MANCHESTER, NEW HAMPSHIRE
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2025 S-25 Supplement contains
Local legislation current through Ord. passed 6-3-2025
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-800-445-5588 www.amlegal.com
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
AN ORDINANCE
"An Ordinance Adopting and Enacting a New Code of Ordinances for the City of
Manchester, NH; Establishing the Same; Revising, Amending, Restating,
Codifying, and Compiling certain existing General Ordinances of the City
dealing with subjects embraced in said Code; Providing for the Effective Date
of Such Code and a Penalty for the Violation Thereof; Providing for the Manner
of Amending Such Code; and Providing When this Ordinance Shall Become
Effective."
BE IT ORDAINED, By the Board of Mayor and Aldermen of the City of Manchester,
as follows:
Whereas, the present General Ordinances of the City of Manchester are
incomplete and inadequate and the manner of arrangement, classification and
indexing thereof is insufficient to meet the immediate needs of the City; and
Whereas, the Acts of the State Legislature of the State of New Hampshire
empower and authorize the City Legislative Body of this City to revise, amend,
restate, codify and to compile any existing ordinance or ordinances and all new
ordinances not heretofore adopted or published and to incorporate said
ordinances into one ordinance in book form; and
Whereas, the Board of Mayor and Aldermen of the City of Manchester has
authorized a general compilation, revision and codification of the ordinances
of the City of a general and permanent nature and publication of such
ordinances in book form.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen that:
Section 1. The general ordinances of the City of Manchester as herein revised,
amended, restated, codified, and compiled in book form are adopted and enacted
as the "Code of Ordinances of the City of Manchester," and shall supersede all
other general and permanent ordinances passed by the Board of Mayor and
Aldermen on or before October 1, 1996, except such as are by reference thereto
expressly saved from repeal or continued in force and effect, or as detailed in
Section 3.
Section 2. Said Code as adopted in Section 1 shall consist of the following
titles, to-wit:
            Title I      General Provisions
            Title III   Administration
            Title V      Public Works
            Title VII   Traffic Code
            Title IX   General Regulations
            Title XI   Business Regulations
            Title XIII   General Offenses
            Title XV   Land Usage
            Tables of Special Ordinances
            Parallel References
            Index
Section 3. The repeal provided for in Section 1 hereof shall not affect any
offense committed or penalty incurred or any right established prior to the
effective date of said Code, nor shall such repeal affect any ordinance:
(a)   Extending or contracting the boundaries of the City;
(b)   Levying or otherwise affecting any taxes, not inconsistent herewith;
(c)   Making or otherwise affecting any appropriations;
(d)   Appropriating money;
(e)   Authorizing or directing the issuance of any bonds or other evidence of
indebtedness;
(f)   Authorizing or directing the making of any investment;
(g)   Promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the City;
(h)   Relating to franchises or granting special rights to certain persons;
(i)   Providing for local improvements, or making assessments therefor;
(j)   Authorizing, directing or ratifying any purchase or sale;
(k)   Affecting any contract or obligation assumed by the City;
(l)   Pertaining to zoning or rezoning;
(m)   Granting or accepting easements, plat or dedication of land to public
use;
(n)   Regulating or restricting traffic;
(o)   Dedicating, naming, establishing, opening, paving, widening, vacating,
abandoning, changing, or accepting any street, highway, alley, park, square,
playground, building, bridge, terminal, ski area or easement within the City or
setting the boundaries of streets, alleys or other public places;
(p)   Establishing or prescribing grades in the City, regulating or restricting
traffic or parking in particular locations in the City, not inconsistent
herewith;
(q)   Approving or accepting any subdivision or plat in the City;
(r)   An ordinance enacted March 28, 1868, entitled "A by-law and ordinance
regulating the taking of inventory and the appraisal of property for taxation,
and in regard to the assessment and abatement of taxes and issuing warrants for
the collection of the same";
(s)   nor to any other ordinance of a temporary or special nature or pertaining
to subjects not contained therein.
Section 4. The repeal provided for by Section 1 hereof shall not be construed
to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent
ordinance which is repealed by this ordinance.
Section 5. That any and all additions and amendments to such Code when passed
in such form as to indicate the intention of the Board of Mayor and Aldermen to
make the same a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated in such Code
so that reference to the "Code of Ordinances, City of Manchester, New
Hampshire" shall be understood and intended to include such additions and
amendments.
Section 6. Said Code shall be deemed published as of January 31, 1997, and
approved by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen. The City Clerk is hereby
authorized and ordered to file a copy of said Code in the Office of the City
Clerk.
Section 7. Said Code shall be in full force and effect from the date of its
publication and filing thereof in the Office of the City Clerk, and said Code
shall be presumptive evidence in all courts and places of the ordinance and all
provisions, sections, penalties and regulations therein contained and of the
date of passage, and that the same is properly signed, attested, recorded and
approved and that any public hearings and notices thereof as required by law
have been given.
January 7, 1997. In Board of Mayor and Aldermen. Passed to be Enrolled.
January 7, 1997. In Board of Mayor and Aldermen. Passed to be Ordained.
                                  Raymond J. Wieczorek /s/
                                 Mayor
                                 A TRUE RECORD. ATTEST.
                                  Leo R. Bernier /s/
                                 City Clerk
CHARTER
Editor's note: This charter was approved by the electorate on 11-5-96.
PREAMBLE
Section
ARTICLE I. POWERS
   
1.01   Incorporation
   
1.02   General powers
ARTICLE II. THE MAYOR AND BOARD OF ALDERMEN
Board of Aldermen
   
2.01   Governing body
   
2.02   Composition, eligibility and term
   
2.03   Powers and duties
   
2.04   Power to delegate authority
   
2.05   Vacancies
   
2.06   Meetings
The Mayor
   
2.07   Eligibility and term
   
2.08   Powers and duties
   
2.09   Veto power
   
2.10   Appointments
   
2.11   Removals
ARTICLE III. DEPARTMENTS AND DEPARTMENT HEADS
Departments
   
3.01   Departments
   
3.02   Departments existing at adoption
Department Heads
   
3.03   Nominations
   
3.04   Authority
   
3.05   Tenure of office
   
3.06   Removal of department heads
Appointed Officers
   
3.07   Appointed city officers
   
3.08   Nominations of appointed officers
   
3.09   Tenure of office
   
3.10   Removal of appointed officers
Boards, Commissions, and Authorities
   
3.11   Departmental boards and commissions
   
3.12   Existing departmental boards and commissions
   
3.13   Additional boards and commissions
   
3.14   Membership limitation, appointment, organization, terms, and removal
ARTICLE IV. SCHOOLS AND SCHOOL COMMITTEE
   
4.01   School district
   
4.02   School committee
   
4.03   Superintendent of Schools
   
4.04   Vacancies
ARTICLE V. ELECTIONS
Terms and Definitions
   
5.01   Non-partisan ballot system
   
5.02   Municipal general election
   
5.03   Municipal primary elections
   
5.04   Filing fee
   
5.05   Filing period
   
5.06   Nominating petitions
   
5.07   Primary system
Political Calendar
   
5.08   Authority
Elected Officers
   
5.09   City and ward officers
   
5.10   Terms of office and vacancies
Checklist and Voter Registration
   
5.11   Board of Registrars
   
5.12   Actions by a single registrar
   
5.13   Deputy Registrars
   
5.14   Prohibition against holding other public offices
   
5.15   Sessions
Qualification for Office
   
5.16   Citizenship
   
5.17   Domicile
   
5.18   Registered voter
   
5.19   Mayor and Commissioner of Welfare
Nominations
   
5.20   Candidates
Primary
   
5.21   Posting notice of primary
Post-Election Procedure
   
5.22   Preservation of ballots and checklists
   
5.23   Declaration of election results
Recounts
   
5.24   Application and filing fee
   
5.25   Board of Recount
   
5.26   Time and notice
   
5.27   Conduct of recount
   
5.28   Declaration of results
Political Campaign Reporting
   
5.29   Definitions
Applicability of Statutes-Election Materials
   
5.30   State election laws
   
5.31   Forms
   
5.32   Ballots
   
5.33   Wards
ARTICLE VI. BUDGETS AND APPROPRIATIONS
   
6.01   Fiscal year
   
6.02   Budget review and recommendations
   
6.03   Budget formulation, submission and message
   
6.04   Budget adoption
   
6.05   Amendments after adoption
   
6.06   School district budget
   
6.07   School committee budget hearings
   
6.08   Administration of the budget
   
6.09   Overspending of appropriations prohibited
   
6.10   Debt limit
   
6.11   Finance Officer
   
6.12   Independent audit
   
6.13   Biennial budgeting
   
6.14   Fund depositories
   
6.15   Limitation on budget increase
ARTICLE VII. PROCUREMENT PROCEDURES
   
7.01   Procurement code
   
7.02   Procurement methods
   
7.03   Procurement manager
ARTICLE VIII. GENERAL PROVISIONS
Administrative Rules and Policies
   
8.01   Establishment of rules
   
8.02   Statement of policy
Charter Review Committee
   
8.03   Periodic review
Compensation
   
8.04   Compensation of officials
Incompatibility
   
8.05   Incompatibility of office
Library
   
8.06   Contract with the Athenaeum
Local Initiative
   
8.07   Initiative
Oaths
   
8.08   Oaths
Retirement
   
8.09   Employee retirement system
   
8.10   Pension act repeal
Separability
   
8.11   Provisions and application
Special Acts
   
8.12   Applicability
Veterans
   
8.13   Veterans recognition
Public Participation
   
8.14   Public comment boards and commissions
Charter Enforcement
   
8.15   Charter enforcement provision
ARTICLE IX. STANDARDS OF CONDUCT
   
9.01   Declaration of policy
   
9.02   Definitions
   
9.03   Standards of conduct
   
9.04   Conduct board
ARTICLE X. TRANSITION PROVISIONS
Effective Date
   
10.01   Effective date of this charter
State and Municipal Laws
   
10.02   Continuation of existing laws
Departments, Offices and Agencies
   
10.03   Transfer of powers
   
10.04   Temporary regulations
Officers and Employees
   
10.05   Existing officials and employees
   
10.06   Department heads and appointed city officers employment transition
   
10.07   Sick leave transition
Miscellaneous
   
10.08   Initial salary of the mayor
   
10.09   Election of at-large aldermen and school committee members
   
10.10   Voting procedures prior to election of aldermen at-large
   
10.11   Debt limit
   
10.12   Continuance of Chapter 551
PREAMBLE
   We, the people of the City of Manchester, State of New Hampshire, in order
to maintain our right of local self-government and to secure the benefits and
advantages granted by the state constitution, do adopt and establish this home
rule charter. This charter expresses the desire we, the citizens, have to
govern ourselves in the most effective, efficient and beneficial manner. We
resolve for ourselves and for our children that there be a representative
government which promotes the general welfare and stimulates harmony and
creativity among all its citizens. Through the elective process, we secure for
ourselves and future generations a municipal government which strives to
achieve compassion, freedom and justice.
ARTICLE I. POWERS
SECTION 1.01 INCORPORATION.
   The residents of the city shall continue to be a body politic and corporate
under the name of Manchester and shall have, exercise and enjoy all rights,
immunities, powers and privileges and shall be subject to all duties and
liabilities now incumbent upon them as a municipal corporation. All existing
property of the city shall remain vested in it, and all existing debts and
obligations of the city shall remain obligatory upon it after the adoption of
this charter. All ordinances not inconsistent with the provisions of this
charter shall continue to remain in full force and effect until amended or
appealed.
SECTION 1.02 GENERAL POWERS.
   The city shall have all the powers as now or hereafter may be conferred upon
cities under the New Hampshire State Constitution and under the Revised
Statutes Annotated.
ARTICLE II. THE MAYOR AND BOARD OF ALDERMEN
Board of Aldermen
SECTION 2.01 GOVERNING BODY.
   The administration of the fiscal affairs, municipal resources and other
affairs of the city shall be vested in a principal officer to be called the
mayor and a board of directors to be called the board of aldermen who as a
body, acting together, shall be known as the board of mayor and aldermen.
SECTION 2.02 COMPOSITION, ELIGIBILITY AND TERM.
   (a)   The board of aldermen shall be composed of fourteen (14) members, one
each from the twelve wards of the city and two from the city at-large.
   (b)   Aldermen representing a ward shall be residents and qualified voters
of the ward. Aldermen at-large shall be residents of the city.
   (c)   Aldermen shall be elected to serve a term of two years.
   (d)   The board of aldermen shall be the final judge of the election and
qualifications of its members.
SECTION 2.03 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (a)   The board of aldermen shall act as the policy making and legislative
body for the city government.
   (b)   Unless a contrary intent or provision appears in this charter or in
State law, the board of aldermen shall have all the powers and discharge all
the duties conferred or imposed on city councils, boards of aldermen or
selectmen of towns.
   (c)   The board of aldermen shall provide for the performance of all duties
and obligations imposed on the city by this charter or State law.
   (d)   The board of aldermen shall nominate and appoint the city officers
listed in
Section 3.07 of this Charter.
SECTION 2.04 POWER TO DELEGATE AUTHORITY.
   (a)   The board of aldermen may delegate such of its powers as may be
lawfully delegated to authorities, boards, commissions, departments or
officers.
   (b)   The board of aldermen shall not, in the exercise of this power,
decrease the administrative and executive powers of mayor and department heads
as granted by this charter.
SECTION 2.05 VACANCIES.
   (a)   Should a vacancy occur in the office of mayor, the aldermen shall
elect a mayor, who shall serve until the next regularly scheduled election for
the office of mayor, and until his successor is duly elected and qualified,
pursuant to R.S.A. 45:6.
   (b)   Should a vacancy occur in the office of alderman, the remaining
members shall call a special election in the ward in which the vacancy shall
have occurred, to fill the vacancy.
   (c)   Should a vacancy occur in the office of school committee-man, the
board of aldermen shall fill the vacancy until an election is held.
(Amended by electorate 11-3-15)
SECTION 2.06 MEETINGS.
   (a)   Regular meetings of the board of mayor and aldermen shall be held at
least monthly as provided by ordinance.
   (b)   Special meetings of the board of mayor and aldermen may be called by
the mayor or eight (8) of the aldermen.
   (c)   The board of mayor and aldermen shall provide a period of public
comment at least monthly.
The Mayor
SECTION 2.07 ELIGIBILITY AND TERM.
   (a)   The mayor shall be elected for a term of two years.
   (b)   The mayor shall have been a resident of the city for at least one (1)
year prior to filing for the office of mayor, and be a qualified voter of the
city.
SECTION 2.08 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (a)   Chief executive officer. The administrative and executive powers of
the city shall be vested in the mayor.
   (b)   Administrative powers. The mayor shall have the power to supervise the
administrative affairs of the city. The mayor shall carry out the policies
enacted by the board of aldermen and perform other duties as are consistent
with those of a chief executive.
   (c)   The mayor shall not, in the exercise of his powers, decrease the
policy making power of the aldermen as granted in this charter.
   (d)   Presiding officer. The mayor shall be the presiding officer at all
meetings of the board of mayor and aldermen.
   (e)   Voting powers. The mayor shall have the power to break tie votes of
the board of aldermen, pursuant to R.S.A. 45:9.
   (f)   Communication. The mayor shall keep the aldermen informed of the
condition of the city and shall make such recommendations as he may deem
advisable.
   (g)   Law enforcement authority. The mayor shall enforce, or direct other
officials to enforce the ordinances of the city, this charter and all general
laws and special acts applicable to the city.
   (h)   Budget officer. The mayor shall exercise administrative control over
the expenditure of all appropriations; establish a budget format and the
procedures for the adoption of the budget; review all departmental budgetary
requests; and make recommenda-tions to the board of aldermen regarding
financial policies, appropriation resolutions and revenues.
   (i)   Other powers and duties. The mayor shall exercise all other powers and
discharge all other duties not inconsistent with this charter, municipal
ordinances, general law and all special acts pertaining to the city not hereby
repealed by this charter.
SECTION 2.09 VETO POWER.
   The mayor shall have veto power upon the action of the board of aldermen in
all matters. No vote can be passed or appointment made by the board of aldermen
over his veto unless a vote to override the veto is approved by at least two-
thirds (2/3) of all the aldermen elected.
SECTION 2.10 APPOINTMENTS.
   (a)   The mayor shall appoint the members of the standing committees of the
board of aldermen and school committee and shall choose the chair for each
committee.
   (b)   The mayor shall appoint, based upon merit and due consideration of
qualifications, all department heads, except the city officers as listed in
Section 3.07, and the board of aldermen shall confirm the appointment by a vote
of eight (8) aldermen.
   (c)   The mayor shall nominate members of boards, commissions and
authorities unless such power is granted to someone other than the mayor by
state law or this charter. All such appointments shall be made pursuant to the
provisions established in Article III, Sections 3.11.
SECTION 2.11 REMOVALS.
   (a)   The mayor may remove a department head by giving the department head
written notice of and the basis for such action. The removal shall become
effective upon the vote of nine (9) members of the board of aldermen. The
department head shall be given the opportunity to be heard prior to such vote.
   (b)   See Article III,
Section 3.14 for the removal procedures for members of boards, commissions and
committees.
   (c)   See Article III,
Section 3.10 for removal of appointed city officers.
   ARTICLE III. DEPARTMENTS AND DEPARTMENT HEADS
Departments
SECTION 3.01 DEPARTMENTS.
   (a)   All departments of the city in existence on the effective date of this
charter shall remain as then organized unless and until nine (9) aldermen shall
vote to establish, eliminate, combine or otherwise reorganize departmental
structure by ordinance to meet the future needs of the city. Such ordinances(s)
shall describe the functions of the departments so established.
   (b)   In exercising the powers set forth herein, the aldermen shall detail
in any ordinance passed, the scope and duties of any department and shall have
the power to consolidate similar functions performed by several departments in
one or more departments.
   (c)   The board of aldermen may by majority vote transfer support functions
from one department to another in the interest of economy or efficiency or in
keeping with good business practice.
SECTION 3.02 DEPARTMENTS EXISTING AT ADOPTION.
   (a)   For reference, the following depart- ments of the city exist at the
adoption of this charter. The departments existing are as follows:
   Board of Assessors
   Department of Aviation
   Building Department
   Office of City Clerk
   Economic Development Office
   Elderly Services Administration
   Finance Department
   Fire Department
   Health Department
   Highway Department
   Information Systems
   Library
   Office of the Mayor
   Parks, Recreation, and Cemetery
   Personnel Department
   Police Department
   Public Building Services
   Risk Management
   Office of City Solicitor
   Office of Tax Collector
   Traffic Department
   Water Department
   Welfare Department
   Office of Youth Services
   (b)   It shall be the duty of the first mayor holding office under the
provisions of this charter to draft and submit to the board of aldermen within
nine (9) months after the adoption of this charter, an ordinance consistent
with the charter which defines the functions and duties of each department
existing at the time of the ordinance.
Department Heads
SECTION 3.03 NOMINATIONS.
   Department heads shall be nominated by the mayor based upon merit and after
due consideration of qualifications for office. The board of mayor and aldermen
shall adopt a procedure for the selection of department heads which shall
require a job description for each position, the posting and advertising of any
vacancy in appropriate publications and final selection after an interview
process has been completed. Qualified candidates shall be interviewed by the
mayor or appropriate commission under
Section 3.08 of this charter. The mayor may nominate his choice from among such
candidates. No department head shall take office until the nomination has been
confirmed by a vote of eight (8) aldermen.
SECTION 3.04 AUTHORITY.
   (a)   Chief administrative officer. The department head shall be the chief
administra-tive officer of the department, subject to departmental policies,
the supervisory authority of the mayor as to administration and policy
directives of the board of aldermen or policies established by boards and
commissions in accordance with section 2.04 of this charter.
   (b)   Exclusive personnel responsibility. The department head shall have
exclusive personnel authority within the department. All appoint-ments and
promotions shall be made solely on the basis of merit and only after
appropriate examination or review of the applicant's relative knowledge,
skills, abilities and experience. Hiring, assignment, promotion, and discipline
of personnel within the department shall be subject to the requirements of
personnel ordinances and the provisions contained in collective bargaining
agreements.
   (c)   Supervisory authority. The department head shall supervise the
activities of the department and its employees and shall maintain a proper
record of such activities, including money expended.
   (d)   Budgetary authority. The department head shall prepare such budget and
program plans and requests as may be necessary for the operation and
development of the department. The department head shall submit the same to the
mayor for inclusion in the city budget, all in accordance with guidelines set
by the mayor.
   (e)   Small purchase expenditures. The department head shall be responsible
for budget expenditures made under the small purchase procedures of this
charter or ordinances of the city.
SECTION 3.05 TENURE OF OFFICE.
   Effective upon the adoption of this charter there shall be no set terms for
department heads, subject to the provisions of Article X,
Section 10.06.
SECTION 3.06 REMOVAL OF DEPARTMENT HEADS.
   The mayor may remove a department head by giving the department head written
notice of and the basis for such action. The removal shall not be effective
until it has been confirmed by the vote of nine (9) aldermen. The department
head shall be given the opportunity to be heard prior to such vote.
Appointed Officers
SECTION 3.07 APPOINTED CITY OFFICERS.
   (a)   There shall be a city clerk. The city clerk shall be nominated and
appointed by the board of aldermen as prescribed by state law.
   (b)   The Board of Assessors shall consist of three (3) full time members
and shall continue to act in its current capacity as a board of appeals for
abatements, unless nine (9) members of the Board of Aldermen vote to reorganize
the Assessors office pursuant to
Section 3.01. The assessors shall be nominated by the board of aldermen,
subject to confirma-tion by eight (8) aldermen, subject to the provisions of
Section 3.08 of this charter. One of the three assessors shall be appointed
department head by the board of aldermen. The department head shall chair the
Board of Assessors.
   (c)   There shall be a finance officer. The finance officer shall be
nominated and appointed by the board of aldermen subject to the provisions of
Section 3.08 of this charter.
SECTION 3.08 NOMINATIONS OF APPOINTED OFFICERS.
   City officers shall be nominated by the board of aldermen based upon merit
and after due consideration of qualifications for office. The board of mayor
and aldermen shall adopt a procedure for the selection of officers which shall
require a job description for each position, the posting and advertising of any
vacancy in appropriate publications and final selection after an interview
process has been completed.
SECTION 3.09 TENURE OF OFFICE.
   Effective upon the adoption of this charter there shall be no set terms for
appointed city officers, subject to the provisions of Article X,
Section 10.06.
SECTION 3.10 REMOVAL OF APPOINTED OFFICERS.
   The board of aldermen may remove a city officer by giving the city officer
written notice of and the basis for such action. The removal shall not be
effective until it has been confirmed by the vote of nine (9) aldermen. The
city officer shall be given the opportunity to be heard prior to such vote.
Boards, Commissions, and Authorities
SECTION 3.11 DEPARTMENTAL BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS.
   (a)   In order to provide citizen input to the city departments, the board
of mayor and alder-men may establish commissions to consult, advise and make
policy recommendations to the department heads and board of mayor and aldermen
on matters appropriate to the depart-ment.
   (b)   Upon request of the board of mayor and aldermen or the department
head, the commission may advise the board or the depart-ment head on specific
matters referred to the commission.
   (c)   The commission shall have no respon- sibility for personnel decisions
or administration of the department unless otherwise required by state statute
or this charter.
   (d)   If specifically requested to do so by the mayor, the commission may
serve as a nominating committee to recommend a candi-date or candidates to the
mayor for department head.
   (e)   Upon request of the board of aldermen the commission shall assume the
policy making authority of the board of aldermen in accordance with
Section 2.04 of this charter. The board of aldermen shall retain the right to
rescind such action.
SECTION 3.12 EXISTING DEPARTMENTAL BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS.
   (a)   Each departmental board or commission which exists on the effective
date of this charter shall remain in existence unless changes are made in
accordance with
Section 3.01 above or by this charter. The following is a list of departmental
boards, commissions, and authorities in the city at the adoption of this
charter:
   Airport Authority. The Airport Authority shall continue to have seven
members. Two members of the Airport Authority shall continue to be residents of
the Town of Londonderry as directed by the Intermunicipal Agreement. At least
two members of the authority shall hold airmen's certificates or higher or the
military equivalent.
   Fire Commission. The Fire Commission shall continue to have five members.
   Board of Health. The Board of Health shall continue to have five members.
The Board of Health shall have at least one physician, one dentist and one
nurse among its membership.
   Highway Commission. The Highway Commission shall continue to have five
members.
   Parks, Recreation and Cemetery Commission. The Parks, Recreation and
Cemetery Commission shall continue to have five members.
   Police Commission. The Police Commission shall continue to have five
members.
   Water Commission. The Water Commission shall continue to have seven members.
The mayor shall be an ex-officio member of the Water Commission with a vote.
   (b)   One member of each departmental commission shall be a representative
from organized labor, who shall hold a valid union membership at the time of
nomination and during his term of office. The mayor shall invite organized
labor to submit names for consideration for appointment to these commissions.
SECTION 3.13 ADDITIONAL BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS.
   The board of mayor and aldermen may establish additional commissions, boards
or authorities by ordinance to consult, advise and make policy recommendations
to the board of mayor and aldermen.
SECTION 3.14 MEMBERSHIP LIMITATION, APPOINTMENT, ORGANIZATION, TERMS, AND
REMOVAL.
   The following provisions shall apply to all commissions, boards and
authorities, whether departmental commissions or commissions established by
ordinance, and to extent permitted by law, commissions or boards established or
required by statute hereinafter referred to as “commission:”
   (a)   Membership limitations.
      (1)   No commission shall be comprised entirely of members of the same
political party. No commission shall have a majority of members from any one
ward of the city. The mayor and aldermen shall seek broad geographical
representation for members of all commissions.
      (2)   The mayor shall establish procedures to give reasonable notice of
vacancies before they are filled and provide an opportunity for application by
citizens of the city.
      (3)   Members of commissions shall be residents of the city except as
required by law.
   (b)   Appointments and organization. The members of all commissions of the
city shall be nominated by the mayor and shall not take office until the
appointment has been confirmed by a vote of eight (8) aldermen, unless the
appointment has been made by the aldermen under the provisions of
Section 3.14(g)2. Each January, all commissions shall choose one of its members
to chair the commission and one to serve as secretary.
   (c)   In the event of a vacancy in any commission as a result of
resignation, death, expiration of term or other reason, the above nomination
and appointment process shall be followed subject to the provisions of 3.14(b).
   (d)   Terms and limits. Members of commissions shall serve for three (3)
year terms and shall be limited to two (2) consecutive full terms on the same
commission. (A full term shall be considered a term of two (2) years or more.)
No member shall take office for a term, having served two (2) consecutive
terms, unless two (2) years shall have elapsed since such member completed the
second consecu-tive term.
   (e)   Removal for cause. After a finding by the board of aldermen that there
is cause to remove a member of a commission of the city, the member may be
removed by a vote of nine (9) aldermen voting on a motion stating specific
reasons.
   (f)   Attendance. If any member of a commission fails to attend one third ()
of the regularly scheduled meetings of the board or commission during a
calendar year or misses four (4) consecutive meetings held by such commission,
the record of attendance shall be reported to the mayor and aldermen who, upon
a finding of no reasonable explanation for such absences, shall declare the
office vacant.
   (g)   Appointment of commissions.  
      (1)   No member of a commission shall serve in holdover status for a
period longer than ninety (90) days after the expiration of any term. At the
end of such period, the office shall become vacant unless the mayor has re-
nominated the incumbent or nominated a replacement. The mayor shall submit a
nomina-tion to the aldermen for confirmation not later than ninety (90) days
after the expiration of the term.
      (2)   In the event the mayor shall fail to submit a nomination in said
ninety (90) day period, the position shall be filled by the board of aldermen
which shall be entitled to nominate and confirm its choice. Such confirmation
vote shall require the votes of nine (9) aldermen.
      (3)   In the event the mayor makes a nomination in said ninety (90) day
period and the nominee is not confirmed, the mayor shall be entitled to
nominate a new candidate within ninety (90) days after the rejection of the
prior nominee. There shall be no limit on the number of nominees the mayor may
nominate as long as nominations are made within ninety (90) days of the
rejection of the prior nominee.
ARTICLE IV. SCHOOLS AND SCHOOL COMMITTEE
SECTION 4.01 SCHOOL DISTRICT.
   The city of Manchester shall to continue to constitute a single school
district and except as otherwise provided in this charter the board of mayor
and aldermen and the school committee shall to continue to exercise such power
in relation thereto as these respective bodies have under the law in effect at
the time of the adoption of this charter.
SECTION 4.02 SCHOOL COMMITTEE.
   The School Committee shall be comprised of fourteen (14) members, one each
from the twelve wards of the city and two from the city at-large. The school
committee shall sit and act together as one body. The mayor shall be an ex-
officio member with all the powers and privileges of the other committee
members and shall be chairman of the committee.
SECTION 4.03 SUPERINTENDENT OF SCHOOLS.
   The school committee shall nominate a candidate for superintendent of
schools for election in accordance with state law.
SECTION 4.04 VACANCIES.
   Should a vacancy occur in the office of school committeeman, the board of
aldermen shall fill such vacancy until an election is held.
ARTICLE V. ELECTIONS
Terms and Definitions
SECTION 5.01 NON-PARTISAN BALLOT SYSTEM.
   The mayor, aldermen, school committee members, ward clerks, selectmen and
moderators shall be elected by non-partisan ballot.
(Amended by electorate 11-3-15)
SECTION 5.02 MUNICIPAL GENERAL ELECTION.
   “Municipal general election” shall mean the biennial municipal election to
be held on the Tuesday next following the first Monday of November in each odd
numbered year at which time the qualified voters shall choose city and ward
officers.
SECTION 5.03 MUNICIPAL PRIMARY ELECTIONS.
   “Municipal primary election” shall mean the biennial municipal primary,
conducted by the regular election officers, to be held at the regular polling
places in each ward on the third Tuesday of September in each odd numbered year
at which time the qualified voters shall nominate candidates for the municipal
general election held in November.
SECTION 5.04 FILING FEE.
      “Filing fee” shall mean the fee paid to the city clerk for the use of the
city by each candidate who submits a declaration of candidacy. The amount of
the fee for each office shall be as follows: mayor, $100; aldermen, $50; school
committee, $25; and all other offices, no fee.
(Amended by electorate 11-3-15)
SECTION 5.05 FILING PERIOD.
   “Filing period” shall mean the ten (10) consecutive working days (excluding
Saturday and Sunday) commencing on the second Monday in July in each odd
numbered year during which candidates for municipal office shall file their
declarations of candidacy.
SECTION 5.06 NOMINATING PETITIONS.
   “Nominating petitions” shall mean petitions filed with the city clerk by
each candidate who submits a declaration of candidacy, and who chooses not to
pay the filing fee. The number of petitions for each office shall be as
follows: mayor, 200; aldermen, 100; school committee, 50; and other offices
none.
(Amended by electorate 11-3-15)
SECTION 5.07 PRIMARY SYSTEM.
   (a)   In the event, two candidates or fewer, or in the case of at-large
aldermanic and school committee elections four candidates or fewer, file for an
elected office, the primary election for said office will be declared
unnecessary by the city clerk, who shall then declare the candidates nominated
and place them upon the municipal general election ballot.
   (b)   In each primary election, the two candidates, or four candidates in
the case of an at-large aldermanic and school committee elections, receiving
the highest number of votes shall be selected from those running for said
office and shall be placed on the general election ballot.
Political Calendar
SECTION 5.08 AUTHORITY.
   Prior to the municipal primary election, the city clerk with the advice and
approval of the city solicitor, shall prepare a political calendar for the
municipal primary election and the municipal general election setting forth the
dates when action is required under the election laws. Any action taken by any
candidate or official in connection with the election laws which shall be in
accordance with dates set forth in such calendar shall be deemed duly performed
for the purposes of the election laws. Copies of such calendar shall be
available in the office of the city clerk.
Elected Officers
SECTION 5.09 CITY AND WARD OFFICERS.
   At every municipal general election, the following officers shall be
elected:
   (a)   The mayor, the two aldermen at-large, and the two school committeemen
at-large of the city; and
   (b)   One alderman, one member of the school committee, one moderator, one
ward clerk and three selectmen by the voters in each ward.
(Amended by electorate 11-3-15)
SECTION 5.10 TERMS OF OFFICE AND VACANCIES.
   (a)   The city and ward officers so chosen shall hold their respective
offices for two (2) years from the first Tuesday in January next following the
election and until others are chosen and qualified. Should a vacancy occur in
the office of the mayor or alderman, the board of aldermen shall fill such
vacancy for the unexpired term.
   (b)   Should such a vacancy occur in the office of school committeeman, the
board of aldermen shall fill such vacancy.
   (c)   Unexpired term shall mean the remainder of the term or period until a
successor is elected and sworn in to fill such term under the provisions of
this charter.
(Amended by electorate 11-3-15)
Checklist and Voter Registration
SECTION 5.11 BOARD OF REGISTRARS.
   (a)   Number of members. There shall be a board of registrars consisting of
five (5) members. Four (4) members shall be registered voters who shall have
been residents of the city for at least five (5) years immediately preceding
the date of their appointment. The fifth member shall be the city clerk.
   (b)   Appointments. Each member, except the city clerk, shall be appointed
by the mayor subject to the approval of the board of aldermen.
   (c)   Political representation. The four (4) registered voter members of the
board shall represent the two (2) leading political parties at the preceding
state election, but in no event shall more than two (2) of the registered
voters of the board be of the same political party.
   (d)   Term of office. Appointments to the board shall continue to be made
annually in April, and each member, except the city clerk, shall serve a three
(3) year term beginning on the first day of May and continuing until his
successor is appointed and qualified. Except for the City Clerk, no member
shall serve more than two (2) consecutive three year terms.
   (e)   Vacancies. Vacancies for the unexpired term shall be filled in the
same manner as the original appointment.
   (f)   Organization.  Annually in May before transacting any other business,
the board of registrars shall appoint one of its members as chairman and one as
clerk.
SECTION 5.12 ACTIONS BY A SINGLE REGISTRAR.
   Any member of the board of registrars, at a place, on the days, and during
the hours designated for registration, may accept applications and may examine
applicants and witnesses under oath. All actions by a single registrar shall be
subject to the revision and acceptance of the board of registrars.
SECTION 5.13 DEPUTY REGISTRARS.
   The board of registrars is empowered, from time to time, to appoint such
deputies as may be required, who shall perform all duties as directed by the
board of registrars, including registration of voters.
SECTION 5.14 PROHIBITION AGAINST HOLDING OTHER PUBLIC OFFICES.
   Except for the City Clerk, no person shall be appointed as a registrar or
deputy registrar who holds any other elective or appointed political office.
The acceptance by a registrar or deputy registrar of an office which he is
prohibited from holding shall vacate his office as registrar or deputy
registrar.
SECTION 5.15 SESSIONS.
   The board of registrars shall be in session to receive applications during
the normal business hours of the city clerk's office and at such times as may
be determined by the board of registrars.
Qualifications for Office
SECTION 5.16 CITIZENSHIP.
   To file as a candidate for or to hold any elective city or ward office, a
person must be a citizen of the United States either by birth or
naturalization.
SECTION 5.17 DOMICILE.
   To file as a candidate for or to hold any elective city or ward office, a
person must have and maintain during his term of office a domicile in the city
or ward as the case may be.
SECTION 5.18 REGISTERED VOTER.
   To be a candidate for or to hold any elective city or ward office, a person
must be a registered and qualified voter in the City of Manchester.
SECTION 5.19 MAYOR.
   To file as a candidate for the office of mayor one must be a resident of the
city for one (1) year immediately preceding and shall continue to be a resident
of the city during his term of office.
(Amended by electorate 11-3-15)
Nominations
SECTION 5.20 CANDIDATES.
   The name of any candidate shall not be printed upon the ballot for the
municipal primary election unless such candidate:
   (a)   Shall have met all qualifications for office sought; and
   (b)   Shall have filed during the filing period a declaration of candidacy
and any other required forms together with the requisite filing fee or shall
have filed during the period the requisite number of nominating petitions.
Primary
SECTION 5.21 POSTING NOTICE OF PRIMARY.
   Each ward clerk shall cause notice of such primary to be posted in three (3)
public places in such ward no later than the last Tuesday of July of each odd
numbered year.
Post-Election Procedure
SECTION 5.22 PRESERVATION OF BALLOTS AND CHECKLISTS.
   The clerks of the wards shall preserve all votes, whether by machine or by
ballot, cast and counted at each election and shall deliver them immediately,
together with the checklist used at such election, to the city clerk. All
municipal general election votes and checklists shall be preserved by the city
clerk for a period of sixty (60) days.
SECTION 5.23 DECLARATION OF ELECTION RESULTS.
   When the city clerk has received the returns for an office all wards
comprising the elective district for that office, he shall examine, record and
total such returns. Within twenty-four (24) hours of the closing of the polls
the city clerk shall declare elected to the office the same number of persons
as the number of officers to which the elective district is entitled. Those
persons declared officers elect shall be those persons who received the highest
number of votes cast.
Recounts
SECTION 5.24 APPLICATION AND FILING FEE.
   Any candidate for whom a vote was cast for any office in any election or who
was named on the ballot, who is not, according to the count first made by the
officials, elected to such office or chosen as one of the final candidates
after a primary election, may apply to the city clerk for a recount of the
votes cast, provided that the application is received within two (2) days after
the municipal primary or general election results. The application must by
accompanied by a fee equal to the filing fee established for such office.
SECTION 5.25 BOARD OF RECOUNT.
   (a)   Number of members.  There shall be a board of recount consisting of
three (3) members: One member of the board of aldermen designated by the mayor,
one member of the Republican party and one member of the Democratic party
nominated by the mayor and confirmed by the board of mayor and aldermen. The
Republican and Democrat shall not be members of the board of mayor and
aldermen.
   (b)   Term of office. The term of office shall be for two (2) years. The
provisions of
Section 3.14 shall not apply to the board of recount.
   (c)   Vacancies. Vacancies for unexpired shall be filed in the same manner
as the original appointment.
   (d)   Noncompensatory.  The members of the board of recount shall not be
entitled to compensation for their duties as such board.
SECTION 5.26 TIME AND NOTICE.
   The board of recount shall fix a time for such recount immediately upon the
deadline for the filing of an application, but not later than seven (7) days
after the receipt of the application, and shall notify the opposing candidates
thereof, and as soon thereafter as circumstances permit, such recount shall be
held.
SECTION 5.27 CONDUCT OF RECOUNT.
   Upon the date set for the recount, the ballots shall be counted by the board
of recount. The various candidates, and their counsel, shall have the right to
inspect the ballots and participate in the recount under such suitable rules as
the board may adopt.
SECTION 5.28 DECLARATION OF RESULTS.
   (a)   Declaration of results. If a recount shall show that a candidate other
than the one declared elected or nominated has the greatest number of votes
cast for that office, the board of recount shall declare such candidate elected
or nominated.
   (b)   Refund of fee. If the recount shall show that the applicant was
elected or nominated, the city clerk, within ten (10) days after such recount,
shall return the filing fee.
   (c)   Assessment of cost. If the election results shall show that the
applicant lost the election by more than ten (10) percent of the votes cast for
that office, such applicant's request for a recount shall be deemed frivolous.
If the recount is unsuccessful in overturning the election results, the
applicant shall be required to pay the cost of the recount, as determined by
the city clerk, within ten (10) days after such determination.
   (d)   Right of appeal. Nothing herein shall be construed as affecting the
right of any person to appeal to the court in any matter relative to the
election.
Political Campaign Reporting
SECTION 5.29 POLITICAL CAMPAIGN CONTRIBUTIONS AND EXPENDITURES.
   The provisions of this section shall apply to any municipal election.
   Definitions.
   (a)   “Candidate” shall mean any person publicly declared as such and for
whom votes are sought in an election for the offices of mayor, alderman, or
school committee.
   (b)   “Incumbent Official” shall mean an incumbent mayor, aldermen, or
school committee member.
   (c)   “Contribution” shall mean a payment, gift, subscription, assessment,
contract, payment for services, dues advance, forbear-ance or loan to a
candidate, an incumbent official or political committee made for the purpose of
influencing the nomination or election of any candidate. Contributions shall
include the use of any thing of value but shall not include the services of
volunteers who receive no pay therefor or the use of personal resources by a
candidate on his behalf.
   (d)   “Expenditure” shall mean the disbursement of money or thing of value
or the making of a legally binding commitment, for political purposes, to make
such a disbursement in the future.
   (e)   “Measure” shall mean any question which is submitted or intended to be
submitted to a popular vote at an election.
   (f)   “Municipal election” shall mean the municipal primary election and the
municipal general election.
   (g)   “Political Committee” shall mean any organization of two (2) or more
persons to influence through contributions and or expenditures municipal
elections or measures, including the political committee of a political party
as hereinafter defined.
   (h)   “Political committee of a political party” shall mean the state,
county, city, ward or town committee of a political party.
   Reporting.
   (i)   Consent. Any political committee which is organized to support a
candidate in any election shall secure the written consent of the candidate or
his fiscal agent before it receives contributions or makes expenditures. Such
written consent shall be filed by the city clerk at the time the political
committee registers as provided in the following paragraph.
   (j)   Registration of political committee.  Prior to the municipal election
for which the political committee, is organized, the committee shall file with
the city clerk a statement of the purpose of the political committee and a
statement of the name, address, occupation and principal place of business, of
its chairman, treasurer and other officers, provided, however, that a political
committee to promote the nomination of a candidate of a municipal election may
not be organized within forty-five (45) days of a municipal primary election.
   (k)   Report.
      (1)   Each candidate and each political committee whose combined
contributions or combined expenditures equal or exceed $500 dollars shall file
a disclosure report with the city clerk within ten (10) days immediately
preceding and immediately following an election.
      (2)   Each incumbent official whose combined contributions or combined
expendi-tures equal or exceed $500 within any quarter of the calendar year
shall file a disclosure report with the city clerk within thirty (30) days of
the end of each calendar quarter.
      (3)   The disclosure report shall be itemized, signed and sworn to either
by the incumbent official, the candidate or by the candidate's campaign
chairman or treasurer, as applicable, showing each receipt regardless of amount
with the full name and address of the contributor and the amount of the
contribution made up to the date of the initial report or made since the date
of the last report. The report shall also show each expenditure with the full
name and address of persons, corporations, committee, or whomever was paid or
is to be paid, with the specific nature of the amount of each expenditure made
up to the date of the initial report or made since the date of the last report.
   (l)   Statement. Any candidate whose contributions or expenditures are less
than the amount designated in the preceding paragraph shall file a statement to
that effect which shall be signed and sworn to as set forth in the preceding
paragraph.
   (m)   Prohibition. No candidate shall be entitled to nomination or election
until the sworn itemized report or statement required to be filed by him or on
his behalf has been filed as herein before required.
   (n)   Penalty. Any candidate, or any member of his political committee, who
is convicted for failure to comply with this section shall be subject to
penalty as provided by law.
   (o)   Public inspection.  All reports, statements, written consents and
registrations filed by candidates, political committees and political
committees of political parties shall be open to the public.
(Amended by electorate 11-3-15)
Applicability of Statutes-Election Materials
SECTION 5.30 STATE ELECTION LAWS.
   The provisions of the Revised Statutes Annotated relating to state
elections, including but not limited to, time computation, voters and
checklists, nominations, preparation of voting materials, absentee voting, pre-
election procedure, vacancies, elective districts, political expenditures and
contributions and purity of elections, as are not already made specifically
applicable to municipal elections, shall apply to all municipal primary and
general elections to the extent practicable. The city clerk, in consultation
with the chief legal officer, shall determine the applicability of state
election laws.
SECTION 5.31 FORMS.
   The city clerk shall prepare all forms and related materials necessary for
the municipal primary and general elections, including but not limited to,
declarations of candidacy, nominating petitions, assent to candidacy,
affidavits of qualifications and disclosure forms.
SECTION 5.32 BALLOTS.
   (a)   Preparation by city clerk.  The city clerk shall prepare sufficient
official and sample ballots and all related material for use at the municipal
primary election and municipal general election.
   (b)   Format. The ballot position for candidates in each of the elective
offices in the city shall be alphabetical by surname.
   (c)   Delivery. The ballots shall be delivered to the moderator or other
officer in charge of the election within one (1) hour of the election.
   (d)   Write in votes. All ballots shall make provisions for write in votes.
If a candidate receiving write in votes qualifies as a winner of a primary or
general election, that candidate shall be included on the general election
ballot or declared elected as if qualified under the other provisions of this
charter, if otherwise qualified to hold the office.
SECTION 5.33 WARDS.
   Charter amendment passed at the 11/5/2019 municipal general election
transferring the ward boundary descriptions from the City Charter to City
Ordinances effective upon passage.
ARTICLE VI. BUDGETS AND APPROPRIATIONS
SECTION 6.01 FISCAL YEAR.
   The fiscal year of the city shall begin on the first day of July and end on
the last day of June.
SECTION 6.02 BUDGET REVIEW AND RECOMMENDATIONS.
   (a)   The mayor and such other officials as the mayor shall select, shall
review all departmental budgets to submit the budget in form set forth in
Section 6.03.
SECTION 6.03 BUDGET FORMULATION, SUBMISSION AND MESSAGE.
   (a)   The mayor shall establish the form and organization of procedures for
preparation and adoption of the annual budget, the capital improvement budget,
and other budget instru-ments and plans for future fiscal periods as the mayor
deems appropriate and which shall conform to all city ordinances concerning
budgets and fiscal matters. Such procedures shall require that all budgets
include all proposed expenditures according to general objects of expenditure
and the proposed use and all anticipated revenue.
   (b)   On or before the last day of March of each year, the mayor shall
submit to the board of aldermen a budget for the ensuing fiscal year and an
accompanying message.
   (c)   The mayor's budget message shall explain the budget in fiscal terms
and as an outline of city programs contained and affected. It shall outline the
proposed financial policies of the city for the ensuing fiscal year, describe
the important features of the budget, indicate any major changes from the
current year in financial policies, expenditures and revenues together with the
reasons for such changes, summarize the city's debt position and include such
other material as the mayor deems desirable.
   (d)   The budget as presented shall begin with a clear general summary of
its contents; shall show in detail all estimated income, indicating the
estimated property tax levy, and all proposed expenditures, including debt
service, for the ensuing fiscal year; and shall be arranged to show comparative
figures for actual and estimated income and expenditures of the current fiscal
year and actual income and expenditures of the preceding two (2) fiscal years.
It shall indicate in separate sections:
      (1)   Proposed goals and objectives and expenditures for current
operations during the ensuing fiscal year, detailed for each fund by
organization unit and program, purpose or activity, and the method of financing
such expenditures;
      (2)   Proposed capital expenditures for at least the ensuing two (2)
fiscal years; detailed for each fund by organization unit when practicable, and
the proposed method of financing each such capital expenditure; and
      (3)   The anticipated income and expense and profit and loss for the
ensuing year for each utility or other enterprise fund operated by the city.
For any fund, the total of proposed expendi-tures shall not exceed the total of
estimated income plus the fund balance carried forward, exclusive of reserves.
SECTION 6.04 BUDGET ADOPTION.
   (a)   Notice and hearing. The board of mayor and aldermen shall publish a
copy of the proposed budget, a notice stating the times and place where copies
of the message and budget are available for inspection by the public, and the
time and place for a public hearing on the mayor's budget as submitted, at
least one week in advance of the public hearing.
   (b)   Amendment before adoption. After the public hearing, the board of
mayor and aldermen may adopt the budget with or without amendment. In amending
the budget, it may add or increase programs or amounts and may delete or
decrease any programs or amounts, except expenditures required by law or for
debt service or for an estimated cash deficit, provided that no amendment to
the budget shall increase the authorized expenditures to an amount greater than
total estimated income and provided that no consolidation of city depart-ments
shall be accomplished solely in the budget process without separate and
specific additional action by the board of mayor and aldermen. If amendments
are made to the budget submitted by the mayor, a second public hearing may be
held providing public comment on the changes made, prior to the final adoption
of the budget.
   (c)   Adoption. The board of mayor and aldermen shall adopt the budget on or
before the second Tuesday in June of the fiscal year currently ending. Such
adoption shall include such appropriation and revenue ordinances as shall be
required to fund the budget adopted. The power of the mayor to veto acts of the
board shall apply to the entire budget or any line item thereof stating the
specific reasons for the objection and the proposed alternatives to the item
vetoed, subject to the power of the board of aldermen to override. In the event
of the exercise of a line item veto all portions of the budget not so vetoed
shall be passed. (As used herein “line item” shall mean any object of
expenditure listed in the budget.) The school department budget shall
constitute a single line item. Action by the board of aldermen on any veto
shall be completed by June 30. The final adoption of the budget shall require,
subject to the veto powers of the mayor, the vote of eight members of the board
of aldermen.
   (d)   If the board of mayor and aldermen shall fail to adopt appropriation
resolutions for the ensuing fiscal year as provided herein, the budget as
originally submitted by the mayor shall become the budget.
SECTION 6.05 AMENDMENTS AFTER ADOPTION.
   (a)   Supplemental appropriations. If during the fiscal year the mayor
certifies after consultation with and verification by the finance officer that
there are available for appropriation revenues in excess of those estimated in
the budget, the board of mayor and aldermen may make supplemental
appropriations for the year up to the amount of such excess, after observing
the budget procedures set forth in
Section 6.04 of this charter.
   (b)   Reduction of appropriations. If at any time during the fiscal year it
appears probable to the mayor after consultation with and verifica-tion by the
finance officer that the revenues or fund balances available will be
insufficient to finance the expenditures for which appropria-tions have been
authorized, the mayor shall report to the board of mayor and aldermen without
delay, indicating the estimated amount of the deficit, any remedial action
taken by the mayor and recommendations as to any other steps to be taken. The
board of mayor and aldermen shall then take such further action as it deems
necessary to prevent or reduce any deficit and for that purpose it may reduce
one or more appropriations.
   (c)   Transfer of appropriations. At any time during the fiscal year the
board of mayor and aldermen may by resolution transfer part or all of the
unencumbered appropriation balance from one department or major organizational
unit to the appropriation for other departments or major organizational units
after consultation with and verification by the finance officer of the accounts
and balances involved and the fact that such funds are unencumbered. The mayor
may authorize a department head to transfer part or all of any unencumbered
appropriation balances among programs within a department or organizational
unit and shall report such transfers to the board in writing prior to its next
meeting. This provision shall not apply to intra-departmental transfers in the
school district budget.
   (d)   Limitation; effective date. No appropriation for debt service may be
reduced or transferred, and no appropriation may be reduced below any amount
required by law to be appropriated or by more than the amount of the
unencumbered balance thereof. The emergency appropriations and reduction or
transfer of appropriations authorized by this section may be made effective
immediately upon adoption.
SECTION 6.06 SCHOOL DISTRICT BUDGET.
   The school committee shall prepare and submit its budget proposal. The
budget shall be subject to the approval of the board of mayor and aldermen. The
budget shall be submitted in accordance with the budget schedule established by
the mayor under
Section 6.03(a). The board of mayor and aldermen shall accept such budget as
submitted, or reject it and return it to the school committee along with the
explanation for rejection and the maximum dollar amount which the board of
mayor and aldermen will approve. The school committee shall then submit a
revised budget which shall not exceed the maximum dollar amount established by
the board of mayor and aldermen. The school committee shall administer, expend
and account for the funds approved by the board of mayor and aldermen and shall
have the exclusive authority to transfer funds among line items in the school
budget.
SECTION 6.07 SCHOOL COMMITTEE BUDGET HEARINGS.
   The school committee shall conduct two (2) public hearings. The first shall
be held prior to the submission of the school district budget to the board of
mayor and aldermen; the second shall be held within thirty (30) days from the
time of adoption of the school committee budget by the board of mayor and
aldermen.
SECTION 6.08 ADMINISTRATION OF THE BUDGET.
   The board of mayor and aldermen may provide by ordinance any additional
procedures for administering of the budget.
SECTION 6.09 OVERSPENDING OF APPROPRIATIONS PROHIBITED.
   No payment shall be made or obligation incurred against any appropriation
except in accordance with appropriations made. Any authorization of payment or
incurring of obligation in violation of the provisions of this charter shall be
void and any payments made illegal.
SECTION 6.10 DEBT LIMIT.
   The debt limit for the city shall be as prescribed by state law as amended
from time to time.
SECTION 6.11 FINANCE OFFICER.
   The finance officer, in addition to other duties set forth in this charter
or by law, shall maintain accounting control over the finances of the city,
shall make financial reports at least quarterly, and shall perform such other
duties relating to budget management and control as the board of mayor and
aldermen by ordinance may require.
SECTION 6.12 INDEPENDENT AUDIT.
   (a)   There shall be an Independent City Auditor nominated and appointed by
the Board of Aldermen based upon merit and after due consideration of
qualifications for office.
   (b)   The Independent City Auditor shall report to the Board of Mayor and
Aldermen or to such committee as the Board of Mayor and Aldermen may designate.
   (c)   It shall be the duty of the Independent City Auditor to assure that an
independent audit shall be made of all books and accounts of the City at least
once every year. The audit shall be performed in accordance with the auditing
standards promulgated by the Comptroller General of the United States and by
certified public accountants or a firm of such accountants experienced in
municipal accounting who have no personal interest, direct or indirect, in the
fiscal affairs of City government. The Independent City Auditor shall, through
a competitive bid process, provide for the selection of the independent
auditors in accordance with the City’s procurement code. The results of such
audit shall be made public and reported to the Board of Mayor and Aldermen.
   (d)   It shall be the duty of the Independent City Auditor to:
      (1)   Conduct post-audits of the accounts and records of any City
department.
      (2)   Conduct such program result audits of a department as the Board of
Mayor and Aldermen or any committee designated by the Board of Mayor and
Aldermen may direct.
(Amended by electorate 11-2-04)
SECTION 6.13 BIENNIAL BUDGETING.
   In the event the legislature of the state of New Hampshire authorizes the
use of biennial budgeting practices, the board of mayor and aldermen may adopt,
consistent with this charter, the biennial budgeting process and set by
ordinance any procedures necessary in order to effectively carry out said
changes.
SECTION 6.14 FUND DEPOSITORIES.
   The Board of Mayor and Aldermen shall provide by ordinance for the
designation of one (1) or more depositories of city funds, the periodic deposit
of funds and the security required for such funds.
SECTION 6.15 LIMITATION ON BUDGET INCREASE.
   A.   Limitation on budget increase.
      1.   Recognizing that final tax rates for the City of Manchester are set
by the New Hampshire Department of Revenue Administration pursuant to RSA 21 J:
35, I, the board of mayor and aldermen of the City of Manchester and the
Manchester School District shall develop their annual budget proposals and
shall act upon such proposals in accordance with the mandates of this section.
      2.   Section
6.15 does not apply to the Enterprise Funds of the City of Manchester, i.e.,
the Aviation Department, the Environmental Protection Division, the Parking
Division, the Water Works, the Recreation Enterprise Division and such other
enterprise funds as duly created by the board of mayor and aldermen. Section
6.15 does not apply to the Central Business Service District. Section
6.15 does not apply to amounts payable in connection with municipal bond
obligations, whether issued for school or municipal purposes. Override
Provision. Budgetary restrictions described in any part of Section
6.15  may be overridden upon a vote of two-thirds (2/3) of all aldermen
elected. Such override only applies to the budget then under consideration.
Supplemental appropriations require two-thirds (2/3) override votes, or the
limitations expressed in this section will apply.
      3.   In submitting their proposed budgets to the board of aldermen, the
mayor and school district shall not propose total expenditures excluding
amounts payable in connection with municipal bond obligations in an amount
exceeding the budget established during the prior fiscal year, excluding
amounts payable in connection with municipal bond obligations for the prior
fiscal year, increased by a factor equal to the average of the changes in the
Consumer Price Index-Urban (CPI-U) for the three (3) calendar years immediately
preceding budget adoption as published by the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics.
If the average of the changes in the Consumer Price Index-Urban as published by
the United States Department of Labor for the three (3) immediately preceding
calendar years declines, then the increase in total expenditures, excluding
amounts payable in connection with municipal bond obligations, shall be zero.
      4.   In establishing a combined municipal budget, the board of mayor and
aldermen shall assume estimated property tax revenues only in an amount not to
exceed the property tax revenues raised, excluding property tax revenues raised
for amounts payable in connection with municipal bond obligations, during the
prior fiscal year increased by a factor equal to the average of the changes in
the National Consumer Price Index-Urban as published by the United States
Department of Labor for the three (3) calendar years immediately preceding the
year of the budget adoption. If the average of the changes in the Consumer
Price Index-Urban as published by the United States Department of Labor for the
three (3) immediately preceding calendar years declines, then the increase in
property tax revenues, excluding property tax revenues raised for amounts
payable in connection with municipal bond obligations, shall be zero.
   B.   Exception to budget increase limitation. Capital expenditures may be
excepted from being included in the expenditures that are subject to the prior
limitation upon a two-thirds (2/3) vote of all the aldermen elected. Capital
expenditures include land, land improvements, easements, buildings, building
improvements, vehicles, machinery, equipment and infrastructure assets. The
exception made under this section shall only apply to the budget then under
consideration, unless two- thirds (2/3) of all the aldermen elected, vote to
renew the exception for the next budget year.
   C.   Budget limitation in revaluation year.  When there is a citywide
revaluation, the board of mayor and aldermen shall adhere to the following
limitations for a positive or negative revaluation: Property tax revenues
raised in the prior fiscal year, excluding property tax revenues raised for
amounts payable in connection with municipal bond obligations of the prior
fiscal year, shall not be increased by a factor more than the average of the
changes in National Consumer Price Index-Urban as published by the United
States Department of Labor for the three (3) calendar years immediately
preceding budget adoption, then this figure shall be used in establishing the
new municipal budget.
   D.   Budget limitation with annual changes in assessments. When annual
changes in real estate values occur as a result of State of New Hampshire
assessing requirements, the board of mayor and aldermen shall adhere to a
maximum increase in real estate tax revenues as follows:
      1.   The real estate taxes raised from the prior year shall not be
increased by a factor of more than the average of the changes in the National
Consumer Price Index-Urban as published by the United States Department of
Labor for the three (3) calendar years immediately preceding budget adoption,
plus real estate taxes calculated by applying the prior year real estate tax
rate to the net increase in new construction. “Net increase in new
construction” is defined as the total assessed dollar value resulting from
building permit activity less total assessed dollar value resulting from
demolition permit-activity for the period of April 1 - March 31 preceding
budget adoption.
   E.   Total Expenditures. Total expenditures, excluding amounts payable in
connection with municipal bond obligations, for any given budget year shall not
exceed the amount of funds reasonably calculated to be derived from property
tax revenues pursuant to Paragraph A.4. herein, increased by the other revenues
generated by the City.
   F.   Effective Date: Upon Passage
(Approved by electorate 11-3-09; amendment approved by electorate 11-8-11)
ARTICLE VII. PROCUREMENT PROCEDURES
SECTION 7.01 PROCUREMENT CODE.
   All purchases made by the city for materials, supplies, services, repairs,
construction, or ocher items shall be made in accordance with a procurement
code, which shall be adopted by ordinance by the board of mayor and aldermen.
The procurement code shall promote fair and equitable treatment to all
suppliers or prospective suppliers of goods or services, promote effective
competition among prospective suppliers of goods and services, make as uniform
as possible the procedures among various departments and agencies of the city,
and promote the economical, effective, and efficient use of the city's total
resources.
SECTION 7.02 PROCUREMENT METHODS.
   (a)   As set forth hereinafter, the procurement code shall specify
conditions precedent to and procedures applicable to competitive sealed
bidding. As alternatives to competitive sealed bidding, the procurement code
may specify conditions precedent to and procedures applicable to the use of one
or more of the following methods of procurement: Competitive sealed proposal;
small purchase procedures; special competitive selection procedures; and
special purchase procedures. Such methods shall be as set in the 1982 Charter
or the ordinance adopted thereunder in effect on the effective date of this
charter until amended by the board of mayor and aldermen. Any such amendment
shall conform with the laws of the State of New Hampshire. No such amendment
shall eliminate the requirement for procurement methods as set forth herein but
may change the provisions of such procedures for the good of the city.
   (b)   The city shall not preclude, otherwise qualified businesses or
individuals of the City of Manchester from participating in the bidding
process. In so far as it is possible, the city shall encourage local businesses
to participate in the bidding process.
SECTION 7.03 PROCUREMENT MANAGER.
   Subject to the same appointment and removal provisions of this charter as to
department heads, the mayor may appoint a professionally qualified and
experienced procurement manager for the city to promote the continued
development of purchasing policies and practices and to secure the advantages
of centralized procurement or cooperative procurement processes.
ARTICLE VIII. GENERAL PROVISIONS
Administrative Rules and Policies
SECTION 8.01 ESTABLISHMENT OF RULES.
   The board of mayor and aldermen may establish rules, procedures and
standards, hereinafter called policies, relating to matters over which the
board has jurisdiction. Such policies shall be set forth in a manual which
shall be maintained by the city clerk and made available to the departments.
SECTION 8.02 STATEMENT OF POLICY.
   (a)   The board of mayor and aldermen shall provide by ordinance for the
adoption by city authorities, boards, commissions, departments and officers
written statements of policy or interpretations thereof formulated or used in
the discharge of their duties.
   (b)   These statements of policies shall include a general description of
the organization of the department, the general course and method of its
operations, the methods by which the public may obtain information or make
submissions or requests, as well as forms and instructions used in dealing with
the public, and a description of such other procedures which may directly bear
on relations with the public, including any applicable appeal procedure.
   (c)   Each authority, board, commission, department and officer shall file
all such adopted rules with the city clerk and shall transmit to the city clerk
and make available to the public all other written statements of policy or
interpretation formulated or used by the agency in the discharge of its duties.
Charter Review Committee
SECTION 8.03 PERIODIC REVIEW.
   (a)   Not less than once every ten (10) years the board of mayor and
aldermen shall cause the question of charter revision to be considered by the
voters under the provision of state law. Except as set forth below, nothing in
this provision shall limit the availability of the charter amendment process
provided by law.
   (b)   The local procedures used for amendment, revision, or replacement of
the charter shall comply with the procedural laws of the state pertaining to
amendment, revision or replacement of a city charter as set forth in RSA 49-B,
and no legislative approval shall be required to amend, revise or replace those
aspects of the charter pertaining to the school district provided that the
proposed charter amendment, revision or replacement shall be consistent with
the general laws of the state regarding school districts and shall not divest
the district of the powers and duties afforded school districts under state
law.
(Amended by electorate 11-3-20)
Compensation
SECTION 8.04 COMPENSATION OF OFFICIALS.
   (a)   The board of mayor and aldermen may determine the salaries of aldermen
and school committee members by ordinance provided that no ordinance shall take
effect until the commencement of the next term of office of the board of mayor
and aldermen.
   (b)   The salary of the mayor shall be set at sixty-eight thousand dollars
($68,000) after the election of a new mayor at the next municipal general
election. The mayor's salary shall not be increased from the time of any
election until the close of the term of the mayor then elected. The board of
aldermen shall have the power to increase the mayor's salary as they deem
necessary, but shall not lower said salary.
Incompatibility
SECTION 8.05 INCOMPATIBILITY OF OFFICE.
   (a)   No elected city official shall be employed by the city or by the
school district until completion of the term for which the official was
elected.
   (b)   Acceptance of the elected office of mayor, alderman, school
committeeman or welfare commissioner by a city or by a school district employee
shall result in termination of employment.
(Approved by electorate 11-8-05)
Library
SECTION 8.06 CONTRACT WITH THE ATHENAEUM.
   The contract dated September 6, 1854 between the City and the Manchester
Athenaeum executed pursuant to the Laws of 1854, Chapter 1588, is recorded in
the office of the city clerk in the Manchester City Reports 1855-1859 beginning
at page 107. The pro-visions of this charter referring to commissions and
department heads shall apply to the library as may be consistent with the
contract and state law.
Local Initiative
SECTION 8.07 INITIATIVE.
   (a)   On the written petition of a number of voters equal to at least
fifteen percent (15%) of the registered voters of the city, including at least
six percent (6%) of the registered voters of each ward, the board of mayor and
aldermen shall order non-binding informational questions to be placed on the
ballot at any general election, whether federal, state or municipal except a
primary held within the municipality in accordance with the procedures set
forth below.
   (b)   The petitions shall be limited to questions which do not involve
established operational expenses of the city or questions on appointed or
elected officials of the city. Each page comprising the total petition shall be
complete unto itself as a separate document setting out in full the proposed
initiative questions and shall be in such format as is approved by the city
clerk prior to voter signature and each such petition shall be signed by only
one voter.
   (c)   Petitions shall be submitted to the city clerk not less than forty-
five (45) days prior to the election at which the question is to be submitted
to the voters and such petitions shall be collected within twelve (12) months
of the election at which the question will appear.
   (d)   The city clerk shall certify as to the adequacy of such petitions on
the examination of the same after referring the same to the board of registrars
for verification and report.
   (e)   On certification by the city clerk of the adequacy of the petitions,
the board of mayor and aldermen shall order such questions placed on the
ballot, but the result of any such initiative shall be non-binding, unless
otherwise required by law.
Oaths
SECTION 8.08 OATHS.
   Every person elected or appointed to any city office shall before assuming
the duties of office take the oath of office prescribed by law. The oath of
office shall be taken the first Tuesday after the first Monday in January.
Retirement
SECTION 8.09 EMPLOYEE RETIREMENT SYSTEM.
   (a)   The retirement system for city employees approved on referenda, as
proposed by Laws 1973, Chapter 218 and Laws 1976, Chapter 24 shall remain in
full force and effect.
   (b)   Eligible persons within the school department, police department and
fire department shall participate in the appropriate state administered
retirement system as required by law.
   (c)   Any amounts which may be paid or payable to, or on account of, any
member or retired member on account of any disability to which the city has
made contributions under the provisions of any worker's compensation or similar
law or plan shall be reduced against or from the city pension on account of the
same disability, except that any city employee who is receiving both disability
retirement benefits and worker's compensation benefits as of January 1, 1986
shall not be affected. (Ord. of 11/5/85)
Editor's note: This section refers to a local law which applies only to
Manchester and is not included in the current recodification of the Revised
Statutes.
SECTION 8.10 PENSION ACT REPEAL.
   (a)   All existing annual pension acts are hereby repealed except that such
acts shall continue in force with respect to persons already receiving annual
pensions and with respect to present employees not disqualified by law or by
ordinance from receiving annual pensions under such acts.
   (b)   The retirement system may be amended by the Trustees of the City
Retire-ment System to meet the requirements of a qualified trust within the
meaning of section 401(a), and to qualify as a governmental plan within the
meaning of section 414(d) of the United States Internal Revenue Code of 1968,
as amended, or replaced and with the laws of the state of New Hampshire.
Separability
SECTION 8.11 PROVISIONS AND APPLICATION.
   If any provision of this charter is held invalid, the other provisions of
this charter shall not be affected thereby. If the application of this charter
or any of its provisions to any person or circumstances is held invalid, the
application of this charter and its provisions to any other person or to any
other circumstance shall not be affected thereby.
Special Acts
SECTION 8.12 APPLICABILITY.
   Special acts inconsistent with the provisions of this charter are repealed
to the extent of such inconsistency.
Veterans
SECTION 8.13 VETERANS RECOGNITION.
   In recognition of its veterans who have fought and died for their country,
the city shall honor them in appropriate ceremonies on Memorial Day and
Veterans Day.
Public Participation
SECTION 8.14 PUBLIC COMMENT BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS.
   All boards, commission, authorities and committees, acting together as a
full body, shall provide for a period of public comment.
Charter Enforcement
SECTION 8.15 CHARTER ENFORCEMENT PROVISION.
   (a)   It shall be the responsibility of all elected officials to ensure the
enforcement of and compliance with this charter.
   (b)   In the event there is an allegation of a violation of the charter or
failure to follow its provisions, such allegation shall be referred to the
mayor who shall review the allegation with the official or officials involved.
   (c)   In the event such review shall not resolve the matter, the mayor shall
refer the allegation to the chief legal officer of the city who shall report
findings on the allegation to the mayor and board of aldermen within ninety
(90) days.
   (d)   If the violation or failure is alleged to involve the mayor, the
chairman of the aldermen shall receive the allegation and refer it to the chief
legal officer of the city.
   (e)   If a violation is found to have occurred, the mayor and aldermen shall
direct such action or changes in procedure as shall ensure compliance with this
charter. This provision shall comprise administrative procedure and remedy for
alleged violations of this charter.
   (f)   The board of mayor and aldermen shall provide for any procedures
necessary in order to address violations of this charter.
ARTICLE IX. STANDARDS OF CONDUCT
SECTION 9.01 DECLARATION OF POLICY.
   Honest government, ethical conduct, the avoidance of conflicts of interest
and public perception of ethical and honest conduct of public affairs are
essential. This code is adopted to further these purposes.
SECTION 9.02 DEFINITIONS.
   (a)   Business. Any corporation, partner-ship, sole proprietorship or other
business entity whether or not for profit. Such definition does not include
governmental entities.
   (b)   City official. Mayor, alderman, and member of school committee.
   (c)   Immediate family. Spouse, children and spouses of children, step-
children and spouses of stepchildren.
   (d)   Financial interest. A monetary or pecuniary interest in a business,
entity or matter, whether direct or indirect, not shared by the public at
large. A city official shall have a financial interest in the affairs of
immediate family members, any business in which the official is an officer,
director, proprietor, partner, trustee, member or employee, or any investment
in which the official owns directly or indirectly, more than five percent (5%)
of the total stock or an interest totaling $50,000 or more.
   (e)   Personal interest. Interest in a matter which is other than that of
the official as a public official and which is more direct than that of the
public at large and would influence the action of the public official.
(Amended by electorate 11-3-15)
SECTION 9.03 STANDARDS OF CONDUCT.
   This code is written to establish standards of conduct for city officials.
It is declaratory and is to be read consistently with the requirements of New
Hampshire law and not to create duties less stringent than those required by
New Hampshire law. It shall not limit the board of mayor and aldermen or school
district from enacting consistent ordinances or rules.
   (a)   Contracts and Purchases. A city official shall not have an undisclosed
financial or direct personal interest in any contract with the city. In the
event a business or family member shall have any such interest, it shall be
disclosed if pre-existing the official's taking office, or disclosed prior to
any vote to enter such arrangement is taken by the board of mayor and aldermen.
   (b)   Appointment or employment of immediate family member. No city official
shall participate in any way in any decision to employ or appoint any immediate
family member to any city position nor any personnel action in connection with
such employment or classified appointment.
   (c)   Disclosure of confidential information. A city official shall not
disclose confidential information concerning the city or its business without
proper legal authorization; nor shall any official use any such information to
advance a private interest. Confidential information is information which the
official obtains because of the position held which is not a matter of public
record.
   (d)   No city official shall accept any gift or thing of value which is
offered to affect the vote or action of the official, nor shall any official
solicit any such gift. This shall not prohibit legal campaign contributions or
admission to events to which officials are invited in their official
capacities, or food or beverage consumed at such events.
   (e)   Conflict of interest. No city official shall participate in the
decision-making process of any matter in which the official or a member of the
official's immediate family has a direct personal or financial interest. Any
official who believes such an interest exists shall disclose such interest and
shall not participate in the matter further. In the event any other official
believes an official has a conflict, such conflict shall be disclosed to the
city clerk who shall make a record of it. If the official does not believe such
a conflict exists, the board of mayor and alderman, or school committee if the
official is a member of the school committee, shall make a determination and if
it finds a conflict exists, the official shall not participate in the matter
further, or the appropriate board may refer the matter to the Conduct Board.
   (f)   Financial disclosure. Within 90 days after the effective date of this
charter, the city clerk shall prepare a financial disclosure form requiring all
city officials to disclose their own individual business and financial
relationships, employment and financial holdings. Such filings shall be updated
annually before January 15.
   (g)   Non-interference. The board of mayor and aldermen, the various boards
and com-missions and the board of school committee shall act in all matters as
a body, and shall not seek individually to influence the official acts of any
city official, or to direct or request, except in writing, the appointment or
removal of any person to or from office; or to interfere in any way with the
performance by such officers of their duties. This provision shall not prohibit
assistance to constituents in their dealings with city officials if direct
requests to the appropriate administrative officials have been unsuccessful,
advocacy of particular outcomes on matters pending before the city when the
matters are of a general nature, or submission of recommenda-tions or
references on behalf of a candidate for city employment which are not
inconsistent with this code.
SECTION 9.04 CONDUCT BOARD.
   A conduct board is established and shall consist of five (5) members and two
(2) alternates to: issue advisory opinions to the board of mayor and aldermen
or school committee, if requested to do so by said board or committee,
concerning this code and the actions of city officials; Interpret this code;
investigate violations of this code if requested to do so by city officials,
written and attested complaints by citizens of the city or those doing business
with the city, if it finds basis for such complaints, and issue reports after
such investigations to the board of mayor and aldermen which may take action
after such reports if it deems action necessary and, recommend ordinances to
carry out the purposes of this code.
   One member shall be the chief legal officer of the city. Two members and one
alternate shall be appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the vote of eight
(8) aldermen. Two members and one alternate shall be appointed by the board of
aldermen by nine (9) votes. No more than three (3) members of the same
political party shall serve on the board at the same time. At least one (1)
member shall have served as an alderman previously. Members shall be appointed
for terms of three (3) years and such terms shall be staggered so no more than
two (2) members and one (1) alternate are appointed at one time. Members may
not see for more than six (6) consecutive years.
ARTICLE X. TRANSITION PROVISIONS
Effective Date
SECTION 10.01 EFFECTIVE DATE OF THIS CHARTER.
   The effective date of this charter shall be July 1, 1997.
State and Municipal Laws
SECTION 10.02 CONTINUATION OF EXISTING LAWS.
   (a)   All ordinances, resolutions, rules, regulations and votes of the board
of mayor and aldermen which are in force at the adoption of this charter, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this charter, shall continue in full force
until amended or repealed.
   (b)   Where the provisions of this charter conflict with provisions of city
ordinances, regulations, orders or special acts, the provisions of this charter
shall govern. All provisions of city ordinances, rules, regulations, orders and
administrative actions not super-seded by this charter shall remain in force
until otherwise amended.
Departments, Offices and Agencies
SECTION 10.03 TRANSFER OF POWERS.
   (a)   The powers of administration and policy previously held by city
boards, commissions and authorities affected by this charter in Article III,
subsection 1 shall be transferred on the effective date of this charter to the
mayor and department head in admini-strative matters or to the board of mayor
and aldermen for policy matters unless superseded by state or federal law,
intermunicipal agreement, contract or by this charter.
      (1)   The following boards, commissions and authorities shall maintain
the powers and duties granted to them by federal or state law, intermunicipal
agreement, contract, or this charter. The composition of, appointment to and
governance of, said boards, commissions, authorities shall be subject to the
restrictions imposed by state or federal law, intermunicipal agreement,
contract or this charter.
      (2)   All powers and duties not specifically granted by state or federal
law, intermunicipal agreement, contract or this charter to a board, commission,
authority or committee shall be retained by the mayor and department head in
administrative matters and the board of mayor and aldermen in policy matters
subject to the provisions of this charter.
      Board of Adjustment
      Airport Authority
      Board of Assessors
      Conservation Commission
      Board of Health
      Historic District Commission
      Housing and Redevelopment Authority
      Water Commission
      Library Trustees
      Planning Board
      Board of Recount
      Board of Registrars
      Retirement Board
      Transit Authority
      Trustees of Trust Funds
   (b)   All members of boards, commissions, authorities and committees shall
continue to serve until reappointed or a successor has been appointed under the
provisions of this charter.
SECTION 10.04 TEMPORARY REGULATIONS.
   The board of mayor and aldermen may adopt such temporary regulations as they
may deem necessary in connection with the transi-tion of government. Every
temporary regulation shall be presented and ratified in the same manner
prescribed for enacting ordinances. All temporary regulations shall be labeled
as such and be automatically repealed in a manner designated by the board of
mayor and aldermen in any such temporary regulation.
Officers and Employees
SECTION 10.05 EXISTING OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES.
   Any person holding a city office or employment under the city shall retain
such office or employment and shall continue to perform the duties of the
office until provisions have been made in accordance with this charter for the
performance of the said duties by another person or agency.
SECTION 10.06 DEPARTMENT HEADS AND APPOINTED CITY OFFICERS EMPLOYMENT
TRANSITION.
   (a)   Department heads and appointed city officers shall continue their
service under the present terms of employment. All such provisions for the
term, including but not limited to, promotions, removals and benefits shall
remain in force during the remainder of the term. Upon the expiration of the
department head's existing term, the department head shall continue in service
under the provisions established by this charter.
   (b)   Department heads and appointed city officers in transition from term
status to the provisions of this charter shall not be subject to competitive
tests or other criteria as a condition of continuance in the office, but shall
become subject to the removal provisions in this charter and the personnel
system provided for in the ordinances of the city.
SECTION 10.07 SICK LEAVE TRANSITION.
   No employee of the city covered by sick leave benefits on the effective date
of this charter shall have such benefits reduced unless such change is
contained in a ratified collective bargaining agreement covering such employee.
Miscellaneous
SECTION 10.08 INITIAL SALARY OF THE MAYOR.
   The salary of the mayor shall become effective upon the inauguration of the
mayor in January 1998.
SECTION 10.09 ELECTION OF AT-LARGE ALDERMEN AND SCHOOL COMMITTEE MEMBERS.
   The Board of Aldermen and the School Committee shall increase to 14 members
upon the election and swearing in of at-large members of the board of aldermen
and school committee elected at the municipal general election in November of
1997. The city clerk shall prepare such necessary materials as may be necessary
to provide for the election of at-large members of the board of aldermen and
school committee at the municipal primary election and the municipal general
election of 1997.
SECTION 10.10 VOTING PROCEDURES PRIOR TO ELECTION OF ALDERMEN AT-LARGE.
   Until such time as the Aldermen at-large representatives of the Board of
Aldermen are sworn into office, votes of the Board of Aldermen that require
nine (9) members under this charter shall be considered ratified by two-thirds
of the present aldermen elect. Votes requiring the approval of eight (8)
aldermen under this charter shall be considered ratified upon the approval of a
majority of the present aldermen elect.
SECTION 10.11 DEBT LIMIT.
   On the effective date of this charter the debt limit of the city is as set
forth in Chapter 209.7 of the Laws of 1959.
SECTION 10.12 CONTINUANCE OF CHAPTER 551.
   Nothing in this Charter shall be construed as repealing Chapter 551 of the
Laws of 1971.
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
            Chapter
               
10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
               
11.     CITY SEAL AND CITY FLAG
               
12.   CITY WARD LINES
CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
10.01   Title of code
   
10.02   Interpretation
   
10.03   Application to future ordinances
   
10.04   Construction of ordinances; recordation, publication
   
10.05   Captions
   
10.06   Definitions
   
10.07   Rules of interpretation
   
10.08   Severability
   
10.09   Reference to other sections
   
10.10   Reference to offices
   
10.11   Errors and omissions
   
10.12   Official time
   
10.13   Reasonable time
   
10.14   Ordinances repealed
   
10.15   Ordinances unaffected
   
10.16   Effective date of ordinances
   
10.17   Repeal or modification of ordinance
   
10.18   Ordinances which amend or supplement code
   
10.19   Section histories; statutory references
   
10.20   Unauthorized alteration or tampering with code
   
10.21   Officers and employees not liable to fine for failure to perform duties
   
10.22   Acts punishable under different sections
 
   
10.99   General penalty
Cross-reference:
   
For code enforcement procedures, see Chapter 38 of this Code
§ 10.01 TITLE OF CODE.
   This codification of ordinances by and for the municipality of Manchester
shall be designated as the Code of Manchester and may be so cited.
§ 10.02 INTERPRETATION.
   Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required, the
same rules of construction, definition, and application shall govern the
interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of state law.
§ 10.03 APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.
   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation, shall apply to
ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code unless
otherwise specifically provided.
§ 10.04 CONSTRUCTION OF ORDINANCES; RECORDATION, PUBLICATION.
   (A)   All bylaws passed by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen shall be termed
“ordinances,” and the enacting style shall be: “Be it ordained by the Board of
Mayor and Aldermen of the City of Manchester as follows.” ('71 Code, § 1-3)
   (B)   All the ordinances of the city shall be recorded by the City Clerk, in
a fair and legible hand or typewritten, without interlineation or erasure, in
the order in which they are passed, in a book to be kept for that purpose, with
proper margin and index, to be entitled “Record of Ordinances of the City of
Manchester,” which book shall be preserved in the office of the City Clerk,
subject to the inspection of the citizens. ('71 Code, § 1-4)
   (C)   All the ordinances of the city and such resolutions and orders as the
Board of Mayor and Aldermen may direct shall be published by causing the same
to be inserted once in one or more newspapers printed and published in the city
as the Board of Mayor and Aldermen shall from time to time designate; but
whenever the city shall make a general revision of all of its ordinances, no
publication of such revised ordinances shall be required in any newspaper. ('71
Code, § 1-5) (Ord. passed 2-15-66; Am. Ord. passed 2-3-70)
§ 10.05 CAPTIONS.
   Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter, and
section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.
§ 10.06 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   General rule. Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain, or
ordinary and usual sense. However, technical words and phrases having a
peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be understood according to their
technical import.
   (B)   For the purpose of this code, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BOARD OF MAYOR AND ALDERMEN. The Board of Mayor and Aldermen of the City of
Manchester.
   CITY. The City of Manchester, New Hampshire.
   CODE, THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES. This municipal code as modified
by amendment, revision, and adoption of new titles, chapters, or sections.
   COMPUTATION OF TIME. When time is to be reckoned from a day, date, act done,
or the time of an act done, either by force of law, or by virtue of a contract
made since December 23, 1842, such day, date, or the day when such act is done
shall not be included in the computation.
   CORPORATE or CITY LIMITS. The legal boundaries of the City of Manchester.
   COUNTY. Hillsborough County, New Hampshire.
   DELEGATION OF AUTHORITY. Whenever a provision appears requiring the head of
a department or some other city officer to do some act or perform some duty, it
is to be construed to authorize the head of the department or other officer to
designate, delegate, and authorize subordinates to perform the required act or
perform the duty unless the terms of the provisions of the section specify
otherwise.
   JOINT AUTHORITY. All words purporting to give a joint authority to three or
more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a
majority of such persons or officers, unless otherwise expressly declared.
   MAYOR. The Mayor of Manchester.
   MAY. The act referred to is permissive.
   MONTH. A calendar month.
   OATH. An affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be
substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words SWEAR and SWORN shall be
equivalent to the words AFFIRM and AFFIRMED.
   OFFICERS, OFFICE, EMPLOYEE, COMMIS- SION, or DEPARTMENT. An officer, office,
employee, commission, or department of this municipality unless the context
clearly requires otherwise.
   OWNER. Applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint
owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant, or tenant by the
entirety, of the whole or of a part of such building or land.
   PERSON. Extends to and includes person, persons, firm, corporation,
copartnership, trustee, lessee, or receiver. Whenever used in any clause
prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms PERSON or WHOEVER as applied to
any unincorporated entity shall mean the partners or members thereof, and as
applied to corporations, the officers or agents thereof.
   PERSONAL PROPERTY. Includes every species of property except real property,
as herein described.
   PRECEDING or FOLLOWING. Next before or next after, respectively.
   REAL PROPERTY. Lands, tenements, and hereditaments.
   REGISTERED MAIL. When used in connection with the requirement for notice by
mail shall mean either registered mail or certified mail.
   SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
   SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION. Includes a mark when the person cannot write.
   STATE. The State of New Hampshire.
   STREET. Includes streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes,
viaducts, and all other public ways in the city, and shall include all areas
thereof embraced between the property lines and dedicated to the public use.
   SUBCHAPTER. A division of a chapter, designated in this code by a heading in
the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of the chapter,
setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter of the heading.
Not all chapters have subchapters.
   TENANT or OCCUPANT. Applied to a building or land, shall include any person
holding a written or oral lease or who occupies the whole or part of such
buildings or land, either alone or with others.
   WHOLESALE, WHOLESALER or WHOLESALE DEALER. In all cases where the words
WHOLESALE, WHOLESALER or WHOLESALE DEALER are used in this Code, unless
otherwise specifically defined, they shall be understood and held to relate to
the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things in quantity to persons who
purchase for purposes of resale, as distinguished from a retail dealer who
sells in smaller quantities direct to the consumer.
   WRITTEN. Any representation of words, letters, or figures, whether by
printing or otherwise.
   YEAR. A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed; equivalent to the words
YEAR OF OUR LORD.
('71 Code, § 1-2)
§ 10.07 RULES OF INTERPRETATION.
   The construction of all ordinances of this municipality shall be by the
following rules, unless such construction is plainly repugnant to the intent of
the legislative body or of the context of the same ordinance:
   (A)   AND or OR. Either conjunction shall include the other as if written
“and/or,” if the sense requires it.
   (B)   Acts by assistants. When a statute or ordinance requires an act to be
done which, by law, an agent or deputy as well may do as the principal, such
requisition shall be satisfied by the performance of such act by an authorized
agent or deputy.
   (C)   Gender; singular and plural; tenses. Words denoting the masculine
gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders; words in the
singular shall include the plural, and words in the plural shall include the
singular; the use of a verb in the present tense shall include the future, if
applicable.
   (D)   General term. A general term following specific enumeration of terms
is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so limited.
§ 10.08 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provision of this code as now or later amended or its application to
any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect
other provisions that can be given effect without the invalid provision or
application.
§ 10.09 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof, such
reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified, or renumbered unless the subject matter is
changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
§ 10.10 REFERENCE TO OFFICES.
   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer, or employee of this municipality exercising the powers,
duties, or functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any
transfer of functions or change in the official title of the functionary.
§ 10.11 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any
words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention of
the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning can be
attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was clearly
intended to express such intent, such spelling shall be corrected and such word
or words supplied, omitted, or substituted as will conform with the manifest
intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though the correct
words were contained in the text as originally published. No alteration shall
be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or extent of
such error.
§ 10.12 OFFICIAL TIME.
   The official time, as established by applicable state/federal laws, shall be
the official time within this municipality for the transaction of all municipal
business.
§ 10.13 REASONABLE TIME.
   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in a
reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, reasonable time or
notice shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of such act or the giving of such notice.
   (B)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein provided, shall
be computed by excluding the first day and including the last. If the last day
be Sunday, it shall be excluded.
§ 10.14 ORDINANCES REPEALED.
   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated and
embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this code
shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code.
§ 10.15 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other ordinances
pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in full force and
effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary implication.
§ 10.16 EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.
   All ordinances passed by the legislative body requiring publication shall
take effect from and after the due publication thereof, unless otherwise
expressly provided. Ordinances not requiring publication shall take effect from
their passage, unless otherwise expressly provided.
§ 10.17 REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCE.
   (A)   Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be repealed or
modified by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part of an ordinance thus
repealed or modified shall continue in force until the due publication of the
ordinance repealing or modifying it when publication is required to give effect
thereto, unless otherwise expressly provided.
   (B)   No suit, proceedings, right, fine, forfeiture, or penalty instituted,
created, given, secured, or accrued under any ordinance previous to its repeal
shall in any way be affected, released, or discharged, but may be prosecuted,
enjoyed, and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had continued in force
unless it is otherwise expressly provided.
   (C)   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause, or provision
shall be itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to revive the
former ordinance, clause, or provision, unless it is expressly provided.
§ 10.18 ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.
   (A)   If the legislative body shall desire to amend any existing chapter or
section of this code, the chapter or section shall be specifically repealed and
a new chapter or section, containing the desired amendment, substituted in its
place.
   (B)   Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing code a new
chapter or section shall indicate, with reference to the arrangement of this
code, the proper number of such chapter or section. In addition to such
indication thereof as may appear in the text of the proposed ordinance, a
caption or title shall be shown in concise form above the ordinance.
§ 10.19 SECTION HISTORIES; STATUTORY REFERENCES.
   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and passage
date of the original ordinance, and the most recent three amending ordinances,
if any, are listed following the text of the code section. Example: (Ord.
passed 5-13-60; Am. Ord. passed 1-1-70; Am. Ord. passed 1-1-80; Am. Ord. passed
1-1-85)
   (B)   (1)   If a statutory cite is included in the history, this indicates
that the text of the section reads substantially the same as the statute.
Example: R.S.A. 31:69-a (Ord. passed 1-17-80; Am. Ord. passed 1-1-85).
      (2)   If a statutory cite is set forth as a “statutory reference”
following the text of the section, this indicates that the reader should refer
to that statute for further information.
Example:
   § 39.01 PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.
      This municipality shall make available to any person for inspection or
copying all public records, unless otherwise exempted by state law.
Statutory reference:
   For provisions concerning the inspection of public records, see R.S.A. 91-A:
4
   (C)   If a section of this code is derived from the previous code of
ordinances of the city published in 1971 and subsequently amended, the 1971
code section number shall be indicated in the history by “('71 Code, §     ).”
§ 10.20 UNAUTHORIZED ALTERATION OR TAMPERING WITH CODE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to change or amend, by
additions or deletions, any part or portions of this code, or to insert or
delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such code in any
manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented
thereby.
('71 Code, § 1-8)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 10.21 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES NOT LIABLE TO FINE FOR FAILURE TO PERFORM
DUTIES.
   No provision of this code designating the duties of any officer or employee
shall be so construed so as to make such officer or employee liable for any
fine or penalty provided in this code for a failure to perform such duty,
unless the intention of the Board of Mayor and Aldermen to impose such fine or
penalty on such officer or employee is specifically and clearly expressed in
the section creating the duty.
('71 Code, § 1-12)
§ 10.22 ACTS PUNISHABLE UNDER DIFFERENT SECTIONS.
   In all cases where the same offense is made punishable or is created by
different clauses or sections of this code, the prosecuting officer may elect
under which to proceed; but not more than one recovery shall be had against the
same person for the same offense, provided that the revocation of a license or
permit shall not be considered a recovery or penalty so as to bar any other
penalty being enforced.
('71 Code, § 1-13)
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   Any person, firm, or corporation who violates any provision of this code for
which another penalty is not specifically provided shall, upon conviction, be
subject to a fine not exceeding the maximum allowed by R.S.A. 47:17 or other
law. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during which a
violation occurs or continues.
('71 Code, § 17¾-1)
Cross-reference:
   
For code enforcement procedures, see Chapter 38
CHAPTER 11: CITY SEAL AND CITY FLAG
Section
   
11.01   City seal
   
11.02   Depiction of city seal
   
11.03   City flag
   
11.04   Depiction of city flag
§ 11.01 CITY SEAL.
   The seal of the city shall be as follows:
   (A)   A circular disk, upon the border of which shall be the words: “City of
Manchester. Incorporated June 1846.”
   (B)   Upon the disk, to be a shield divided into three compartments, each to
contain a device. First, a waterfall with trees and the Uncanoonuc Mountains in
the background. Second, a piece of machinery called a regulator. Third, a
factory building and a locomotive with a transportation car loaded with bales
of manufactured goods.
   (C)   The shield surmounted by a hand holding a hammer with a scroll
containing the words “Labor Vincit” - the whole being the design hereto
annexed.
   (D)   The city seal shall be the property of the city. No person shall
manufacture, sell, expose for sale, or have in his possession for sale any
article or substance, being an article of merchandise or receptacle of
merchandise or article or thing for carrying or transporting merchandise, or
sell, expose for sale, give away, or have in possession for sale or to give
away, or for any purpose any article or thing to advertise or promote services,
upon which shall have been painted, printed, attached, or otherwise placed, a
representative or likeness of the city seal.
('71 Code, § 2-1) (Ord. passed 3-2-76)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 11.02 DEPICTION OF CITY SEAL.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/23fe8e9a76ad599887dbcf9a98135ba33d87257d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-13.jpg]
 
§ 11.03 CITY FLAG.
   (A)   The flag of the city shall consist of a white background, gold border,
and a centered depiction of the city seal.
   (B)   The city flag shall be the property of the city. No person shall
manufacture, sell, or display the city flag without a license issued by the
City Clerk.
(Ord. passed 12-19-17) Penally, see §
10.99
§ 11.04 DEPICTION OF CITY FLAG.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/23fe8e9a76ad599887dbcf9a98135ba33d87257d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3108.jpg]
 
(Ord. passed 12-19-17)
CHAPTER 12: CITY WARD LINES
Section
   
12.01   Ward 1
   
12.02   Ward 2
   
12.03   Ward 3
   
12.04   Ward 4
   
12.05   Ward 5
   
12.06   Ward 6
   
12.07   Ward 7
   
12.08   Ward 8
   
12.09   Ward 9
   
12.10   Ward 10
   
12.11   Ward 11
   
12.12   Ward 12
§ 12.01 WARD 1.
   Beginning at a point at the intersection of the centerline of Interstate 93
and Mammoth Road; thence southwesterly by the centerline of Mammoth Road to the
centerline of Smyth Road; thence southwesterly by the centerline of Smyth Road
to the centerline of Webster Street; thence westerly by the centerline of
Webster Street to the centerline of River Road; thence northerly by the
centerline of River Road to the centerline of West Clarke Street; thence
westerly by the centerline of West Clarke Street extended westerly to the
centerline of the Merrimack River; thence upstream along the centerline of the
Merrimack River to the Manchester-Hooksett town line; thence northeasterly by
the Manchester-Hooksett town line to the centerline of Interstate 93; thence
northeasterly and southerly by the Manchester-Hooksett town line to the
centerline of Interstate 93; thence continuing southerly and southeasterly by
the Manchester-Hooksett town line to the centerline of Interstate 93; thence
southeasterly by the centerline of Interstate 93 to the centerline of Mammoth
Road, to the point of the beginning.
(Ord. passed 4-7-20; Am. Ord. passed 12-21-21)
§ 12.02 WARD 2.
   Beginning at a point at the intersection of the centerline of Interstate 93
and Mammoth Road; thence northwesterly by the centerline of Interstate 93 to
the Manchester-Hooksett town line; thence southeasterly by the Manchester-
Hooksett town line to the Manchester-Auburn town line; thence southerly by the
Manchester-Auburn town line to the centerline of Wellington Road; thence
southwesterly by the centerline of Wellington Road to the intersection of the
centerline of Mammoth Road and the centerline of Bridge Street; thence westerly
by the centerline of Bridge Street to the centerline of Ashland Street; thence
northerly by the centerline of Ashland Street to the centerline of Pearl
Street; thence westerly by the centerline of Pearl Street to the centerline of
Union Street; thence northerly by the centerline of Union Street to the
centerline of Webster Street; thence easterly by the centerline of Webster
Street to the centerline of Smyth Road; thence northeasterly by the centerline
of Smyth Road to the centerline of Mammoth Road; thence northerly by the
centerline of Mammoth Road to the centerline of Interstate 93, to the point of
the beginning.
(Ord. passed 4-7-20 ; Am. Ord. passed 12-21-21)
§ 12.03 WARD 3.
   Beginning at a point at the intersection of the centerline of Webster Street
and Union Street; thence southerly by the centerline of Union Street to the
centerline of Valley Street; thence westerly by the centerline of Valley Street
to the centerline of Willow Street; thence southerly by the centerline of
Willow Street to the centerline of the northernmost on-ramp to Queen City
Avenue; thence westerly by the centerline of the northernmost on-ramp to the
centerline of Queen City Avenue; thence westerly along the centerline of Queen
City Avenue to the centerline of the Merrimack River; thence upstream by the
centerline of the Merrimack River to its intersection with the centerline of
West Clarke Street extended; thence easterly by the centerline of West Clarke
Street to the centerline of River Road; thence southerly by the centerline of
River Road to the centerline of Webster Street; thence easterly by the
centerline of Webster Street to the centerline of Union Street, to the point of
the beginning.
(Ord. passed 4-7-20; Am. Ord. passed 12-21-21)
§ 12.04 WARD 4.
   Beginning at a point at the intersection of the centerline of Merrimack
Street and the centerline of Union Street; thence easterly by the centerline of
Merrimack Street to the centerline of Cass Street; thence southerly by the
centerline of Cass Street to the centerline of Central Street; thence easterly
by the centerline of Central Street to the centerline of Tarrytown Road; thence
southerly by the centerline of Tarrytown Road to the centerline of Lake Avenue;
thence easterly by the centerline of Lake Avenue to the centerline of Hanover
Street; thence easterly by the centerline of Hanover Street to the centerline
of Interstate 93; thence northerly along the centerline of Interstate 93 to the
centerline of the west-bound lane of N.H. Route 101; then northeasterly along
the centerline of the west-bound lane of N.H. Route 101 for approximately 1,500
feet to a point, said point representing the southerly point of a line which
extends northerly to the centerline of Karatzas Avenue; thence northerly along
a line which extends approximately 980 feet to the centerline of Karatzas
Avenue, said line also being located 100 feet to the east and parallel to
Lagrange Avenue; thence westerly by the centerline of Karatzas Avenue to the
centerline of Old Wellington Road; thence southwesterly by the centerline of
Old Wellington Road to the centerline of Wellington Way; thence northwesterly
by the centerline of Wellington way to the centerline of Wellington Road;
thence southwesterly by the centerline of Wellington Road to the intersection
of the centerline of Mammoth Road and to the centerline of Bridge Street;
thence westerly by the centerline of Bridge Street to the centerline of Ashland
Street; thence northerly by the centerline of Ashland Street to the centerline
of Pearl Street; thence westerly by the centerline of Pearl Street to the
centerline of Union Street; thence southerly by the centerline of Union Street
to the centerline of Merrimack Street, to the point of the beginning.
(Ord. passed 4-7-20; Am. Ord. passed 12-21-21)
§ 12.05 WARD 5.
   Beginning at a point at the intersection of the centerline of Merrimack
Street and the centerline of Union Street; thence easterly by the centerline of
Merrimack Street to the centerline of Cass Street; thence southerly by the
centerline of Cass Street to the centerline of Central Street; thence easterly
by the centerline of Central Street to the centerline of Tarrytown Road; thence
southerly by the centerline of Tarrytown Road to the centerline of Lake Avenue;
thence easterly by the centerline of Lake Avenue to the centerline of Hanover
Street; thence easterly by the centerline of Hanover Street to the centerline
of Page Street; thence southerly by the centerline of Page Street to the
centerline of Laydon Street; thence westerly by the centerline of Laydon Street
to the centerline of Cody Street; thence southerly by the centerline of Cody
Street to the centerline of Oakland Avenue; thence westerly by the centerline
of Oakland Avenue to the centerline of Woodbine Avenue; thence southerly by the
centerline of Woodbine Avenue to the centerline of Longwood Avenue; thence
westerly by the centerline of Longwood Avenue to the centerline of Revere
Avenue; thence southerly by the centerline of Revere Avenue to the centerline
of Wayland Avenue; thence westerly by the centerline of Wayland Avenue to the
centerline of Massabesic Street; thence westerly by the centerline of
Massabesic Street to the centerline of Valley Street; thence westerly by the
centerline of Valley Street to the centerline of Union Street; thence northerly
by the centerline of Union Street to the centerline of Merrimack Street, to the
point of the beginning.
(Ord. passed 4-7-20; Am. Ord. passed 12-21-21)
§ 12.06 WARD 6.
   Beginning at a point at the intersection of the Manchester-Auburn town line
and the centerline of Wellington Road; thence southerly by the Manchester-
Auburn town line to the Manchester-Londonderry town line; thence southerly and
westerly by the Manchester- Londonderry town line to the centerline of
Interstate 93 North; thence northwesterly by the centerline of Interstate 93
North to its intersection with the centerline of Interstate 293 North; thence
westerly and northwesterly by the centerline of Interstate 293 North to the
centerline of South Mammoth Road; thence northwesterly by the centerline of
South Mammoth Road to the centerline of Island Pond Road; thence easterly by
the centerline of Island Pond Road to the centerline of Benjamin Street; thence
northerly by the centerline of Benjamin Street to the centerline of Benjamin
Street extended; thence northerly by the centerline of Benjamin Street extended
to the centerline of Medford Street; thence easterly by the centerline of
Medford Street to the centerline of Normand Street; thence northerly by the
centerline of Normand Street to the centerline of Holt Avenue; thence easterly
by the centerline of Holt Avenue to the centerline of Cody Street; thence
northerly by the centerline of Cody Street to the centerline of Laydon Street;
thence easterly by the centerline of Laydon Street to the centerline of Page
Street; thence northerly by the centerline of Page Street to the centerline of
Hanover Street; thence easterly along the centerline of Hanover Street to the
centerline of Interstate 93; thence northerly along the centerline of
Interstate 93 to the centerline of the west-bound lane of N.H. Route 101; then
northeasterly along the centerline of the west-bound lane of N.H. Route 101 for
approximately 1,500 feet to a point, said point representing the southerly
point of a line which extends northerly to the centerline of Karatzas Avenue;
thence northerly along a line which extends approximately 980 feet to the
centerline of Karatzas Avenue, said line also being located 100 feet to the
east and parallel to Lagrange Avenue; thence westerly by the centerline of
Karatzas Avenue to the centerline of Old Wellington Road; thence southwesterly
by the centerline of Old Wellington Road to the centerline of Wellington Way;
thence northwesterly by the centerline of Wellington Way to the centerline of
Wellington Road; thence northeasterly by the centerline of Wellington Road to
the Manchester-Auburn town line, to the point of the beginning.
(Ord. passed 4-7-20; Am. Ord. passed 8-4-20; Am. Ord. passed 12-21-21)
§ 12.07 WARD 7.
   Beginning at a point at the intersection of the centerline of Mammoth Road,
the centerline of South Mammoth Road and the centerline of Cilley Road; thence
southerly by the centerline of South Mammoth Road to the centerline of Island
Pond Road; thence easterly by the centerline of Island Pond Road to the
centerline of Benjamin Street; thence northerly by the centerline of Benjamin
Street to the centerline of Benjamin Street extended; thence northerly by the
centerline of Benjamin Street extended to the centerline of Medford Street;
thence easterly by the centerline of Medford Street to the centerline of
Normand Street; thence northerly by the centerline of Normand Street to the
centerline of Holt Avenue; thence easterly by the centerline of Holt Avenue to
the centerline of Cody Street; thence northerly by the centerline of Cody
Street to the centerline of Oakland Avenue; thence westerly by the centerline
of Oakland Avenue to the centerline of Woodbine Avenue; thence southerly by the
centerline of Woodbine Avenue to the centerline of Longwood Avenue; thence
westerly by the centerline of Longwood Avenue to the centerline of Revere
Avenue; thence southerly by the centerline of Revere Avenue to the centerline
of Wayland Avenue; thence westerly by the centerline of Wayland Avenue to the
centerline of Massabesic Street; thence westerly by the centerline of
Massabesic Street to the centerline of Valley Street; thence westerly by the
centerline of Valley Street to the centerline of Willow Street; thence
southerly by the centerline of Willow Street to the centerline of Silver
Street; thence easterly by the centerline of Silver Street the centerline of
Beech Street; thence southerly by the centerline of Beech Street to the
centerline of Shasta Street; thence easterly by the centerline of Shasta Street
to the centerline of Hall Street; thence southerly by the centerline of Hall
Street to the centerline of South Hall Street; thence southerly by the
centerline of South Hall Street to the centerline of Vinton Street; thence
easterly by the centerline of Vinton Street to the centerline of South Jewett
Street; thence northerly by the centerline of South Jewett Street to the
centerline of Cilley Road; thence easterly by the centerline of Cilley Road to
the intersection of the centerline of Mammoth Road and the centerline of South
Mammoth Road, to the point of the beginning.
(Ord. passed 4-7-20; Am. Ord. passed 12-21-21)
§ 12.08 WARD 8.
   Beginning at a point at the intersection of the centerline of Vinton Street
and South Hall Street; thence easterly by the centerline of Vinton Street to
the centerline of South Jewett Street; thence northerly by the centerline of
South Jewett Street to the centerline of Cilley Road; thence easterly by the
centerline of Cilley Road to the intersection of the centerline of Mammoth Road
and the centerline of South Mammoth Road; thence southerly by the centerline of
South Mammoth Road to the centerline of Interstate 293 North; thence easterly
and southeasterly by the centerline of Interstate 293 North to its intersection
with the centerline of the Interstate 93 North; thence southeasterly by the
centerline of Interstate 93 to the Manchester-Londonderry town line; thence
westerly and southerly by the Manchester-Londonderry town line to
theManchester-Litchfield town line; thence northwesterly by the Manchester-
Litchfield town line to the centerline of the Merrimack River; thence upstream
by the centerline of the Merrimack River to the centerline of Interstate 293;
thence easterly by the centerline of Interstate 293 to the centerline of South
Willow Street; thence northerly and northwesterly by the centerline of South
Willow Street to the centerline of Parkview Street; thence easterly by the
centerline of Parkview Street to the centerline of South Hall Street; thence
northerly by the centerline of South Hall Street to the centerline of Vinton
Street, to the point of the beginning.
(Ord. passed 4-7-20; Am. Ord. passed 8-4-20; Am. Ord. passed 12-21-21)
§ 12.09 WARD 9.
   Beginning at a point at the intersection of the centerline of Beech Street
and the centerline of Shasta Street; thence easterly by the centerline of
Shasta Street to the centerline of Hall Street; thence southerly by the
centerline of Hall Street to the centerline of South Hall Street; thence
southerly by the centerline of South Hall Street to the centerline of Parkview
Street; thence westerly by the centerline of Parkview Street to the centerline
of South Willow Street; thence southeasterly and southerly by the centerline of
South Willow Street to the centerline of Interstate 293; thence westerly by the
centerline of Interstate 293 to the centerline of the Merrimack River; thence
upstream by the centerline of the Merrimack River to the centerline of Queen
City Avenue; thence easterly by the centerline of Queen City Avenue to the
centerline of the northernmost on- ramp to Queen City Avenue; thence easterly
by the centerline of the northernmost on-ramp to Queen City Avenue to the
centerline of Willow Street; thence northwesterly by the centerline of Willow
Street to the centerline of Silver Street; thence easterly by the centerline of
Silver Street to the centerline of Beech Street; then southerly by the
centerline of Beech Street to the centerline of Shasta Street, to the point of
the beginning.
(Ord. passed 4-7-20; Am. Ord. passed 12-21-21)
§ 12.10 WARD 10.
   Beginning at the intersection of the Manchester-Goffstown town line and the
centerline of the Piscataquog River; thence downstream by the centerline of the
Piscataquog River to the centerline of Winter Street extended; thence
northeasterly by the centerline of Winter Street to the centerline of Granite
Street; thence northeasterly by the centerline of Granite Street to the
centerline of Quincy Street; thence northerly by the centerline of Quincy
Street to the centerline of Conant Street; thence easterly by the centerline of
Conant Street to the centerline of Dubuque Street; thence northerly by the
centerline of Dubuque Street to the centerline of Gates Street; thence easterly
by the centerline of Gates Street to the centerline of Cartier Street; thence
southerly by the centerline of Cartier Street to the centerline of Walsh
Avenue; thence easterly by the centerline of Walsh Avenue to the centerline of
Notre Dame Avenue; thence southerly by the centerline of Notre Dame Avenue to
the centerline of Conant Street; thence easterly by the centerline of Conant
Street to the centerline of Main Street; thence southerly by the centerline of
Main Street to the centerline of Douglas Street North Back; thence easterly by
the centerline of Douglas Street North Back to the intersection of Douglas
Street North Back, Douglas Street, and Allard Drive; thence northeasterly by
the centerline of Allard Drive for approximately 100 feet to a point on the
centerline of Allard Drive, said point being approximately 200 feet northwest
of the intersection of the south-bound off-ramp of Interstate 293 and Granite
Street; thence southeasterly to the intersection of the south- bound off-ramp
of Interstate 293 and the centerline of Granite Street; thence northwesterly
along the centerline of Granite Street to the centerline of the Merrimack
River; thence downstream by the centerline of the Merrimack River to the
Manchester-Bedford town line; thence westerly, northerly and westerly by the
Manchester-Bedford town line to the Manchester-Goffstown town line; thence
northerly by the Manchester-Goffstown town line to the centerline of the
Piscataquog River, to the point of the beginning.
(Ord. passed 4-7-20; Am. Ord. passed 12-21-21)
§ 12.11 WARD 11.
   Beginning at a point of the intersection of the centerline of the
Piscataquog River and the centerline of Kelly Street; thence northerly and
northeasterly by the centerline of the Piscataquog River to the Manchester-
Goffstown town line; thence northwesterly by the Manchester- Goffstown town
line to the centerline of Upland Street; thence southeasterly by the centerline
of Upland Street to the centerline of Kimball Street; thence generally easterly
and southerly by the centerline of Kimball Street to the centerline of Bremer
Street; thence easterly by the centerline of Bremer Street to the centerline of
Boutwell Street; thence northerly by the centerline of Boutwell Street to the
centerline of Mason Street; thence northeasterly and easterly by the centerline
of Mason Street to the centerline of Montgomery Street; thence northerly by the
centerline of Montgomery Street to the centerline of Goffstown Road; thence
easterly by the centerline of Goffstown Road to the centerline of Amoskeag
Street; thence southeasterly by the centerline of Amoskeag Street to the
centerline of the Merrimack River; thence downstream by the centerline of the
Merrimack River to the centerline of Granite Street; thence westerly by the
centerline of Granite Street to the intersection of Granite Street and the
south- bound off-ramp of Interstate 293; thence northwesterly approximately 200
feet to a point on the centerline of Allard Drive that is approximately 100
feet northeast from the intersection of Allard Drive, Douglas Street, and
Douglas Street North Back; thence, from that point, southwesterly approximately
100 feet to the intersection of Allard Drive, Douglas Street, Douglas Street
North Back; thence westerly by the centerline of Douglas Street North Back to
the centerline of Main Street; thence northerly by the centerline of Main
Street to the centerline of Conant Street; thence westerly by the centerline of
Conant Street to the centerline of Notre Dame Avenue; thence northerly by the
centerline of Notre Dame Avenue to the centerline of Walsh Avenue; thence
westerly by the centerline of Walsh Avenue to the centerline of Cartier Street;
thence northerly by the centerline of Cartier Street to the centerline of Gates
Street; thence westerly by the centerline of Gates Street to the centerline of
Dubuque Street; thence southerly by the centerline of Dubuque Street to the
centerline of Conant Street; thence westerly by the centerline of Conant Street
to the centerline of Quincy Street; thence southerly by the centerline of
Quincy Street to the centerline of Granite Street; thence southwesterly by the
centerline of Granite Street to the centerline of Winter Street then
northwesterly by the centerline of Winter Street extended to the centerline of
the Piscataquog River; thence upstream by the centerline of the Piscataquog
River to the centerline of Kelley Street, to the point of the beginning.
(Ord. passed 4-7-20; Am. Ord. passed 12-21-21)
§ 12.12 WARD 12.
   Beginning at the intersection of the Manchester-Goffstown town line and the
centerline of Upland Street; thence southeasterly by the centerline of Upland
Street to the centerline of Kimball Street; thence generally easterly and
southerly by the centerline of Kimball Street to the centerline of Bremer
Street; thence easterly by the centerline of Bremer Street to the centerline of
Boutwell Street; thence northerly by the centerline of Boutwell Street to the
centerline of Mason Street; thence northeasterly and easterly by the centerline
of Mason Street to the centerline of Montgomery Street; thence northerly by the
centerline of Montgomery Street to the centerline of Goffstown Road; thence
easterly by the centerline of Goffstown Road to the centerline of Amoskeag
Street; thence southeasterly by the centerline of Amoskeag Street to the
centerline of the Merrimack River; thence upstream by the centerline of the
Merrimack River to the Manchester-Hooksett town line; thence northerly,
northwesterly and westerly by the Manchester-Hooksett town line to the
Manchester-Goffstown town line; thence southerly by the Manchester-Goffstown
town line to the centerline of Upland Street, to the point of the beginning.
(Ord. passed 4-7-20; Am. Ord. passed 12-21-21)
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
            Chapter
               
30.   CITY OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES
               
31.   POLICE DEPARTMENT
               
32.   BOARDS, COMMISSIONS, AND DEPARTMENTS
               
33.   HUMAN RESOURCES
               
34.   CITY POLICIES
               
35.   FINANCES
               
36.   TAXATION
               
37.   CENTRAL BUSINESS SERVICE DISTRICTS
               
38.   CODE ENFORCEMENT
               
39.   PROCUREMENT CODE
CHAPTER 30: CITY OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES
Section
General Provisions
   
30.01   Meeting for oath of office
   
30.02   Board to examine votes
   
30.03   [Reserved]
   
30.04   [Reserved]
   
30.05   Officials absent from city
   
30.06   Obligation of city for legal services
   
30.07   Records retention and disposition
   
30.08   [Reserved]
   
30.09   Salary of officers
   
30.10   Salary of Board of Aldermen
   
30.11   Salary of Board of School Committee
   
30.12   Salary of the Mayor
City Clerk
   
30.18   Department established
   
30.19   Department head
   
30.20   Bond required
   
30.21   Committees
   
30.22   Recordation of ordinances and resolutions
   
30.23   Record of board proceedings
   
30.24   Marriage index
   
30.25   Registration of deaths
   
30.26   Secured transactions
   
30.27   Rentals of halls and buildings
City Solicitor
   
30.38   Department established
   
30.39   Department head
   
30.40   Duties
   
30.41   Draft legal instruments
   
30.42   Furnish legal advice
   
30.43   Furnish written opinions
   
30.44   Prosecution of civil suits
   
30.45   Defense of city
   
30.46   Attend tax sales
   
30.47   Criminal cases
   
30.48   Risk management and insurance
Independent City Auditor
   
30.55   Office established
   
30.56   Duties of Independent City Auditor
Chief Negotiator and Contract Administrator
   
30.60   Position established
   
30.61   Duties
   
30.62   Cooperation with other city departments and officials
Cross-reference:
   
Finance Officer, see §§ 35.015 - 35.018
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 30.01 MEETING FOR OATH OF OFFICE.
   The Mayor, Aldermen, and members of the Board of School Committee shall
biennially meet on the first Tuesday of January at 10:00 a.m. for the purpose
of taking the respective oaths of office.
('71 Code, § 2-2) (Am. Ord. passed 5-15-18)
Statutory reference:
   Meeting for oath of office required, see R.S.A. 46:4
§ 30.02 BOARD TO EXAMINE VOTES.
   The Board of Mayor and Aldermen shall biennially meet on the first Tuesday
of December at 7:30 p.m. for the purpose of examining the returns of the votes
given in the wards for Mayor.
('71 Code, § 2-3) (Am. Ord. passed 5-5-18)
Statutory reference:
   Examination of votes required, see R.S.A. 45:2
§ 30.03 [RESERVED].
   (Previous section repealed on 4-21-98)
§ 30.04 [RESERVED].
   (Previous section repealed on 11-4-98)
§ 30.05 OFFICIALS ABSENT FROM CITY.
   All salaried officials appointed by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen or by
the Mayor shall notify the Mayor before absenting themselves from the city and
shall state the length of time of such absence.
('71 Code, § 2-6)
§ 30.06 OBLIGATION OF CITY FOR LEGAL SERVICES.
   No city official, department, commission, board, trustee, or other agent of
the city shall obligate the city for legal service, without first having
secured the authorization of the Board of Mayor and Aldermen therefor. Before
such a request is presented to the Board of Mayor and Aldermen, it shall be
submitted to the City Solicitor for his opinion and comment.
('71 Code, § 2-7)
§ 30.07 RECORDS RETENTION AND DISPOSITION
   (A)   Definitions.
      RECORDS. Information required by ordinance, statute, regulation or
administrative rule, in any format, created by or on behalf of the city.
      RETENTION means the length of time that the city is required to maintain
the record.
   (B)   Departments, commissions, and all other municipal officers or agencies
shall maintain all records and documents, including all incoming and outgoing
correspondence, in accordance with current New Hampshire Municipal Records
Board Rules.
   (C)   Records that are described in the New Hampshire Municipal Records
Board Rules may be disposed of after they have met the minimum retention period
prescribed therein except as provided for elsewhere in this section.
   (D)   Departments, commissions, and all other municipal officers or
agencies, may develop internal Retention Schedules which exceed the standards
published in the New Hampshire Municipal Records Board Rules or as may be
recommended by the City Solicitor.
   (E)   Records that may be needed by government agencies for legal actions
must be retained for the entire period of the action even if their retention
period has passed. The record must be retained for one additional year
following the end of the legal action, or the end of the retention period,
whichever is longer.
   (F)   Due to the diversity and rapidly changing functions of municipal
government, new types of records may not be covered by the New Hampshire
Municipal Records Board Rules. Before disposing of any record not so covered,
the City Solicitor shall be contacted to determine if a legal minimum retention
period has been established or is recommended, and the City Clerk shall be
contacted to determine if there may be sufficient administrative or historical
value to merit retention beyond established time periods.
   (G)   The Committee on Administration may order the loan, deposit, or
ownership transfer of archival records or other records of enduring value that
are worthy of permanent retention and special management because of the
importance of the information they contain for historical or research purposes
to another public or private records repository within the city to ensure the
proper preservation and public access to these records.
   (H)   The outgoing Mayor shall deliver all records and documents, including
all incoming and outgoing correspondence, belonging to his office or to the
city, which are not of a personal nature, to the City Clerk, who shall give him
a receipt therefor if desired. And the City Clerk shall be responsible for the
retention or disposition of such records as provided for in this section.
   (I)   A permanent record shall be kept of the identity, inclusive dates, and
approximate quantity of records that are destroyed or otherwise disposed of.
('71 Code, § 2-9) (Ord. passed 12-7-71; Am. Ord. passed 9-1-87; Am. Ord. passed
6-4-96)
§ 30.08 [RESERVED].
   (Previous section repealed on 12-7-99)
§ 30.09 SALARY OF OFFICERS.
   (A)   The officers of the city shall receive compensation for all services
rendered in salary amounts to be determined by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen.
   (B)   The salary of city officials providing for a minimum and maximum
salary shall be increased periodically by vote of the Board of Mayor and
Aldermen when deemed necessary until the maximum salary for a specific office
has been granted and approved. ('71 Code, § 2-101 through 2-117)
   (C)   The Moderators in each ward of the city shall receive for their
services and for all the duties appertaining to their office during polling
hours, following closing of the polls, and attendance at training sessions, the
sum of $410 per election. Moderators not attending a training session shall be
paid no more than $205.
   (D)   The Ward Clerks in each ward of the city shall receive for their
services and for all the duties appertaining to their office during polling
hours, following closing of the polls, and attendance at training sessions the
sum of $410 per election. Ward Clerks not attending a training session shall be
paid no more than $205.
   (E)   The Ballot Inspectors in each ward of the city shall receive for their
service during polling hours, following closing of the polls, and attendance at
training sessions, the sum of $280 per election. Ballot Inspectors not
attending a training session shall be paid no more than $140.
   (F)   The Selectmen in each ward of the city shall receive for their
services and for all the duties appertaining to their office during polling
hours, following closing of the polls, and attendance at training sessions, the
sum of $375 per election. Selectmen not attending a training session shall be
paid no more than $187.50.
   (G)   The Moderators, Ward Clerks, Selectmen and Ballot Inspectors shall be
compensated as outlined herein appertaining to their election position. To
receive full compensation, such officials shall participate in a training
session to be provided by the City Clerk, and perform their respective duties
at the polling place of the ward. Officials shall only be compensated for
actual time performing their respective duties.
(Ord. passed 6-20-61; Am. Ord. passed 10-15-63; Am. Ord. passed 6-15-65; Am.
Ord. passed 8-2-66; Am. Ord. passed 9-5-95; Am. Ord. passed 4-21-98; Am. Ord.
passed 8-6-02; Am. Ord. passed 10-7-08; Am. Ord. passed 8-18-09; Am. Ord.
passed 7-18-17; Am. Ord. passed 2-5-19; Am. Ord. passed 9-3-24)
§ 30.10 SALARY OF BOARD OF ALDERMEN.
   Each member of the Board of Aldermen shall receive a salary of $4000 per
annum, payable quarterly, for services performed.
(Ord. passed 1-3-00)
§ 30.11 SALARY OF BOARD OF SCHOOL COMMITTEE.
   Each member of the Board of School Committee shall receive a salary of
$5,000 per annum, payable quarterly, for services performed.
(Ord. passed 1-3-00; Am. Ord. passed 3-7-23)
§ 30.12 SALARY OF THE MAYOR.
   The base salary of the Mayor shall be $100,000 per annum.
(Ord. passed 6-6-23)
CITY CLERK
§ 30.18 DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED.
   Pursuant to
Charter § 3.02 there is established the Office of the City Clerk.
(Ord. passed 11-4-98)
§ 30.19 DEPARTMENT HEAD.
   The department head shall be the City Clerk who shall be appointed as
provided by
Charter § 3.07. The City Clerk shall perform such other duties as are
prescribed by federal, state and local law.  
(Ord. passed 11-4-98)
§ 30.20 BOND REQUIRED.
   The City Clerk shall give a bond for the faithful performance of the duties
of his office in the sum of $10,000, said bond to be approved by the Board of
Mayor and Aldermen.
('71 Code, § 2-19)
Statutory reference:
   Appointment, see R.S.A. 48:2
   Authority of city to prescribe bond, see R.S.A. 47:17(XV)
   Clerk pro tem, see R.S.A. 48:7
   Custodian of tax invoices and assessments, see R.S.A. 48:5
   Deputy, see R.S.A. 48:6
   Ex Officio Clerk of Board of Mayor and Aldermen, see R.S.A. 48:3
    General duties, see R.S.A. 48:4
   Keeping of records, see R.S.A. 48:9
   Vacancy, see R.S.A. 48:8
§ 30.21 COMMITTEES.
   (A)   The City Clerk shall be the clerk of all standing committees for the
Board of Mayor and Aldermen, and he shall also act as the clerk of all special
committees, including the Joint School Building Committee.
   (B)   The City Clerk shall attend the sessions of the committees and keep a
record of their acts, votes, and proceedings, which record shall be preserved
by him as public records of the city, and he shall also perform such other
services as clerk that the committee shall require.
   (C)   The City Clerk shall enter in a separate journal, to be kept for that
purpose, and provided with an index, all accepted reports of standing and
special committees.
('71 Code, § 2-20) (Ord. passed 5-6-58)
§ 30.22 RECORDATION OF ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS.
   The City Clerk shall record all ordinances and resolutions passed by the
Board of Mayor and Aldermen.
('71 Code, § 2-21)
§ 30.23 RECORD OF BOARD PROCEEDINGS.
   The City Clerk shall keep a record of all the acts, votes, and proceedings
of the Board of Mayor and Aldermen.
('71 Code, § 2-22) (Am. Ord. passed 6-3-08)
§ 30.24 MARRIAGE INDEX.
   The City Clerk shall index alphabetically the names of all persons
expressing an intention of marriage.
('71 Code, § 2-23)
Statutory reference:
   Clerk required to keep chronological record of marriages, see R.S.A. 126:10
§ 30.25 REGISTRATION OF DEATHS.
   The City Clerk shall receive, record, and index the following facts
concerning the deaths in the city: the date of death, name, sex, race,
condition, whether single, widowed, or married, age, residence, occupation,
place of birth, names and places of birth of the parents, cause of death, and
place of burial of the deceased, and the date of record.
('71 Code, § 2-24)
Statutory reference:
   Clerks required to keep chronological record of deaths, see R.S.A. 126:10
§ 30.26 SECURED TRANSACTIONS.
   The City Clerk shall, at the time of recording any secured transaction,
index it as required by the provisions of R.S.A. Ch. 382-A pertaining to the
Uniform Commercial Code.
('71 Code, § 2-25)
§ 30.27 RENTALS OF HALLS AND BUILDINGS.
   The City Clerk, under the direction of the Board of Mayor and Aldermen or
the committee that the Board of Mayor and Aldermen may appoint, shall have
charge of the letting and receiving pay for the halls and buildings of the
city, and shall account for and pay to the City Treasurer, monthly, all moneys
received for the use of the halls and buildings.
('71 Code, § 2-26)
CITY SOLICITOR
§ 30.38 DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED.
   Pursuant to
Charter § 3.02 there is established the Office of the City Solicitor.
(Ord. passed 11-4-98)
§ 30.39 DEPARTMENT HEAD.
   The department head shall be the City Solicitor who shall be appointed as
provided by
Charter § 3.03.
(Ord. passed 11-4-98)
§ 30.40 DUTIES.
   The City Solicitor shall serve as legal counsel to the Board of Mayor and
Alderman and shall exercise general supervision over departments, boards,
commissions and officers to the extent that they perform their duties in
accordance with law. The City Solicitor shall do every professional act which
may be required of him/her by the city government, or any committee or board
thereof, and shall perform such other duties as are prescribed by federal,
state or local law.
('71 Code, § 2-37)(Ord. passed 11-4-98)
§ 30.41 DRAFT LEGAL INSTRUMENTS.
   The City Solicitor shall draft all bonds, obligations, contracts, deeds,
leases, conveyances, and other legal instruments that may be required of him by
any ordinance or order of the Board of Mayor and Aldermen or which by any such
ordinance or order is requisite and necessary to be done and made between the
city and any person contracting with the city, and which by law, usage, or
agreement the city is to be at the expense of drawing.
('71 Code, § 2-38)
§ 30.42 FURNISH LEGAL ADVICE.
   The City Solicitor shall at all times furnish legal advice to any officer of
the city upon any subject touching the duties incumbent on such officer.
('71 Code, § 2-39)
§ 30.43 FURNISH WRITTEN OPINIONS.
   The City Solicitor shall, when required by the city government, or any
committee or board thereof, furnish a written opinion upon any legal question
or subject which may be submitted to him.
('71 Code, § 2-40)
§ 30.44 PROSECUTION OF CIVIL SUITS.
   The City Solicitor shall commence and prosecute all suits that may be
brought by the city, for or on account of any estate, right, claim, privilege,
or demand of the city.
('71 Code, § 2-41)
§ 30.45 DEFENSE OF CITY.
   The City Solicitor shall appear in defense, in all actions and suits brought
against the city or its officers in their legal capacity, wherein the rights,
estate, privileges, ordinances, or acts of the city, or any violation thereof,
may be brought in question before any court in this state.
('71 Code, § 2-42)
§ 30.46 ATTEND TAX SALES.
   The City Solicitor shall attend all tax sales held in the city and purchase
for the city all lands upon which the taxes assessed and due have not been paid
and not otherwise sold by the Tax Collector.
('71 Code, § 2-43)
Cross-reference:
   
Taxation, see Ch. 36
§ 30.47 CRIMINAL CASES.
   The office of City Solicitor shall handle all complaints filed by the
Manchester Police filed in the Manchester District Court. The City Solicitor
shall be responsible for the prosecution of all offenses against the ordinances
of the city and for such ordinances of the state as may be required of him by
law. This provision shall not be construed to prohibit the state police from
handling complaints alleging violations of the law within the City of
Manchester, which were filed by members of the state police in the Manchester
District Court.
('71 Code, § 2-44) (Ord. passed 2-15-77; Am. Ord. passed 5-5-09)
§ 30.48 RISK MANAGEMENT AND INSURANCE.
   Subject to the direction and control of the City Solicitor, the Risk Manager
shall be responsible for the administration of the city's risk management and
insurance programs contained in §§ 33.090 through 33.094 of this title.
(Ord. passed 6-27-94)
INDEPENDENT CITY AUDITOR
§ 30.55 OFFICE ESTABLISHED.
   Pursuant to City Charter Section
6.12, the Office of Independent City Auditor is hereby established as a
division within the office of the City Solicitor.
(Ord. passed 10-4-05)
§ 30.56 DUTIES OF INDEPENDENT CITY AUDITOR.
   (A)   The position of Independent City Auditor is hereby transferred to the
office of the CitySolicitor. It shall report to the Board of Mayor and Aldermen
or to such committee as the Board of Mayor and Aldermen may designate.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of the Independent City Auditor to perform such
duties and functions as set forth in City Charter Section
6.12.
   (C)   The cost of any audit done by the Independent City Auditor or by any
other auditor under his or her direction or authority of any department funded
by any self-sustaining or special fund shall be a charge against the
appropriate fund, and said cost shall be transferred from said fund to the
general fund.
   (D)   The Independent City Auditor shall receive the full cooperation of all
other city officials and departments. The Finance Officer shall provide
assistance to the Independent City Auditor upon request.
   (E)   In making any audit, investigation, analysis, or research the
Independent City Auditor shall have the power to examine whatever accounts or
records of or property or things of value held by any department, board,
institution, commission or agency that is deemed useful to said audit,
investigation, analysis, or research requested by the Board of Mayor and
Alderman. All city departments, boards, institutions, commissions or agencies
shall be required to furnish to the Independent City Auditor any information,
including confidential information, the Independent City Auditor may request in
the course of carrying out his or her duties.
   (F)   The Independent City Auditor shall be subject to the same restrictions
and penalties regarding disclosure of confidential information as the original
custodian of the information. Disclosure of confidential information to the
Independent City Auditor shall be for the purpose of, and to the extent
necessary for, conducting audits, investigations, analysis, or research. If any
department, board, institution, commission or agency objects to providing
confidential information under the provisions of this section, the entity may
apply to the City Solicitor for disapproval of the request. The City Solicitor
shall review any confidential information to which the Independent City Auditor
has requested access to determine whether or not it is necessary for the
Independent City Auditor to examine the information. If it is determined that
such information is necessary it shall be provided in a mutually agreeable and
compatible format.
(Ord. passed 10-4-05)
CHIEF NEGOTIATOR AND CONTRACT ADMINISTRATOR
§ 30.60 POSITION ESTABLISHED.
   The position of Chief Negotiator and Contract Administrator (hereinafter
“Negotiator”) is hereby established within the office of the Human Resources
Department. It shall be subject to the direction and control of the School
Committee and Board of Mayor and Aldermen and shall be included within the City
Position and Classification Systems.
('71 Code, § 2-180) (Am. Ord. passed 6-27-94; Am. Ord. passed 6-4-96)
Cross-reference:
   
Personnel policy, see Ch. 33
§ 30.61 DUTIES.
   (A)   Contract negotiation. The Negotiator shall represent the city in the
negotiation of collective bargaining agreements. This shall include all
discussions, meetings, mediations, fact findings, or arbitrations and any
regulatory or administrative proceeding at any phase of the negotiation
process.
   (B)   Contract administration. The Negotiator shall, on behalf of the city,
be fully responsible for the administration of all collective bargaining
agreements.
('71 Code, § 2-181) (Ord. passed 4-5-88)
§ 30.62 COOPERATION WITH OTHER CITY DEPARTMENTS AND OFFICIALS.
   The Negotiator shall receive the full cooperation of all other city
officials and departments. The City Solicitor and the Human Resources
Department shall provide support and assistance to the Negotiator upon specific
request.
('71 Code, § 2-182) (Ord. passed 4-5-88)
CHAPTER 31: POLICE DEPARTMENT
Section
General Provisions
   
31.00   Police Department established
   
31.01   Execution of ordinances by police
   
31.02   Enforcement of laws by Chief
   
31.03   Chief and deputy chiefs to serve full time
   
31.04   Chief's obedience to Mayor and Aldermen
   
31.05   Chief to receive complaints
   
31.06   Prosecution of offenders by Chief
   
31.07   Court Clerk to furnish forms
   
31.08   Chief to preserve peace
   
31.09   Chief's duties at fires
   
31.10   Authority to enter buildings for suppressing disturbances
   
31.11   Copies of reports and records by police
   
31.12   Disposition of fines and forfeitures
   
31.13   Disposition of money received by Chief
   
31.14   Deputy chiefs to deliver money to Chief
   
31.15   Chief to designate Halloween
Stolen, Lost, or Abandoned Property
   
31.30   Delivery to Chief of Police
   
31.31   Property taken from accused persons
   
31.32   Disposition when property unclaimed
   
31.33   Perishable or bulky property
   
31.34   Disposition of weapons, and the like
Statutory reference:
   Authority of city to regulate police, see R.S.A 47:17(II)
   Police officers, see R.S.A. Ch. 105
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 31.00 POLICE DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED.
   (A)   Pursuant to
Charter § 3.02 there is established a Police Department.
   (B)   Department head. The department head shall be the Chief of Police who
shall be appointed as provided by
Charter § 3.03.
   (C)   Composition. The Police Department shall also include a Police
Commission consisting of five members who shall be appointed as provided by
Charter § 3.14, and the Commission shall have those duties and responsibilities
as assigned by the Charter.
   (D)   Duties. The Police Department shall be responsible for public safety
through the enforcement of city ordinances and state laws and shall perform
such other duties as are prescribed by federal, state and local law.
(Ord. passed 11-4-98)
§ 31.01 EXECUTION OF ORDINANCES BY POLICE.
   The police shall execute and carry into effect all ordinances which shall
from time to time be made by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen to prevent
unlawful and injurious practices in the streets and other public places in the
city.
('71 Code, § 20-2)
§ 31.02 ENFORCEMENT OF LAWS BY CHIEF.
   The Chief of Police shall carry into execution within the city the laws of
the state and all the ordinances of the city, and shall be vigilant to detect
and bring to punishment all violators thereof.
('71 Code, § 20-3)
§ 31.03 CHIEF AND DEPUTY CHIEFS TO SERVE FULL TIME.
   The Chief of Police and Deputy Chiefs of Police shall devote their full time
to the service of the city and the duties of their offices.
('71 Code, § 20-4)
§ 31.04 CHIEF'S OBEDIENCE TO MAYOR AND ALDERMEN.
   The Chief of Police shall obey and execute all the commands of the Board of
Mayor and Aldermen relating to the interest or security of the city.
('71 Code, § 20-5)
§ 31.05 CHIEF TO RECEIVE COMPLAINTS.
   The Chief of Police shall receive all complaints made to him of any
violation of the laws or of any ordinance of the city.
('71 Code, § 20-6)
§ 31.06 PROSECUTION OF OFFENDERS BY CHIEF.
   The Chief of Police shall, on behalf of the city, cause all offenders
against the laws and ordinances of the city to be promptly prosecuted before
the Manchester District Court. This provision shall not be construed to
prohibit the state police from prosecuting complaints alleging violations of
the law within the City of Manchester, which were filed by members of the state
police in the Manchester District Court.
('71 Code, § 20-7) (Am. Ord. passed 5-5-09)
§ 31.07 COURT CLERK TO FURNISH FORMS.
   The Clerk or Deputy Clerk of the Manchester District Court may furnish all
necessary blank writs and other papers to be used for the prosecution of suits
and complaints before the court, and sell the same at cost.
('71 Code, § 20-8)
§ 31.08 CHIEF TO PRESERVE PEACE.
   The Chief of Police shall, to the utmost of his power, preserve the public
peace, and prevent all riots, disorders, and unlawful practices within the
city.
('71 Code, § 20-9)
§ 31.09 CHIEF'S DUTIES AT FIRES.
   The Chief of Police shall, in case of fire, cause three or more police
officers or watchmen to report to the place where the fire may be and there,
acting under the direction of the Board of Engineers, to attend diligently to
the preservation of the public peace, the prevention of thefts, and the loss or
destruction of property; and to prevent all persons from interfering in any
manner with the Fire Department.
('71 Code, § 20-10)
§ 31.10 AUTHORITY TO ENTER BUILDINGS FOR SUPPRESSING DISTURBANCES.
   The police shall enter any building, for the purpose of suppressing any riot
or disturbance therein, and to arrest any person there found making or abetting
in such riot or disturbance.
('71 Code, § 20-13)
Statutory reference:
   Mob action, see R.S.A. Ch. 644
§ 31.11 COPIES OF REPORTS AND RECORDS BY POLICE.
   (A)   Unless otherwise prohibited by law, the Police Department is hereby
authorized to furnish copies of accident reports, offense reports, photographs
of motor vehicle accidents (only after all criminal charges are disposed of by
court), to make record check and report (local records only), take fingerprints
of individuals on request.
   (B)   The reports of accidents and photographs shall be furnished only to
any person involved or injured in the accident, or his attorney, or any
authorized representative of any insurance carrier reasonably anticipating
exposure to civil liability as a consequence of the accident.
   (C)   The furnishing of the other reports shall be allowed only to persons
having a legitimate interest therefor, and the Chief of Police, or his agent,
may refuse any of the above services to any person he has reason to believe may
use same for other than legitimate purposes.
   (D)   (1)   For the above service a fee shall be charged as follows:
Copy of accident reports, first page   $10
   Each additional page   1
Copy of offense reports, per page   5
Record check by name (local record only), per name   10
Record check by letter (local record only), per name   10
Fingerprinting of individuals on request, per person   20
Photograph reproduction, only after all criminal charges have been
   disposed of by court, 8 x 10 enlargements   20
Storage of video recording for civil proceedings   25
      (2)   No charges shall be made for any service to any governmental
agency. The aforesaid charges shall be collected when the service is rendered
and a receipt shall be given. All sums collected shall be turned over to the
City Treasurer in the same manner as other city funds.
('71 Code, § 20-14) (Ord. passed 4-19-66; Am. Ord. passed 10-6-70; Am. Ord.
passed 11-6-80; Am. Ord. passed 3-1-83; Am. Ord. passed 12-17-85; Am. Ord.
passed 10-21-86; Am. Ord. passed 6-27-94; Am. Ord. passed 6-9-03)
§ 31.12 DISPOSITION OF FINES AND FORFEITURES.
   All fines and forfeitures imposed by the Manchester District Court shall be
paid into the city treasury, to be appropriated to such purposes as the Board
of Mayor and Aldermen shall from time to time determine.
('71 Code, § 20-15)
Statutory reference:
   Disposition of fines and forfeitures, see R.S.A 618:2
§ 31.13 DISPOSITION OF MONEY RECEIVED BY CHIEF.
   If the Chief of Police shall receive any sum of money for any services
rendered or act done by virtue of his office, he shall pay over the same to the
city treasury monthly, with all sums received of the police officers and of the
Deputy Chiefs of Police, and shall at the same time deliver to the City Auditor
an account in detail of the different sources from which such money was
received.
('71 Code, § 20-16)
§ 31.14 DEPUTY CHIEFS TO DELIVER MONEY TO CHIEF.
   If the Deputy Chiefs of Police shall obtain any sum of money for any act
done by them by virtue of their office, they shall immediately pay the same to
the Chief of Police, and take their receipt therefor.
('71 Code, § 20-17)
§ 31.15 CHIEF TO DESIGNATE HALLOWEEN.
   The Chief of Police shall designate the date and hours during which
Halloween shall be observed.
('71 Code, § 20-18) (Ord. passed 12-16-80)
STOLEN, LOST, OR ABANDONED PROPERTY
§ 31.30 DELIVERY TO CHIEF OF POLICE.
   All property or money taken under suspicion or with knowledge of it having
been stolen or feloniously obtained and all property lost or abandoned, that
may come into the possession of any member of the Police Department, shall be
delivered to the Chief of Police, who shall enter or cause to be entered in a
record to be kept by him for that purpose, a detailed description of the same,
together with the name of the person from whom received, the names of any
claimants thereto, the time of the seizure, and the final disposition thereof.
('71 Code, § 20-28) (Ord. passed 4-19-66)
§ 31.31 PROPERTY TAKEN FROM ACCUSED PERSONS.
   When any person arrested shall be adjudged innocent of the offense charged
by a court of competent jurisdiction, which shall adjudge that the property or
money belongs to such person, the Chief of Police shall thereupon deliver such
property or money to him personally, and not to his attorney or agent, and
shall take his receipt therefor. If the accused is held for trial or
examination, such money or property shall remain in the custody of the Chief of
Police until the discharge or conviction of the person accused.
('71 Code, § 20-29) (Ord. passed 4-19-66)
§ 31.32 DISPOSITION WHEN PROPERTY UNCLAIMED.
   The Chief of Police, or such person as shall be designated by him, may sell
at public auction all unclaimed property that has been in custody for a period
of 180 days. He shall fix a day upon which the sale shall take place, and give
notice thereof by publication in a daily newspaper. The notice shall state the
day and hour when such sale shall commence and shall contain a general
description of the property to be sold, or shall refer to a list thereof on
file with the Chief of Police. The notice shall be signed by the Chief of
Police or by the person designated by him to conduct such public auction. The
proceeds of such sale, after deducting the cost of storage, advertising,
selling, and other expenses incident to the handling and selling of such
property, shall, together with all moneys unclaimed for a period of 180 days,
be paid into the city treasury. Money which has been found, as distinguished
from money that has been stolen or feloniously obtained, will be turned over to
the finder if unclaimed for a period of 180 days. In no case shall any property
be sold or disposed of until the necessity for the use thereof as evidence has
ceased.
('71 Code, § 20-30) (Ord. passed 4-19-66; Am. Ord. passed 2-17-98)
§ 31.33 PERISHABLE OR BULKY PROPERTY.
   If any property seized or taken possession of by the Police Department shall
be of a perishable nature, or so bulky or of such nature as to make it
dangerous or inadvisable to retain possession thereof for the length of time
specified in § 31.32 of this subchapter, the Chief of Police, upon certifying
such fact to the Police Commission and setting forth his reasons why such
property should not be retained for the period hereinabove fixed before selling
same, shall, with the approval of the Police Commission, cause such property to
be advertised forthwith in a daily newspaper of the city, and shall sell such
property at public auction at any time after three days have elapsed from the
seizure or taking possession thereof.
('71 Code, § 20-31) (Ord. passed 4-19-66)
§ 31.34 DISPOSITION OF WEAPONS, AND THE LIKE.
   (A)   None of the provisions of this subchapter shall apply to bowie knives,
dirks, slingshots, metallic knuckles, or other deadly weapons of like
character. All of such weapons, except those that the Chief of Police shall
deem to be of use to the Department and retain for the use of the Police
Department, shall, within 60 days after their receipt, be destroyed under the
direction of the Chief of Police or such person as shall be designated by him.
('71 Code, § 20-32)
   (B)   (1)   The Chief of Police, or such person who may be designated by him
may sell at auction to federally licensed dealers all unclaimed pistols,
revolvers, derringers, or other deadly weapons of like character, that have
been in custody for a period of 60 days, as permitted by state and federal law.
He shall fix a day upon which the sale shall take place, and shall give notice
thereof by publication in a daily newspaper. The notice shall state the day,
hour, and place when such sale shall commence and shall contain a general
description of the property to be sold, or shall refer to a list thereof on
file with the Chief of Police. Such notice shall be signed by the Chief of
Police or by the person designated by him to conduct such auction.
      (2)   The proceeds of such sale, after deducting the cost of storage,
advertising, selling, and other expenses incident to the handling and selling
of such property shall be paid into the city general fund.
('71 Code, § 20-33) (Ord. passed 4-19-66; Am. Ord. passed 6-7-88)
CHAPTER 32: BOARDS, COMMISSIONS, AND DEPARTMENTS
Section
General Provisions
   
32.001   Statements of policy
   
32.002   Policy Review Committee
   
32.003   Policy manual
   
32.004   Conflict of interest
Trustees of Trust Funds
   
32.010   Board of Trustees of trust funds established
   
32.011   Finance Officer
   
32.012   Election of Board Chairperson and Clerk
   
32.013   Annual reports by Finance Officer and Trustees
   
32.014   Cemetery trusts
   
32.015   Term transition
Municipal Departments
   
32.017   Department of Aviation established
   
32.018   Office of Youth Services established
   
32.019   Department of Public Building Services
   
32.020   Department of Welfare established
   
32.021   Manchester Economic Development Office established
   
32.022   Library Department established
Arts Commission
   
32.025   Establishment and purpose
   
32.026   Composition and appointment of members
   
32.027   Terms and selection of officers
   
32.028   Duties and powers
   
32.029   Funding and resource management
   
32.030   Community engagement and collaboration
   
32.031   Committees and subcommittees
   
32.032   Annual report and evaluation
   
32.033   Amendments
   
32.034   Existing agreements
   
32.035   [Reserved]
Safety Review Board
   
32.040   Establishment; composition; terms
   
32.041   Ex officio members
   
32.042   Duties in general
   
32.043   Safety regulations
   
32.044   Enforcement of safety regulations
   
32.045   Rules and regulations
Consultant Services Review Committee
   
32.055   Committee established
   
32.056   Duties
Information Systems Department
   
32.065   Information Systems Department established
   
32.066   [Reserved]
   
32.067   [Reserved]
   
32.068   [Reserved]
   
32.069   Systems Advisory Committee authorized; composition
Fleet Management Department
   
32.080   Central Fleet Management Department established
   
32.081   [Reserved]
   
32.082   [Reserved]
Central Purchasing
   
32.083   Central Purchasing Division
Conservation Commission
   
32.090   Established
   
32.091   Purpose
   
32.092   Composition; terms
   
32.093   Powers and duties
Department of Senior Services
   
32.104   [Reserved]
   
32.105   [Reserved]
   
32.106   [Reserved]
   
32.107   [Reserved]
   
32.108   [Reserved]
   
32.109   [Reserved]
   
32.110   [Reserved]
   
32.111   [Reserved]
Heritage Commission
   
32.120   Established
   
32.121   Purpose
   
32.122   Composition; terms; vacancies
   
32.123   Powers and duties
   
32.124   Appropriations
   
32.125   Consolidation
Housing Commission
   
32.130   Established
   
32.131   Purpose
   
32.132   Composition; terms
   
32.133   Powers and duties
   
32.134   Housing Commission Fund
Human Resources Department
   
32.140   Human Resources Department established
Lead Exposure Prevention Commission
   
32.150   Finding of fact
   
32.151   Established
   
32.152   Purpose
   
32.153   Composition; terms; officers and their duties; conflicts of interest
   
32.154   Powers and duties
   
32.155   Lead Exposure Prevention Commission fund
 
Cross-reference:
   
Office of Emergency Management, see §§ 92.80 through 92.83
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 32.001 STATEMENTS OF POLICY.
   City agencies described in
Charter, § 8.02 shall adopt required rules and written statements of policy in
accordance with the procedures herein provided. Existing policies and rules
shall be readopted.
('71 Code, § 2-11) (Ord. passed 9-1-87)
Cross-reference:
   Statements of policy, see
Charter, § 8.02
§ 32.002 POLICY REVIEW COMMITTEE.
   A Policy Review Committee consisting of the Mayor, an Alderman designated by
the Aldermen, the City Clerk, City Coordinator, City Solicitor and the Finance
Officer is hereby established. The Committee shall prescribe requirements and
guidelines as to the format and content of policy statements and rules. The
Committee shall review all submissions for compliance with prescribed
requirements, for brevity and clarity and shall establish procedures for the
compilation and updating of rules and policies.
('71 Code, § 2-12) (Ord. passed 9-1-87; Am. Ord. passed 7-12-90)
§ 32.003 POLICY MANUAL.
   The Policy Review Committee shall recommend for the consideration of the
Board of Mayor and Aldermen a policy establishing procedures to be followed in
adopting policies and in the maintenance of the manual by the City Clerk.
('71 Code, § 2-13) (Ord. passed 9-1-87)
Cross-reference:
   Establishment of rules, see
Charter, § 8.01
§ 32.004 CONFLICT OF INTEREST.
   (A)   No member of the Board of Mayor and Aldermen, Planning Board, Zoning
Board of Adjustment or any board or commission of the city shall vote,
participate in deciding, or sit upon the hearing of any question which the
board or commission is to decide if that member has a direct personal and
pecuniary interest in the outcome which differs from the interest of other
citizens.
   (B)   When uncertainty arises as to the application of division (A) of this
section to a Board member in particular circumstances, the Board shall, upon
request of that member or another member of the Board, vote on the question of
whether that member should be disqualified. Such a vote shall be advisory and
nonbinding, and may not be requested by persons other than Board members.
('71 Code, § 2-14) (Ord. passed 4-5-88)
TRUSTEES OF TRUST FUNDS
§ 32.010 BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF TRUST FUNDS ESTABLISHED.
   A Board of Trustees of trust funds is hereby established pursuant to R.S.A.
31:22. All trust gifts, legacies and devises made to the city for public
purposes shall be administered by the Trustees. The Board of Trustees of trust
funds shall be comprised of five members: the mayor, ex officio, and four other
members who shall be appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the Aldermen for
terms of six years. In January of 1981, two members shall be appointed for
terms of three years and two members for terms of six years. Thereafter, as
their respective terms expire, appointments shall be made in the month of
January for six-year terms. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term.
('71 Code, § 2-67) (Ord. passed 8-26-80)
Statutory reference:
   Capital reserve funds for cities, see R.S.A. Ch. 34
   Trust funds, see R.S.A. 31:22
§ 32.011 FINANCE OFFICER.
   The Finance Officer, ex officio, shall be a nonvoting member of the Board
and shall under the direction of the Trustees have the care and custody of all
funds or legacies under their jurisdiction.
('71 Code, § 2-68) (Ord. passed 8-26-80)
§ 32.012 ELECTION OF BOARD CHAIRPERSON AND CLERK.
   The Trustees of trust funds shall elect one of their members as Chairperson,
and shall choose a Clerk and make such regulations for their own government and
in relation to the officers appointed by them as they may deem expedient.
('71 Code, § 2-69) (Ord. passed 8-26-80)
§ 32.013 ANNUAL REPORTS BY FINANCE OFFICERS AND TRUSTEES
   The Finance Officer shall publish each year an annual report showing a
statement of receipts and expenditures and condition of the funds in his
custody. The statement of the Finance Officer shall be accompanied by a report
of the trustees giving in detail their activities during the previous year,
together with such suggestions or recommendations as they may deem useful.
('71 Code, § 2-70) (Ord. passed 8-26-80)
§ 32.014 CEMETERY TRUSTS.
   With respect to cemetery trusts, the trustees shall not be required to make
separate investments of the different sums accepted, but they shall apply the
income or interest thereof in as equitable a manner as practicable, as follows:
first, to keep in suitable and good repair and preservation, the lot of the
donor, and monuments, tomb, fences, trees, shrubbery, and soil thereon; second,
to buffer the surplus, if any, of such income or interest to accumulate for
such time as the trustees may deem expedient. 
('71 Code, § 2-71) (Ord. passed 8-26-80)
§ 32.015 TERM TRANSITION.
   In order to comply with the City Charter requirement of three year terms and
to comply with the staggered terms provision of R.S.A. 31:22, the two Trustees
of Trust Funds appointed in 1999 shall be for two year terms expiring January
2001. Thereafter as the respective terms expire, appointment shall be made in
the month of January for three year terms.
(Ord. passed 4-6-99)
MUNICIPAL DEPARTMENTS
§ 32.017 DEPARTMENT OF AVIATION ESTABLISHED.
   (A)   Pursuant to
Charter § 3.02 there is established a Department of Aviation.
   (B)   Department head. The department head shall be the Airport Director who
shall be appointed as provided by
Charter § 3.03.
   (C)   Composition. The Department of Aviation shall also include an Airport
Authority of seven members who shall be appointed as provided by
Charter § 3.14 and the Authority shall have those duties and responsibilities
as assigned by the Charter.
   (D)   Duties. The Department of Aviation shall be responsible for the care,
maintenance, and operation of the airport and its related facilities and shall
perform such other duties as are prescribed by federal, state and local law.
(Ord. passed 11-4-98)
§ 32.018 OFFICE OF YOUTH SERVICES ESTABLISHED.
   (A)   Pursuant to
Charter § 3.02 there is established the Office of Youth Services.
   (B)   Department head. The department head shall be the Executive Director
of Youth Services who shall be appointed as provided by
Charter § 3.03.
   (C)   Composition. The Office of Youth Services shall also contain an
advisory board of 15 members who shall be appointed as provided by
Charter § 3.14.
   (D)   Duties. The Office of Youth Services shall be responsible for
promoting a quick response to the problems of youth utilizing the resources of
the community and shall perform such other duties as are prescribed by federal,
state and local law.
(Ord. passed 11-4-98)
§ 32.019 DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC BUILDING SERVICES.
   The Department of Public Building Services and its duties and
responsibilities are hereby transferred to the Highway Department and shall be
known as the Building Maintenance Division.
(Ord. passed 11-4-98; Am. Ord. passed 12-7-99)
§ 32.020 DEPARTMENT OF WELFARE ESTABLISHED.
   (A)   Pursuant to
Charter § 3.02 there is established a Department of Welfare.
   (B)   Department head. The department head shall be the Commissioner of
Welfare who shall be elected as provided by
Charter § 5.01.
   (C)   Duties. The Department of Welfare shall administer and direct public
welfare programs, including emergency and continuing assistance programs and
shall perform such other duties as are prescribed by federal, state and local
law.
(Ord. passed 11-4-98)
§ 32.021 MANCHESTER ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT OFFICE ESTABLISHED.
   (A)   Pursuant to
Charter § 3.02 there is established the Manchester Economic Development Office.
   (B)   Department head. The department head shall be the Economic Development
Director who shall be appointed as provided by
Charter § 3.03.
   (C)   Duties. The Manchester Economic Development Office shall be
responsible for promoting the economic prosperity of the city by creating and
retaining jobs and increasing the tax base through projects, programs and
activities, and shall perform such other duties as are prescribed by federal,
state and local law. The office shall also provide staff support to the
Manchester Development Corporation and its for-profit subsidiary, the
Manchester Development Corporation, Inc.
(Ord. passed 11-4-98)
§ 32.022 LIBRARY DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED.
   (A)   Pursuant to
Charter § 3.02 there is established a Library Department.
   (B)   Department head. The department head shall be the Library Director who
shall be appointed as provided by a contract dated September 6, 1854 between
the city and the Manchester Athenaeum.
   (C)   Composition. The Library Department shall also include a Board of
Library Trustees consisting of nine members who shall be appointed as provided
by the September 6, 1854 contract between the city and the Manchester
Athenaeum, and the Trustees shall have those duties and responsibilities as are
assigned by the contract, charter and state law.
   (D)   Duties. The Library Department shall be responsible for the care,
maintenance and operation of the Manchester City Library and branch public
libraries and its associated educational programs and activities and shall also
perform such other duties as are prescribed by federal, state and local law.
(Ord. passed 11-4-98)
ARTS COMMISSION
§ 32.025 ESTABLISHMENT AND PURPOSE.
   (A)   The Manchester Arts Commission ("the Commission") is hereby reaffirmed
with an expanded role and purpose.
   (B)   The Commission's purpose shall be to cultivate a vibrant, inclusive,
and accessible arts culture in Manchester, NH, enhancing community engagement,
foster economic development, celebrating diverse artistic expressions, and
promoting equitable opportunities for all artists and art forms.
(Ord. passed 4-1-25)
§ 32.026 COMPOSITION AND APPOINTMENT OF MEMBERS.
   (A)   The Commission shall consist of seven members, all citizens of the
city and all appointed by the Mayor, subject to the approval of the Board of
Mayor and Aldermen. In addition, the Mayor, subject to the approval of the
Board of Mayor and Aldermen, may appoint two alternate members to the
Commission, who shall be residents of the city and who shall have full voting
powers when designated by the Chairperson to act in the place of an absent or
disqualified member. The original Chairperson shall be appointed for a term of
three years, three members shall have two-year terms, and three members shall
have one-year terms. Appointments of respective successors and of alternate
members, both original and successor, shall be for three-year terms.
   (B)   In addition to the seven regular members and two alternates, the
commission shall include one member from the Board of Mayor and Aldermen, the
Director of Fine Arts from the Manchester School District, and the Director of
Economic Development or their appointee.
   (C)   Members shall demonstrate expertise or significant interest in various
arts disciplines and should represent the diverse community of Manchester.
   (D)   The Commission shall strive for representation across different
sectors, including artists, educators, business leaders, and community
organizers.
(Ord. passed 4-1-25)
§ 32.027 TERMS AND SELECTION OF OFFICERS.
   (A)   Terms shall be for three years, commencing the first day of July, and
staggered in such a way as to allow appointments each year.
   (B)   The Commission shall annually elect a Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson
from its members.
   (C)   The Commission may also elect other officers as deemed necessary for
its effective functioning.
(Ord. passed 4-1-25)
§ 32.028 DUTIES AND POWERS.
   (A)   The Commission shall advise city officials and departments on matters
involving art in public spaces and municipal projects.
   (B)   The Commission is empowered to initiate, plan, and execute arts-
related projects, events, and educational programs.
   (C)   The Commission shall actively engage with the community to ensure
diverse participation and representation in arts initiatives.
(Ord. passed 4-1-25)
§ 32.029 FUNDING AND RESOURCE MANAGEMENT.
   (A)   Absent specific conditions to the contrary, all gifts of money
intended to further the Commission's purpose and accepted by the Board of Mayor
and Aldermen shall be deposited in a dedicated, non-lapsing Arts Fund to be
used by the Commission, to be used for supporting local arts projects,
community arts programs, and artist development initiatives.
   (B)   The Commission shall have the authority to seek additional funding
through grants, partnerships, and fundraising activities.
   (C)   The City Finance Officer, pursuant to R.S.A. 41:29 shall have custody
of all monies in the Arts Fund. The Commission shall have the authority to
utilize funds from the Arts Fund without Board of Mayor and Aldermen approval
up to $250 with a unanimous vote in favor by the Commission members.
   (D)   Singular or cumulative expenditures for a single project exceeding
$250 shall be subject to approval from the Board of Mayor and Aldermen upon
recommendation of the Committee on Accounts, Enrollment and Revenue
Administration.
(Ord. passed 4-1-25)
§ 32.030 COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT AND COLLABORATION.
   (A)   The Commission shall establish mechanisms or regular community
engagement, including public forums, collaborations with schools and local
businesses, and inclusive arts events.
   (B)   The Commission shall endeavor to collaborate with local arts
organizations, city departments, and cultural institutions to maximize the
impact of arts in the community.
(Ord. passed 4-1-25)
§ 32.031 COMMITTEES AND SUBCOMMITTEES.
   (A)   The Commission may establish committees and subcommittees focusing on
specific areas such as public art, education, events, artist support, and
foster economic development.
   (B)   These committees shall be tasked with detailed planning and
implementation of various initiatives and programs.
(Ord. passed 4-1-25)
§ 32.032 ANNUAL REPORT AND EVALUATION.
   (A)   The Commission shall prepare an annual report detailing its
activities, financial status, and community impact.
   (B)   The Commission shall conduct regular evaluations of its initiatives to
ensure alignment with its strategic goals and community needs.
(Ord. passed 4-1-25)
§ 32.033 AMENDMENTS.
   This subchapter may be amended by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen to adapt
to evolving needs and opportunities within the city's arts sector.
(Ord. passed 4-1-25)
§ 32.034 EXISTING AGREEMENTS.
   Nothing within these sections shall be construed to alter or otherwise
affect the terms of any existing agreements.
(Ord. passed 4-1-25)
§ 32.035 [RESERVED].
SAFETY REVIEW BOARD
§ 32.040 ESTABLISHMENT; COMPOSITION; TERMS.
   There is hereby established a Safety Review Board composed of seven members
to be appointed by the Mayor, with the approval of the Board of Aldermen: one
member of the Board shall be an Alderman; one member shall be a member of the
Board of School Committee; one member shall be a city employee or official
representing management; and one member shall be a city employee who is a
representative of organized labor. Each of the members shall remain eligible to
serve on the Safety Review Board so long as he continues to be an Alderman,
School Committee member, city official or employee as the case may be. The
remaining three members shall be citizen members and shall be neither city
officials nor employees, but shall be knowledgeable and experienced in the
field of safety. The Mayor shall designate one of the citizen members as
Chairperson. Each member of the Board shall hold office for an indefinite term
or until a successor is appointed by the Mayor and approved by the Aldermen.
('71 Code, § 2-129) (Ord. passed 7-13-77; Am. Ord. passed 4-5-88)
§ 32.041 EX OFFICIO MEMBERS.
   The Risk Manager and the Fleet Manager shall be ex officio nonvoting members
of the Board.
('71 Code, § 2-130) (Ord. passed 7-13-77; Am. Ord. passed 4-5-88)
§ 32.042 DUTIES IN GENERAL.
   The Board may investigate or conduct hearings on accidents involving city
employees or property. The Board may compel the attendance of any city official
or employee at such hearings. It shall attempt to ascertain the nature and
preventability of such accidents. The Board shall receive and review such
accident reports and statistics as may be provided by or required of the safety
and training officer.
('71 Code, § 2-131) (Ord. passed 7-13-77)
§ 32.043 SAFETY REGULATIONS.
   The Safety Review Board shall require such city departments and agencies as
it sees fit to establish safety regulations for the respective departments or
agencies. These regulations shall be in such form as the Board may direct and
shall be submitted to the Board for review and approval. The Board may enact
such safety regulations as it deems appropriate.
('71 Code, § 2-132) (Ord. passed 7-13-77)
§ 32.044 ENFORCEMENT OF SAFETY REGULATIONS.
   It shall be the direct responsibility of each department head to enforce
safety regulations applicable to his department. It shall be the duty of the
safety and training officer to require that department heads enforce such
standards as aforesaid. The safety and training officer shall immediately
notify the Safety Review Board if any department head neglects to carry out
these responsibilities under this section.
('71 Code, § 2-133) (Ord. passed 7-13-77)
§ 32.045 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The Safety Review Board shall establish such rules and regulations as it
deems necessary to effectuate the purpose of this subchapter, including rules
of procedure governing its meetings and conduct of investigations and hearings.
The Safety Review Board shall meet monthly and more often as necessary.
('71 Code, § 2-134) (Ord. passed 7-13-77)
CONSULTANT SERVICES REVIEW COMMITTEE
§ 32.055 COMMITTEE ESTABLISHED.
   A Consultant Services Review Committee consisting of three members to be
appointed by the Mayor is hereby established as a standing committee of the
Board of Mayor and Aldermen. The coordinator of resources and development and
the Finance Officer shall be advisory members of the Committee and the Finance
Officer shall be the Clerk.
('71 Code, § 2-161) (Ord. passed 5-1-79)
§ 32.056 DUTIES.
   It shall be the duty of the Consultant Services Review Committee to consider
and report on all matters relating to consultant services referred to it by the
Board of Mayor and Aldermen, the Finance Committee of the Board of Mayor and
Aldermen, or the Mayor.
('71 Code, § 2-162) (Ord. passed 5-1-79)
INFORMATION SYSTEMS DEPARTMENT
§ 32.065 INFORMATION SYSTEMS DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED.
   (A)   Pursuant to
Charter § 3.02 there is established an Information Systems Department.
   (B)   The department head shall be the Information Systems Director who
shall be appointed as provided by
Charter § 3.03.
   (C)   The Information Systems Department shall be responsible for planning,
organizing, and providing information technology services for city departments
and agencies and shall perform such other duties as are prescribed by federal,
state and local law.
('71 Code, § 2-166) (Ord. passed 10-9-79; Am. Ord. passed 12-27-79; Am. Ord.
passed 11-4-98)
§ 32.066 [RESERVED].
   (Previous section repealed on 11-4-98)
§ 32.067 [RESERVED].
   (Previous section repealed on 11-4-98)
§ 32.068 [RESERVED].
   (Previous section repealed on 11-4-98)
§ 32.069 SYSTEMS ADVISORY COMMITTEE AUTHORIZED; COMPOSITION.
   To assist and advise the Information Systems Committee in planning and
providing data processing services, a Systems Advisory Committee is authorized.
The Committee shall consist of the Mayor, who shall serve as Chairperson, a
representative of the School Department, and five representatives of major user
departments, one of which shall be an agency or department contracting with the
city for electronic data processing services, which representatives shall be
appointed by the Mayor, confirmed by the Board of Aldermen, and shall serve
until their successors are appointed.
('71 Code, § 2-170) (Ord. passed 10-9-79; Am. Ord. passed 12-27-79)
FLEET MANAGEMENT DEPARTMENT
§ 32.080 CENTRAL FLEET MANAGEMENT DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED.
   (A)   Pursuant to Charter §
3.01 there is established a Central Fleet Management Department.
   (B)   The Department head shall be the Central Fleet Services Director who
shall be appointed as provided by Charter §
3.03.
   (C)   The Central Fleet Management Department shall be responsible for the
operation of the central fleet maintenance facility and the maintenance of the
vehicle fleet of the City of Manchester in coordination with city departments
and agencies and shall perform such duties as are prescribed by federal, state
and local law, and such other duties as are assigned by the Board of Mayor and
Aldermen.
(Ord. passed 4-17-12)
§ 32.081 [RESERVED].
   (Previous section repealed on 11-4-98)
§ 32.082 [RESERVED].
   (Previous section repealed on 11-4-98)
CENTRAL PURCHASING
§ 32.083 CENTRAL PURCHASING DIVISION.
   An Office of Central Purchasing is hereby established within the Highway
Department. The Public Works Director shall be responsible for the purchase of
motor vehicles for all city departments as provided in § 32.081(B)(1) and for
all centralized bidding and contracts for gasoline, diesel and heating fuels.
The Public Works Director shall from time to time make recommendations to the
Board of Mayor and Aldermen relative to additional procurement and fleet
management responsibilities.
(Ord. passed 6-21-94; Am. Ord. passed 4-21-98; Am. Ord. passed 12-7-99)
CONSERVATION COMMISSION
§ 32.090 ESTABLISHED.
   The provisions of R.S.A. Ch. 36-A are hereby adopted and a Conservation
Commission is hereby established.
('71 Code, § 2-185) (Ord. passed 3-7-89)
§ 32.091 PURPOSE.
   The establishment of the Conservation Commission shall be for the declared
purpose of developing, protecting, and promoting the natural resources of the
city, for promoting an awareness of conservation practices and policies
throughout the city, and for protecting the watershed resources of the city.
('71 Code, § 2-186) (Ord. passed 3-7-89)
§ 32.092 COMPOSITION; TERMS.
   The Commission shall consist of seven members, all citizens of the city and
all appointed by the Mayor, subject to the approval of the Board of Mayor and
Aldermen. In addition, the Mayor, subject to the approval of the Board of Mayor
and Aldermen, may appoint two alternate members to the Commission, who shall be
residents of the city and who shall have full voting powers when designated by
the Chairperson to act in the place of an absent or disqualified member. The
original Chairperson shall be appointed for a term of three years, three
members shall have two-year terms, and three members shall have one-year terms.
Appointments of respective successors and of alternate members, both original
and successor, shall be for three-year terms. The second term Chairperson shall
be selected by the members from one of their number. Any member or alternate
member of the Commission so appointed may, after a public hearing if requested,
be removed for cause pursuant to the City Charter. A vacancy occurring
otherwise than by expiration of a term shall be filled for the unexpired term
in the same manner as an original appointment.
('71 Code, § 2-187) (Ord. passed 3-7-89; Am. Ord. passed 10-4-05)
§ 32.093 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Commission shall have the following duties and perform the following
functions:
   (A)   The Commission shall prepare a program of conservation and a program
of watershed and open space protection for the city and in undertaking this
program, shall conduct research into local natural resources, watershed areas,
and open spaces, along with evaluation of the uses thereof. It shall keep an
index of the open areas, swamps, wetlands, and areas of unique natural value or
ecological importance within the city. The Commission shall coordinate its
efforts with the activities of other official or unofficial bodies conducting
studies, research, and evaluations for similar purposes.
   (B)   The Commission shall prepare, adopt, and from time to time, review and
amend, a conservation and open space plan, and shall submit the plan to the
Planning Board for consideration as part of the comprehensive plan of the city.
In preparation of the plan, the Commission shall also obtain information
pertinent to the proper utilization of open areas in the city including lands
owned by the state and the city with the exception of land owned by the
waterworks and shall make recommendations for the better promotion,
development, or utilization of the natural resources and open areas in the
city.
   (C)   The Commission shall adopt bylaws and shall keep accurate records of
its meetings and actions and shall file an annual report with the Board of
Mayor and Aldermen which shall be in the annual city report.
   (D)   The Commission may receive gifts of money and property, both real and
personal, and may acquire land or an easement in the name of the city, subject
to approval of the Board of Mayor and Aldermen. The Commission shall not
dispose of city-owned land without a public hearing and approval of the Board
of Mayor and Aldermen.
   (E)   Any monies received by the Commission shall be placed in a
conservation fund and allowed to accumulate from year to year and such monies
may be expended from the fund for purposes consistent with this subchapter. The
city may also make appropriations to the conservation fund. All monies
maintained or expended by the Commission shall be recorded in accordance with
city accounting procedures, and any matters relating to personnel shall be
governed in a manner consistent with the pertinent requirements of the City
Charter and appropriate city ordinances.
('71 Code, § 2-188) (Ord. passed 3-7-89)
DEPARTMENT OF SENIOR SERVICES
§ 32.104 [RESERVED].
   (Previous section repealed on 6-6-23)
§ 32.105 [RESERVED].
   (Previous section repealed on 6-6-23)
§ 32.106 [RESERVED].
   (Previous section repealed on 6-6-23)
§ 32.107 [RESERVED].
   (Previous section repealed on 6-6-23)
§ 32.108 [RESERVED].
   (Previous section repealed on 11-4-98)
§ 32.109 [RESERVED].
   (Previous section repealed on 6-6-23)
§ 32.110 [RESERVED].
   (Previous section repealed on 6-6-23)
§ 32.111 [RESERVED].
   (Previous section repealed on 11-4-98)
HERITAGE COMMISSION
§ 32.120 ESTABLISHED.
   A Heritage Commission is hereby established in the city in accordance with
R.S.A. 673.
(Ord. passed 10-1-96)
§ 32.121 PURPOSE.
   In accordance with R.S.A. 674-44-a, the purpose of the Heritage Commission
shall be to insure the proper recognition, use and protection of resources,
primarily manmade, that are valuable for their historic, cultural, aesthetic,
or community significance within their natural, built, or cultural context.
(Ord. passed 10-1-96)
§ 32.122 COMPOSITION; TERMS; VACANCIES.
   (A)   The Heritage Commission shall consist of seven members who shall be
appointed by the Mayor with approval by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen.
   (B)   Each Heritage Commission member shall be a resident of the city. One
commissioner shall be a member of the Board of Mayor and Aldermen. Where
practicable, five alternate members shall be appointed. When an alternate sits
in absence or disqualification of a regular member, the alternate shall have
full voting powers. In determining each member's qualifications, the Board of
Mayor and Aldermen shall take into consideration the appointee's demonstrated
interest and ability to understand, appreciate and promote the purpose of the
Heritage Commission.
   (C)   Terms shall be for three years, commencing the first day of July, and
staggered in such a way as to allow appointments each year.
   (D)   In accordance with R.S.A. 673:12, the Board of Mayor and Aldermen
shall, within 60 days of a vacancy, cause the appointment of another
Commissioner to fill said vacancy for the duration of the unexpired term.
(Ord. passed 10-1-96)
§ 32.123 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   In accordance with R.S.A. 674:44-b, the Heritage Commission shall have
advisory authority specifically as follows:
   (A)   Survey and inventory all cultural and historic resources.
   (B)   Conduct research and publish findings, including reports to establish
the legal basis for a district and preparation of historic district ordinances
prior to its adoption or amendment as provided in R.S.A. 675:6.
   (C)   Assist the Planning Board, as requested, in preparation of those
sections of the master plan which address cultural and historic resources.
   (D)   Advise, upon request, local agencies and other local boards in their
review of requests on matters affecting or potentially affecting cultural and
historic resources. When information or a recommendation is requested by
another board or agency the Heritage Commission shall respond within 30 days.
   (E)   Coordinate activities with appropriate service organizations and
nonprofit groups.
   (F)   Publicize its activities.
   (G)   Hire consultants and contractors as needed.
   (H)   Receive gifts of money in the name of the city, subject to approval
from the Board of Mayor and Aldermen, such gifts to be managed and controlled
by the Commission for its proper purposes.
   (I)   Hold meetings and hearings necessary to carry out its duties. Regular
meetings shall be held at least four times a year.
(Ord. passed 10-1-96)
§ 32.124 APPROPRIATIONS.
   (A)   The city having established a Heritage Commission, may appropriate
money as deemed necessary to carry out its purposes. The whole or any part of
money so appropriated in any year and any gifts of money received pursuant to
R.S.A. 674-44-b shall be placed in a heritage fund by the Heritage Commission
for its purposes without further approval from the Board of Mayor and Aldermen,
except that major expenses beyond normal operations and administration shall
require concurrence by the Board.
   (B)   The city finance officer, pursuant to R.S.A. 41:29 shall have custody
of all monies in the heritage fund and shall pay out same only upon order of
the Heritage Commission. The disbursement of heritage funds shall be authorized
by a majority of the Commission members.
(Ord. passed 10-1-96)
§ 32.125 CONSOLIDATION.
   (A)   In accordance with R.S.A. 674:44-b III, the Heritage Commission shall
assume the duties and powers granted to the Historic District Commission by
Article XI of the Zoning Ordinance pertaining specifically to the Amoskeag
Corporation Housing Historic District and the Amoskeag Millyard Historic
District.
   (B)   The members of the Historic District Commission shall serve out their
terms as members of the Heritage Commission.
(Ord. passed 10-1-96)
HOUSING COMMISSION
§ 32.130 ESTABLISHED.
   A Housing Commission for the city is hereby established pursuant to R.S.A.
674-44:h.
(Ord. passed 8-3-21)
§ 32.131 PURPOSE.
   The establishment of the Housing Commission shall be for the stated purpose
of recognizing, promoting, enhancing, encouraging, and developing a balanced
and diverse supply of housing to meet the economic, social, and physical needs
of the City of Manchester and its residents.
(Ord. passed 8-3-21)
§ 32.132 COMPOSITION; TERMS.
   The Commission shall consist of five members, all residents of the city and
all appointed by the Mayor, subject to the approval of the Board of Mayor and
Aldermen. In addition, the Mayor, subject to the approval of the Board of Mayor
and Aldermen, may appoint two alternate members to the Commission, who shall be
residents of the city and who shall have full voting powers when designated by
the Chairperson to act in the place of an absent or disqualified member.
Appointments of respective successors and of alternate members, both original
and successor, shall be for three-year terms. The second term Chairperson shall
be selected by the members from one of their number. Any member or alternate
member of the Commission so appointed may, after a public hearing if requested,
be removed for cause pursuant to the City Charter. A vacancy occurring
otherwise than by expiration of a term shall be filled for the unexpired term
in the same manner as an original appointment.
(Ord. passed 8-3-21)
§ 32.133 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   The Housing Commission shall have authority to:
      (1)   Conduct a housing needs assessment, which may be done in
cooperation with the regional housing needs assessment compiled by the regional
Planning Commission under R.S.A. 36:47, II.
      (2)   Conduct activities to recognize, promote, enhance, and encourage
the development of housing, particularly affordable and workforce housing.
      (3)   Assist the Planning Board, as requested, in the development and
review of those sections of the master plan which address housing, and those
sections of the zoning ordinance, subdivision regulations, and site plan
regulations that address housing or otherwise have the potential to affect the
cost or availability of housing.
      (4)   Advise, upon request, local agencies and other local boards in
their review of requests on matters affecting or potentially affecting housing
resources.
      (5)   Coordinate activities with appropriate service organizations and
nonprofit groups.
      (6)   Publicize and report its activities.
      (7)   Hire consultants and contractors.
      (8)   Subject to the approval of the Board of Mayor and Aldermen, receive
gifts of money and property, both real and personal, in the name of the city,
to assist in carrying out the purpose of this section.
      (9)   Hold meetings and hearings necessary to carry out its duties.
   (B)   The Commission shall adopt bylaws and shall keep accurate records of
its meetings and actions and shall file an annual report with the Board of
Mayor and Aldermen which shall be in the annual city report.
   (C)   The Housing Commission may make recommendations to the Board of Mayor
and Aldermen for the acquisition of real property, in the name of the city by
gift, purchase, grant, bequest, devise, lease, development rights, covenant, or
other contractual right, including conveyances with conditions, limitations, or
reversions, as may be necessary to maintain, improve, protect, limit the future
use of, or otherwise conserve and properly use the affordable housing of the
city, and shall manage and control the same; provided, however, that the city
or Housing Commission shall not have the right to condemn property for these
purposes. The Housing Commission may make recommendations to the Board of Mayor
and Aldermen for the disposal of property so acquired. Prior to the
recommendation of use of funds for the purchase of any interest in real
property, the Housing Commission shall hold a public hearing with notice in
accordance with R.S.A. 675:7.
(Ord. passed 8-3-21)
§ 32.134 HOUSING COMMISSION FUND.
   (A)   The Board of Mayor and Aldermen may appropriate money to the Housing
Commission as necessary to carry out its purposes. The whole or any part of
money so appropriated in any year and any gifts of money or property received
under § 31.133(A)(8) shall be placed in a Housing Commission Fund and allowed
to accumulate from year to year. The Housing Commission Fund shall remain
separate from all other city funds, including the Affordable Housing Trust,
which is administered by the Community Improvement Program.
   (B)   The Finance Director shall have custody of all moneys in the Housing
Commission Fund and shall pay out the same only upon order of the Housing
Commission. The disbursement of these funds shall be authorized by a majority
of the Housing Commission.
(Ord. passed 8-3-21)
HUMAN RESOURCES DEPARTMENT
§ 32.140 HUMAN RESOURCES DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED.
   (A)   Pursuant to
Charter § 3.02 there is established a Human Resources Department.
   (B)   The department head shall be the Human Resources Director who shall be
appointed as provided by
Charter § 3.03.
   (C)   The Human Resources Department shall be responsible for the
administration of ordinances and statutes relating to employees relations,
salary and employee benefits management, the compensation and classification
plan, the recruitment, appointment, promotion, transfer, lay off, removal and
discipline of city employees, employee training and development and other
incidents of city employment and shall perform such other duties as prescribed
by federal, state and local law.
   (D)   Also within the Department of Human Resources shall be the Chief
Negotiator and Contract Administrator. The Chief Negotiator and Contract
Administrator shall directly consult with and report to the Board of Mayor and
Aldermen and the Board of School Committee with respect to the negotiation of
collective bargaining agreements.
(Ord. passed 8-5-97; Am. Ord. passed 11-4-98)
LEAD EXPOSURE PREVENTION COMMISSION
§ 32.150 FINDING OF FACT.
   The Board of Mayor and Aldermen find that:
   (A)   Lead is a neurotoxin and exposure at an early age does irreparable
harm to young children.
   (B)   There is no safe level of lead in the human body.
   (C)   Lead based paint was banned for use in residential dwellings in 1978.
Thus the age of housing is a significant risk factor. According to current
estimates, there are approximately 50,000 dwelling units in the city of
Manchester; of which 30,000 are estimated to have been built prior to 1979.
   (D)   Between 2016 and 2020, 465 children in Manchester were diagnosed with
blood lead levels greater than or equal to the state's current action level of
five micrograms per deciliter ("ug/dL"). Note: the U.S. Centers for Disease
Control has adopted 3.5 ug/dL as the recommended reference value.
   (E)   Lead poisoning results in societal costs including: increased special
education, health care, justice system and social assistance spending; reduced
lifetime productivity; and premature mortality.
   (F)   Since 2002, the City of Manchester has received over $18.4 million
funding from the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD)
Department to make housing units 'lead safe' (in addition to city matching
funds).
   (G)   To date, 1170 units have utilized funding to remediate lead in a
manner consistent with state and federal regulations. It
is unknown how many property owners have taken steps to remediate lead on their
own, nor to what extent they follow regulated procedures.
   (H)   It is noteworthy that remediation does not constitute complete
elimination of lead hazards. In certain scenarios (such as remodeling,
reconstruction, or demolition), lead hazards that were considered remediated
will re-emerge, requiring additional and/or ongoing remediation measures.
   (I)   It is estimated that for every dollar spent to reduce lead poisoning
hazards, there is a societal return on investment of between $17 and $221.
   (J)   Childhood lead poisoning is preventable. Actions taken by the city to
emphasize primary prevention of lead exposures will protect the health of
Manchester's children, enabling them to reach their full potential, and avoid
the significant costs associated with childhood lead poisoning.
(Ord. passed 8-1-23)
§ 32.151 ESTABLISHED.
   A Lead Exposure Prevention Commission for the city is hereby established
pursuant to City Charter Section 3.13.
(Ord. passed 8-1-23)
§ 32.152 PURPOSE.
   The establishment of the Lead Exposure Prevention Commission shall be for
the dedicated purpose of preventing childhood lead poisoning.
(Ord. passed 8-1-23)
§ 32.153 COMPOSITION; TERMS; OFFICERS AND THEIR DUTIES; CONFLICTS OF INTEREST.
   (A)   The Commission shall consist of 12 members, all of whom shall be
Manchester residents or employees of the city, and shall include:
      (1)   A representative of the City of Manchester Health Department;
      (2)   A representative of the City of Manchester Planning & Community
Development Department; who shall function in an advisory capacity and shall be
a non-voting member of the Commission;
      (3)   A representative of the City of Manchester School District;
      (4)   Two members of the Board of Mayor and Aldermen, who shall be non-
voting members of the Commission;
      (5)   A pediatrician familiar with childhood lead poisoning or other
qualified and credentialed healthcare provider, familiar with childhood lead
poisoning;
      (6)   A resident whose family has experienced lead exposure in one or
more residential properties;
      (7)   A landlord who owns and has experience renting up to five pre-1978
residential units;
      (8)   A property owner or management company that owns and has experience
renting more than two pre-1978 buildings with a minimum of ten units;
      (9)   A representative or designee of a non-profit organization focused
on children's health and/or early childhood education;
      (10)   A representative or designee of a non-profit organization or
community advisory group working on housing issues, including healthy housing
or other forms of environmental justice;
      (11)   A person with experience as a certified lead risk assessor,
inspector, or abatement contractor;
      (12)   An alternate member who shall be a resident of the city and who
shall have full voting powers when designated by the Chairperson, at their
discretion, to act in the place of an absent or disqualified member.
   (B)   All commissioners shall be nominated by the Mayor, subject to the
approval of the Board of Mayor and Aldermen. Appointments of members, both
original and successor, shall be for three year terms. Initial terms shall be
staggered in such a way as to allow appointments each year. The second term
Chairperson shall be selected by the members from one of their number. Any
member or alternate member of the Commission so appointed may, after a public
hearing if requested, be removed for cause pursuant to the City Charter. A
vacancy occurring otherwise than by expiration of a term shall be filled for
the unexpired term in the same manner as an original appointment.
      (1)   Officers shall be full-time voting members of the Commission,
elected annually, initially at the first meeting of the Commission and
thereafter January of each year, by a majority vote of the Commission. The
Commission Officers and their duties shall be:
         (a)   Chair. The Chair shall preside over all meetings and hearings in
general accordance with Roberts Rules of Order. The Chair, as a voting member
of the Commission, may make motions and vote on all questions. The Chair will
appoint another member to temporarily chair the meeting in the event of a
planned absence.
          (b)   Clerk. The Clerk shall be responsible for the maintenance of
the Commission minutes and records. The Commission shall review the minutes for
accuracy. The Clerk, in coordination with city staff, will post legal meeting
notices, schedule appropriate meeting space, and perform other duties customary
to the office.
         (c)   Treasurer. The Treasurer is elected when funds are first
deposited into the Lead Exposure Prevention Commission Fund. The Treasurer, in
coordination with staff from the city Finance Department, shall be responsible
for recording all funds acquired, owned and dispensed by the Commission. This
shall include all funds budgeted to the Commission by the city, funds raised by
the Commission, and property acquired by the Commission. The Treasurer shall
also record the purposes for which all property is acquired and dispensed. All
dispensed funds will require review and signature from the city Finance
Department.
      (2)   Officer vacancies shall be filled at the next regular meeting by
regular election procedure.
   (C)   Every voting member of the commission present when a question is put
forth, except when the member has a direct personal or financial interest in
the matter as defined under Article IX Standards of Conduct of the City
Charter, shall vote. Abstention from a vote by any member shall include an
explanation of the interest in conflict with the matter before the commission.
Any member with a conflict of interest is prohibited from participating in the
discussion on the matter, as soon as the conflict becomes known.
(Ord. passed 8-1-23)
§ 32.154 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   The Lead Exposure Prevention Commission shall have authority to:
      (1)   Develop recommendations for a long term vision, mission, and
strategy to prevent childhood lead poisoning in Manchester.
      (2)   Identify actions and advance efforts to promote, enhance, and
encourage the prevention of lead exposure in dwellings, particularly for minors
residing in rental units.
      (3)   Assess existing ordinances, including but not limited to the city’s
housing code, to determine whether and how they should be amended to better
prevent childhood lead poisoning, and provide recommendations about regulations
to the Board of Mayor and Aldermen.
      (4)   Assess progress in preventing childhood lead poisoning on an annual
basis by monitoring childhood lead poisoning rates and the extent of lead
exposure in existing housing in the city.
      (5)   Work with and advise city departments and boards in their review of
requests related to childhood lead poisoning, including matters related to the
prevention of lead exposures.
      (6)   Recommend sufficient funding for staffing city departments and/or
contractors to implement recommendations.
      (7)   Coordinate with appropriate service organizations and nonprofit
groups.
      (8)   Subject to the approval of the Board of Mayor and Aldermen, receive
grants, gifts of money and property, both real and personal, in the name of the
city, to assist in carrying out the purpose of this section.
      (9)   With the review and signature of the city Finance Department and
subject to the approval of the Board of Mayor and Aldermen, dispense funds to
assist in carrying out the purpose of this section. All dispensed funds will be
recorded and tracked in accordance with city Finance Department policies and
procedures.
      (10)   Subject to the approval of the Board of Mayor and Aldermen, hire
consultants and contractors, as necessary, to advance the Commission's work.
      (11)   Hold meetings and hearings necessary to carry out its duties.
      (12)   Submit reports to the Board of Mayor and Aldermen every six months
to include status updates on activities undertaken, progress toward goals, and
funds received or dispensed. As available, provide recommendations that advance
the purpose of the Commission.
      (13)   Publicize and report its activities.
   (B)   The Commission shall adopt bylaws and shall keep accurate records of
its meetings and actions and shall file an annual report with the Board of
Mayor and Aldermen.
(Ord. passed 8-1-23)
§ 32.155 LEAD EXPOSURE PREVENTION COMMISSION FUND.
   (A)   The Board of Mayor and Aldermen may appropriate money to the Lead
Exposure Prevention Commission as necessary to carry out its purposes. The
whole or any part of money so appropriated in any year and any grants, gifts of
money or property received under § 31.154(A)(9) shall be placed in a Lead
Exposure Prevention Commission Fund and allowed to accumulate from year to
year. The Lead Exposure Prevention Commission Fund shall remain separate from
all other city funds involving federal or state dollars appropriated for lead
prevention or remediation, which are administered by the Community Improvement
Program.
   (B)   The Finance Officer shall have custody of all moneys in the Lead
Exposure Prevention Commission Fund and shall pay out the same only upon order
of the Lead Exposure Prevention Commission. The disbursement of these funds
shall be authorized by a majority of the Lead Exposure Prevention Commission.
(Ord. passed 8-1-23)
CHAPTER 33: HUMAN RESOURCES
Section
General Provisions
   
33.001   Authority to organize
   
33.002   Discrimination against organization members prohibited
   
33.003   Work stoppage or strike prohibited
   
33.004   Grievance and suggestion procedure
   
33.005   Appeals by nonaffiliated employees
   
33.006   Intervention of Mayor in disputes
   
33.007   Membership in state retirement systems required
   
33.008   [Reserved]
   
33.009   [Reserved]
   
33.010   Denial of pensions
   
33.011   Retired employees; policy on rehiring
   
33.012   Maintenance of plans
Position Classification Plan
   
33.020   Classification plan defined
   
33.021   Schedule of classification plan
   
33.022   Positions not covered by chapter
   
33.023   Contracts not affected
   
33.024   Classification of positions
   
33.025   Compensation of positions
   
33.026   Class specifications
   
33.027   Employee recruitment and selection
   
33.028   Vacant positions
Compensation Plan
   
33.040   Compensation plan defined
   
33.041   Schedules of compensation plan
   
33.042   Salary or wage increases limited by appropriations
   
33.043   Compensation plan based on schedules
   
33.044   Basis of salary rates for FLSA exempt employees
   
33.045   Basis of pay rates for FLSA non- exempt positions
   
33.046   Entrance pay rates
   
33.047   Initial probationary period
   
33.048   [Reserved]
   
33.050   Retention incentive
   
33.051   [Reserved]
   
33.052   Continuity of service
   
33.053   Initial adjustments to pay
   
33.054   Overtime compensation for FLSA non-exempt employees
   
33.055   [Reserved]
   
33.056   Night shift premium
   
33.057   [Reserved]
   
33.058   Outside income deductions
   
33.059   Call-back pay
   
33.060   Standby duty
   
33.061   Temporary assignments
   
33.062   Part-time employees
   
33.063   Temporary and seasonal employees
   
33.064   Employees injured in the line of duty
Leaves of Absence
   
33.075   Holidays
   
33.076   Special leave
   
33.077   Bereavement leave
   
33.078   Absence without leave
   
33.079   Vacations
   
33.080   Military or other similar service
   
33.081   Sick leave
   
33.082   Vacation and sick leave payment for disability-related death or
retirement
Worker's Compensation and Insurance
   
33.090   Aldermanic Human Resources and Insurance Committee
   
33.091   Risk management program
   
33.092   Office of risk management
   
33.093   Duties of City Solicitor as Risk Manager
   
33.094   Insuring personal property of employees
City Officers and Department Heads
   
33.100   Residency requirements
Cross-reference:
   
Chief Negotiator and Contract Administrator, see §§ 30.60 through 30.62
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 33.001 AUTHORITY TO ORGANIZE.
   All employees of the city are authorized and empowered to fully and freely
associate themselves in organizations of their own choosing for their mutual
benefit and advancement.
('71 Code, § 18-1)
§ 33.002 DISCRIMINATION AGAINST ORGANIZATION MEMBERS PROHIBITED.
   No employee of the city shall be punished, disciplined, or discriminated
against, nor shall his status, position, salary, advancement, or any other
rights be affected in any way by reason of his membership in any organizations
or his lawful activities therein.
('71 Code, § 18-2)
§ 33.003 WORK STOPPAGE OR STRIKE PROHIBITED.
   Any organization representing city employees shall prohibit them from
participating in the stoppage or work or in a strike against the city.
('71 Code, § 18-3)
§ 33.004 GRIEVANCE AND SUGGESTION PROCEDURE.
   Administrative heads of all departments of the city may establish in their
respective department effective machinery whereby grievances, complaints,
problems, or suggestions may be presented by the authorized representatives of
any organization chosen by the employees to represent them.
('71 Code, § 18-4)
§ 33.005 APPEALS BY NONAFFILIATED EMPLOYEES.
   (A)   Applicability.
      (1)   The appeal procedure and Appeals Board as defined herein shall
apply only to those permanent employees of the city who are not affiliated with
a union or who do not have appeal rights under collective bargaining
agreements. It shall not apply to department heads.
      (2)   Appeals to the personnel Appeals Board are limited to actions taken
by departments to dismiss or suspend permanent employees or to demote for cause
any permanent employee and such appeal may be made only after the employee has
exhausted the administrative procedures within their department.
   (B)   Personnel Appeal Board. There shall be a Personnel Appeal Board
consisting of five members. Members shall be appointed by the Mayor with the
approval of the Aldermen for a term of three years and shall serve until their
successors are appointed and qualified. Vacancies shall be filled for the
unexpired term. The Mayor shall designate one member as Chairperson of the
Board. Members of the Board shall serve without compensation. No member of the
Board shall be a member of any partisan political committee, nor shall hold, or
be a candidate for, any renumerative elective public office during their term
of office and shall not be otherwise employed in any department of city
government. One member of the Board shall be a member of the bar of this state.
The Human Resources Director shall be ex officio Clerk of the Board.
   (C)   Initial appointments. Of the initial appointees one shall be appointed
for a term of one year, one shall be appointed for a term of two years and one
shall be appointed for a term of three years and thereafter, as appointments
expire, all appointments shall be for a three-year term.
   (D)   Appeal procedure. Any permanent employee who has completed an initial
probation period who is dismissed, demoted for cause or suspended may within
ten work days after the final determination has been made within the department
and/or board or commission on such dismissal, demotion, or suspension, appeal
in writing to the Board for review thereof. Upon such review, both the
appealing employee and the appointing authority whose action is reviewed shall
have the right to be heard publicly. At the hearing of such appeal, the Board
may establish reasonable rules of procedure and for the admission of evidence
it deems advisable. If the Board finds that the action complained of was taken
by the appointing authority on the basis of race, color, national origin,
religion, sex, political affiliation, age, or handicap, the employee shall be
reinstated to their former position without loss of pay. In other cases of
dismissal, demotion for cause, or suspension under the provisions of this
section, the Board may reinstate the employee or otherwise modify any order or
make such order as it may deem just.
('71 Code, § 18-4.1) (Ord. passed 7-6-82; Am. Ord. passed 3-19-85)
§ 33.006 INTERVENTION OF MAYOR IN DISPUTES.
   The Mayor shall have the right to intervene in any dispute between any
employee organization and department of the city if he deems it desirable or
necessary in the interest of the city.
('71 Code, § 18-5)
§ 33.007 MEMBERSHIP IN STATE RETIREMENT SYSTEMS REQUIRED.
   All employees of the city, who are eligible, shall make application for and
retain membership in any existing State of New Hampshire contributory
retirement system of which he or she is now qualified to become a member;
provided, however, that any school teacher who is now employed as such by the
city in the public schools shall make application for and retain membership in
the State of New Hampshire Teachers Retirement Association, and make the
required necessary contribution.
('71 Code, § 18-6)
Statutory reference:
   Participation by city officers and employees in state retirement system, see
R.S.A. 100-A:20
§ 33.008 [RESERVED].
   (Previous section repealed on 6-3-25)
§ 33.009 [RESERVED].
   (Previous section repealed on 6-3-25)
§ 33.010 DENIAL OF PENSIONS. 
   No application for a pension made in accordance with the provisions of
existing local pension acts will be considered or approved if submitted by an
employee of the city who is eligible for membership in any existing State of
New Hampshire retirement system and who neglects to retain membership in such a
retirement system on or before the expiration date as provided for this purpose
in the act governing the operation of the retirement system.
('71 Code, § 18-9)
§ 33.011 RETIRED EMPLOYEES; POLICY ON REHIRING.
   Individuals who have retired from the city service and who are receiving
payments from any city retirement or pension plan shall not be reemployed in
any city department for more than 29 hours a work week regardless of the
funding source. Such part time employees shall not be eligible for any benefits
or leave time whatsoever.
('71 Code, § 18-10) (Ord. passed 12-5-72; Am. Ord. passed 2-18-03)
§ 33.012 MAINTENANCE OF PLANS.
   (A)   Responsibilities of the Human Resources Director. The Human Resources
Director or the Human Resources and Insurance Committee shall be responsible
for the maintenance of the classification and compensation plans, including but
not limited to the allocation of new or changed positions, the determination of
proper compensation rates within the provisions of this chapter, maintenance of
up-to-date class specifications, class lists, and allocation records, and the
preparation of recommendations to the Board of Mayor and Aldermen on revisions
to the plans on the basis of changes in duties of positions and in prevailing
rates of pay for comparable occupations outside the city service. The Human
Resources Director shall develop and implement procedural guidelines for the
administration and maintenance of the classification and compensation plans,
provided that such procedural guidelines shall conform to all of the
requirements and provisions of this chapter. The Human Resources Director may
designate members of the Human Resources Department staff to carry out any of
the duties and tasks referenced herein, but the responsibility for such duties
and tasks shall rest with the Human Resources Director.
   (B)   Adjustments to the pay schedule. The weekly and hourly rates for
different classes of positions which are prescribed in the compensation plan
shall be changed only upon recommendation of the Human Resources Director or
the Human Resources and Insurance Committee and Finance Committee and amendment
by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen. Such changes as required may be made
annually to become effective on the first day of each fiscal year or at shorter
intervals as justified by circumstances. Changes in the compensation plan shall
be made in a manner to maintain proper percentage relationships among the
classes of positions and to reflect changes in prevailing rates of pay for
comparable positions outside the city service.
   (C)   Employee request. Any employee shall have the right to the
consideration of any request they may have with respect to the application of
the classification and compensation plans to their position. The employee shall
initially make their request to the department or office head who shall
promptly seek to arrive at a solution which is consistent with the plans and
acceptable to the employee. Where the department or office head is unable to
resolve such a request in a manner that the employee is willing to accept in
writing, the matter shall then be submitted to the Human Resources Director
and, if necessary, to the Human Resources and Insurance Committee for a
solution which is consistent with the plans.
('71 Code, § 18-64) (Ord. passed 6-14-67; Am. Ord. passed 12-27-67; Am. Ord.
passed 11-4-98; Am. Ord. passed 6-3-25)
POSITION CLASSIFICATION PLAN
§ 33.020 CLASSIFICATION PLAN DEFINED.
   The classification plan shall consist of the occupational list of classes, a
class code, and a class grade for each class with the class specifications
therefor, and the allocation records identifying each individual position with
the appropriate class.
('71 Code, § 18-20) (Ord. passed 6-14-67)
§ 33.021 SCHEDULE OF CLASSIFICATION PLAN.
   The schedule of the classification plan shall be filed in the office of the
Human Resources Director.
('71 Code, § 18-21) (Ord. passed 11-4-98)
§ 33.022 POSITIONS NOT COVERED BY CHAPTER.
   (A)   The provisions of §§ 33.020 through 33.082 of this chapter shall not
apply to elected officials, members of appointed boards and commissions, the
secretary, and the administrative assistants to the Mayor.
   (B)   Certificated employees of the school system shall be exempt from the
provisions of all but those sections of §§ 33.020 through 33.082 of this
chapter in which they are specifically included.
   (C)   Limited term appointments shall consist of appointments to positions
which are funded for a limited period of time or for an indefinite period.
Limited term appointees shall have the same privileges as regular employees
with the exception that their services will be terminated conterminously with
the termination of funding for the positions they occupy.
   (D)   The provisions of §§ 33.020 through 33.082 of this chapter shall not
apply to elected officials, including the Commissioner of Welfare.
('71 Code, § 18-22) (Ord. passed 6-14-67; Am. Ord. passed 11-12-69; Am. Ord.
passed 10-21-86; Am. Ord. passed 12-17-91; Am. Ord. passed 11-4-98)
§ 33.023 CONTRACTS NOT AFFECTED.
   None of the provisions of §§ 33.020 through 33.082 of this chapter shall
amend or modify any existing legal and binding contract between the city and
employees' groups unless or until such contracts are renegotiated to conform
with the provisions of §§ 33.020 through 33.082 of this chapter.
('71 Code, § 18-23) (Ord. passed 6-14-67)
§ 33.024 CLASSIFICATION OF POSITIONS.
   All positions in the service of the city, except those listed in § 33.022 of
this subchapter shall be grouped into classes, and each class shall include
those positions sufficiently similar in respect to their duties and
responsibilities so that similar requirements as to training, experience,
knowledge, skill, and the same rates of compensation are applicable thereto.
('71 Code, § 18-24) (Ord. passed 6-14-67)
§ 33.025 COMPENSATION OF POSITIONS.
   All positions in each class shall be compensated in accordance with the
class grade for each class as set forth in the schedule of the classification
plan and at the rates of pay for such class grade as set forth in the schedules
of the compensation plan.
('71 Code, § 18-25) (Ord. passed 6-14-67)
§ 33.026 CLASS SPECIFICATIONS.
   (A)   Class specifications, which state the main characteristics of the
class, give examples of typical duties performed in positions of the class, and
establish the desirable qualifications required for successful performance in
such positions, shall be prepared and maintained for all classes.
   (B)   The class specifications shall be descriptive and explanatory but not
restrictive. The listing of particular examples of duties shall not preclude
the assignment of other duties by the department heads concerned.
   (C)   A class specification shall be considered in its entirety and in
relation to other class specifications in determining the class to which a
position should be allocated.
   (D)   Nothing contained in the city’s class specifications shall be
interpreted to screen out or exclude qualified candidates for employment in the
city service on the basis of race, ethnicity, religion, age, physical or mental
disability or other forms of illegal discrimination. With regard to physical or
mental disabilities, it is the intent of the city that all class specifications
be interpreted to require only those abilities required to successfully perform
the essential duties and responsibilities of the class.
('71 Code, § 18-26) (Ord. passed 6-14-67; Am. Ord. passed 11-4-98)
§ 33.027 EMPLOYEE RECRUITMENT AND SELECTION.
   In order to insure that employment practices shall be open and competitive,
the following procedures shall be followed in the recruitment and selection of
employees covered by §§
33.020 through
33.082 of this chapter.
   (A)   The recruitment of candidates and the referral of job applications
shall be centrally coordinated through the Human Resources Department.
   (B)   When a job vacancy occurs in any department, the department head shall
promptly notify the Human Resources Department.
   (C)   No interview or final action on any existing or potential candidate
shall occur prior to notification of the Human Resources Department or prior to
the forwarding of applications as provided in division (F) of this section.
   (D)   The Human Resources Department shall upon notification of any vacancy,
post notice of such job opportunity within the department where the vacancy
exists for a period of five working days. Those individuals that are interested
in applying for the vacancy shall submit a completed application to the Human
Resources Department within the five working days. Qualified applicants will be
referred to the Department Head for their review and consideration. If no
departmental employee applies for said vacancy or if no departmental employee
is selected for the vacancy, the Human Resources Department shall post notice
of such job opportunity at a minimum of three conspicuous public places. The
Human Resources Department shall conduct a special notification effort to be
directed to minority organizations.
   (E)   The Human Resources Department shall publicize city employment
opportunities and procedures and shall place specific advertisements for each
job opening.
   (F)   The Human Resources Department shall forward the applications of all
qualified applicants on file to the appropriate department for screening,
selection and appointment. The Human Resources Department may make written
comments on applicant qualifications, but the department wherein the vacancy
exists shall be the final judge.
   (G)   The Human Resources Department shall keep a record of all notices,
candidate referral, and other such information as the Human Resources Director
deems advisable including information on sex and minority status.
   (H)   The appointing authority on filling a job vacancy shall notify the
Human Resources Department, on such standardized form as may be developed by
the Human Resources Department, of the candidate selected, of applicants
interviewed, of the basis of selection and such other information as is
required on the form.
('71 Code, § 18-30) (Ord. passed 12-27-79; Am. Ord. passed 8-13-85; Am. Ord.
passed 11-4-98; Am. Ord. passed 4-16-02; Am. Ord. passed 6-3-25)
§ 33.028 VACANT POSITIONS.
   (A)   Except for positions listed in § 33.022(A) and (B) and positions which
become vacant due to death or discharge, no vacant budgeted position shall be
filled without the approval of the Human Resources Director.
   (B)   Requests to fill vacant positions shall include justification and
shall be submitted to the Human Resources Director. The Human Resources
Director shall investigate the need of filling positions and the impact upon
services to the public if positions are left vacant.
   (C)   In order to expedite the filling of authorized positions, the Human
Resources Director is hereby authorized to begin the recruitment and screening
of applicants at the time the requisition is received; provided, however, that
appointment to such position cannot occur until after the Human Resources
Director has approved filling the position. The Human Resources Director will
notify the Human Resources and Insurance Committee of all approved positions on
a monthly basis.
   (D)   In the event a request to fill a vacant position is not approved by
the Human Resources Director, such request shall be submitted to the next
regular meeting of the Human Resources and Insurance Committee. Actions of the
Human Resources and Insurance Committee shall be reported to and subject to
review by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen.
('71 Code, § 18-31) (Ord. passed 9-1-81; Am. Ord. passed 8-7-84; Am. Ord.
passed 9-3-96; Am. Ord. passed 11-4-98)
COMPENSATION PLAN
§ 33.040 COMPENSATION PLAN DEFINED.
   The compensation plan shall consist of the schedules of salaries and hourly
rates as set forth in the schedules of the compensation plan and the provisions
of §§ 33.020 through 33.082 of this chapter on the administration thereof,
together with the provisions herein on benefits and working conditions.
('71 Code, § 18-27) (Ord. passed 6-14-67)
§ 33.041 SCHEDULES OF COMPENSATION PLAN.
   The schedules of the compensation plan shall be filed in the office of the
Human Resources Director.
('71 Code, § 18-28) (Am. Ord. passed 11-4-98)
§ 33.042 SALARY OR WAGE INCREASES LIMITED BY APPROPRIATIONS.
   No provisions of §§ 33.020 through 33.082 of this chapter shall be construed
as authorizing any increase in salary or wage during a fiscal year which would
result in exceeding appropriations made for such purpose.
('71 Code, § 18-29) (Ord. passed 6-14-67; Am. Ord. passed 12-27-67)
§ 33.043 COMPENSATION PLAN BASED ON SCHEDULES.
   (A)   The pay of city employees occupying positions covered by §§ 33.020
through 33.082 of this chapter shall be on the basis of appropriate schedules
of annual, weekly, or equivalent hourly rates as prescribed in the schedules of
the compensation plan for the respective classes of positions.
   (B)   For each class grade, an annual, weekly and hourly salary range is
hereby established which shall consist of an entrance rate, intermediate rates,
and a maximum rate comprising the base rates for the class grade, and longevity
rates.
('71 Code, § 18-33) (Ord. passed 6-14-67; Am. Ord. passed 11-4-98)
§ 33.044 BASIS OF SALARY RATES FOR FLSA EXEMPT EMPLOYEES.
   (A)   The annual, weekly and hourly rate prescribed in the schedules of the
compensation plan are based on full-time employment on the basis of 40 hours
per week and 52 weeks per year for the respective classes of positions as set
forth in the schedule of the classification plan; provided, however, that the
salaries of positions designated as administrative, executive or professional
exempt under the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA) are fixed according to the
responsibilities to be fulfilled and are not based on a fixed number of hours
of work per week and shall not be adjusted with variations in work schedules,
unless part-time employment is specifically provided and/or unless otherwise
approved by the Mayor and Human Resources and Insurance Committee. Employees in
positions designated as FLSA exempt and whose normal work week is less than 40
hours per week and whose normal work year is less than 52 weeks per year shall
have their pay and authorized sick leave and vacation time prorated to coincide
with the actual hours and actual weeks they are assigned to work per year.
   (B)   All regular, permanent, full-time salaried employees shall be paid the
weekly salaries prescribed in the schedules of the compensation plan for their
respective classes of positions.
   (C)   Salaries of temporary, seasonal, or part-time employees shall be
determined as provided in §§ 33.062, and 33.063 of this subchapter.
('71 Code, § 18-34) (Ord. passed 6-14-67; Am. Ord. passed 11-4-98)
§ 33.045 BASIS OF PAY RATES FOR FLSA NON-EXEMPT POSITIONS.
   Any employee in a class of position indicated as “hourly basis” or FLSA non-
exempt in the schedule of the classification plan shall be paid hourly rates
prescribed herein for the respective class of position for time actually
worked, and for authorized sick leave, vacation, and holiday time, all of which
shall be based on the normal working hours established by the department head
with the approval of the Human Resources Director or the Human Resources and
Insurance Committee of the Board of Mayor and Aldermen.
('71 Code, § 18-35) (Ord. passed 6-14-67; Am. Ord. passed 12-27-67; Am. Ord.
passed 11-4-98)
§ 33.046 ENTRANCE PAY RATES.
   (A)   Starting rate on initial employment. Original appointment to any
position shall be made at the entrance or minimum rate of the pay grade and
advancement from the entrance rate to the maximum rate within a pay range shall
be by successive steps. Department heads may approve initial compensation at
steps two through five, dependent on budgetary constraints, when the needs of
the service so require; provided that any such exception is based on the
outstanding and unusual character of the employee's experience and ability over
and above the qualification requirements specified for the class, or that a
critical shortage of qualified applicants exist. In the latter case, any
incumbents in the same class performing identical duties and receiving a lower
rate shall have their rates increased to the rate established for entrance of
new employees. Upon recommendation of the department heads and the Human
Resources Director, or the Human Resources and Insurance Committee, the Mayor
may approve initial compensation at step six and above, also when the needs of
the service so require; provided that any such exception is based on the
outstanding and unusual character of the employee's experience, or that a
critical shortage of qualified applicants exist. Again, in the latter case, any
incumbents in the same class performing identical duties and receiving a lower
rate shall have their rates increased to the rate established for entrance of
new employees.
   (B)   Starting rate on return from military service. Any employee who holds
a position that is expected to continue indefinitely or for a significant
period of time, and who is a member of the National Guard or of a reserve
component of the armed forces of the United States or who leaves employment and
enlists in the military within 90 days from termination from employment from
the city, shall be entitled to military leave when such duty is in conflict
with the employee's regular work schedule. Under the Federal Uniform Services
Employment and Reemployment Rights Act of 1994 and related Acts, any reservist,
member of the National Guard or military or other qualified service member who
is returning from active duty lasting five years or less with an honorable or
general discharge, shall be guaranteed a position equivalent to the position
that the employee vacated to perform the active duty unless the reemployment
causes an undue hardship to the city pursuant to U.S.C. 4312(d). The returning
employee shall be placed in a step that they would have attained had they not
been on active duty.
   (C)   Starting rate in new positions. Whenever an employee is assigned to
duty in a position not previously held by the employee and such change is in
the nature of a transfer and not in the nature of a promotion and the position
is in the same pay grade as the position currently held by the employee, the
employee shall receive no increase in pay but shall remain in the current step
and shall be eligible for a step in increase on the employee's anniversary date
just as if the employee had been working in the current position.
   (D)   Rate of pay on promotion. In any case where an employee is promoted to
a class with a higher pay grade, the employee's pay shall be increased to at
least the minimum rate for the higher class, but such increase shall be no less
than 10% of the employee's current pay. If the employee refuses the promotion,
the Human Resources Director may approve an additional pay step increase. If
the employee still refuses the promotion, the Human Resources and Insurance
Committee may approve two additional pay step increases. If the employee still
refuses the promotion, the Mayor may approve additional step increases as
provided in §
33.046 above. Advancement to the maximum rates subsequent to promotion will be
on the same basis as described in §
33.048 of this subchapter. Effective dates for promotions shall be the first
work day following approval of the promotions.
   (E)   Rate of pay in cases of voluntary transfer or involuntary demotion to
a lower pay grade. When an employee takes or is moved to a position at a lower
salary grade, the employee shall be moved to the lower grade based upon their
years of service. However, if the years of service result in the employee
receiving a step which compensates the employee at a higher rate of pay than
prior to the move to the lower pay grade, said employee shall be placed in a
step in the lower grade that does not exceed their level of compensation prior
to the move to the lower pay grade.
   (F)   When an employee's position is reclassified to a higher salary grade,
the employee shall be placed in the new grade at a step that would provide an
increase equaling at least one annual merit step increase in the former salary
grade. If an employee's position is reclassified to a lower salary grade, the
employee shall be placed at a step in the lower grade based upon their years of
full-time employment. However, if the years of full service result in the
employee receiving a step which compensates the employee at a higher rate of
pay than prior to the reclassification, said employee shall be placed in a step
in the lower grade that does not exceed their level of compensation prior to
the reclassification.
('71 Code, § 18-36) (Ord. passed 6-14-67; Am. Ord. passed 4-19-88; Am. Ord.
passed 11-4-98; Am. Ord. passed 9-4-01; Am. Ord. passed 11-7-01; Am. Ord.
passed 8-6-02; Am. Ord. passed 2-18-03; Am. Ord. passed 3-18-03; Am. Ord.
passed 3-1-22; Am. Ord. passed 6-3-25)
§ 33.047 INITIAL PROBATIONARY PERIOD.
   (A)   Upon appointment to a regular full time position, the first six months
of service in the position shall be considered the initial probationary period,
except uniformed Fire Department personnel and police personnel whose initial
probationary periods shall be for 12 months.
   (B)   In the event an employee is not meeting the work standard, the
probationary period may be extended up to an additional six months not to
exceed a total of 12 months' probation.
   (C)   In the event an employee does not meet the work standard at the
conclusion of the first six months or at the conclusion of the extended
probationary period, he or she shall be separated from service, except in the
case of a promotional probationary period for which all efforts will be made to
return said employee to their former position if such position is available.
('71 Code, § 18-37) (Ord. passed 7-1-75; Am. Ord. passed 2-19-02; Am. Ord.
passed 11-28-06; Am. Ord. passed 6-3-25)
§ 33.048 ADVANCEMENTS WITHIN PAY RANGE.
   Step increases. Full-time and part-time permanent (not temporary or
seasonal) employees may be advanced to the higher rates within the range as
recommended by the department head and approved by the Human Resources Director
or the Human Resources and Insurance Committee, based upon their job
performance and length of service except as otherwise provided for in
collective bargaining agreements. Such advancement may be made yearly until the
employee has reached the maximum base rate of the class grade for the position.
The Human Resources Director shall develop a standardized form and process for
use by the department heads in evaluating employees' work performance. Such
evaluation of work performance shall be made on an objective and equitable
basis. If the department head fails to complete the performance evaluation in a
timely manner, the employee's step increase shall be processed on the
eligibility date of the step increase.
('71 Code, § 18-38) (Ord. passed 6-14-67; Am. Ord. passed 4-19-88; Am. Ord.
passed 11-4-98; Am. Ord. passed 9-5-00; Am. Ord. passed 11-28-06; Am. Ord.
passed 1-2-07; Am. Ord. Passed 6-3-25)
§ 33.049 [RESERVED].
   (Previous section repealed on 6-4-02)
§ 33.050 RETENTION INCENTIVE.
   (A)   Effective July 1, 2025, when an employee reaches their fifteenth
consecutive year of service with the City of Manchester they shall receive a 3%
retention incentive added to their base pay on their anniversary date of hire.
Said retention incentive shall remain part of the employee's base wages
thereafter. This incentive shall not apply to employees who have already
received a longevity/retention incentive increase for 15 consecutive years of
service with the City of Manchester under the current or former (Yarger-Decker)
pay plan.
   (B)   Beginning July 1, 2026, employees who were both (1) on (or above) the
top step of the new pay plan in the prior fiscal year and (2) who have a
minimum of 20 years of consecutive service with the City of Manchester, shall
receive a one-time 3% retention incentive added to their base pay on their
anniversary date of hire. Said retention incentive shall remain part of the
employee's base wages thereafter.
('71 Code, § 18-40) (Ord. passed 4-19-88; Am. Ord. passed 11-4-98; Am. Ord.
passed 9-5-00; Am. Ord. passed 10-1-19; Am. Ord. passed 6-3-25)
§ 33.051 [RESERVED].
   (Previous section repealed on 11-17-15)
§ 33.052 CONTINUITY OF SERVICE.
   (A)   Service requirements for advancement within pay ranges and for other
purposes as specified in §§
33.020 through
33.082 of this chapter, shall have the implication of continuous service, which
means employment in the city service without break or interruption.
   (B)   All leaves of absence with pay and leaves without pay of ten or less
days shall not interrupt continuous service nor be deducted therefrom.
   (C)   Absences on leave without pay in excess of ten days, except for the
extended service with the Armed Forces of the United States, as defined in §
33.046(C) of this subchapter, shall be deducted in computing total service but
shall not serve to interrupt continuous service.
   (D)   All absences without leave in excess of three consecutive work days
shall be deducted from and shall interrupt continuity of service.
('71 Code, § 18-42) (Ord. passed 6-14-67; Am. Ord. passed 12-27-67)
§ 33.053 INITIAL ADJUSTMENTS TO PAY.
   In order to bring all pay rates into conformity with the pay prescribed in
the schedules of the newly implemented compensation plan effective July 1,
2025, the following rules for application and adjustment shall be effective in
fixing the rates of pay of incumbents of positions effective July 1, 2025.
   (A)   Any employee whose rate of pay is at or above the top of the range for
their class grade effective July 1, 2025 shall continue to receive their
present rate of pay plus a one-time pay increase of 3% to be effective July 1,
2025, and shall not receive any additional increase unless or until the class
grade of their position or pay range is so changed as to provide a higher rate
in the schedule for which the employee may qualify.
   (B)   Any employee whose current rate of pay is below the minimum or
entrance rate for their position shall have their rate advanced to the
appropriate minimum rate so long as that minimum rate results in at least a 3%
increase to the employee's pay rate.
   (C)   Any employee whose current rate of pay is at or between rates of the
range shall be placed on the new pay and classification plan based upon their
assigned classification at the closest step to their wages as of June 30, 2025
which guarantees a minimum of 3% wage increase.
('71 Code, § 18-43) (Ord. passed 6-14-67; Am. Ord. passed 12-27-67; Am. Ord.
passed 11-4-98; Am. Ord. passed 6-3-25)
§ 33.054 OVERTIME COMPENSATION FOR FLSA NON-EXEMPT EMPLOYEES.
   (A)   Administration. In emergencies, a department head may prescribe
reasonable periods of overtime work to meet operational needs. Such overtime
shall be reported and justified as required by the Mayor. Complete records of
overtime of employees shall be maintained by each department or office head.
   (B)   Overtime compensation for non-exempt employees.
      (1)   (a)   When a non-exempt employee is required to work more than 40
hours in a week, they shall be compensated at one and one-half times their
regular hourly rate for each hour or fraction of an hour of 30 minutes'
duration worked. There shall be no accrual of overtime worked beyond 40 hours
per week and overtime shall not be pyramided, compounded, added together, or
paid twice for the time worked.
         (b)   Employees who are assigned to a standard work week of less than
40 hours shall be compensated for hours worked beyond their standard hours per
week at the overtime rate of straight time until they reach 40 hours and then
their overtime rate shall be time and one-half their hourly rate, provided:
            1.   Such overtime work is authorized in advance, in writing, by
the department head or designated authority.
            2.   A request for approval for payment of overtime is submitted
through the established administrative procedure.
      (2)   Compensatory time off in lieu of overtime payment shall be at time
and one-half rate except for executive, administrative and professional
employees in exempt positions. The maximum amount of compensatory time that may
be accrued is 80 hours. When a department head shall determine that there is a
need for overtime, he or she shall offer affected employees the option of
accruing compensatory time or being paid overtime if funds are available.
Compensatory time off may be granted when it least interferes with the
efficient operation of the department. Accrued compensatory time must be
utilized prior to the employee terminating from employment.
      (3)   Police personnel, except executives, administrative, and
professional positions as defined in the administrative regulations shall be
compensated for authorized overtime by payment of such overtime and one and
one-half times their normal rate of pay. Overtime qualifying for compensation
at time and one-half shall be work performed in excess of the normal eight hour
relief or in excess of the regular 40-hour work week, but overtime shall not be
pyramided, compounded, added together, or paid twice for the same time worked.
Court appearances, election details, and roll call time shall be excluded from
the above provisions for overtime payment.
      (4)   Fire Department classes assigned to the Class Code 9000 series of
the occupational list of class titles are not included in the overtime
provisions of this section.
   (C)   Hourly employees. Non-exempt employees shall be paid at one and one-
half times their regular rate for any hours worked beyond 40 per week when
authorized in accordance with division (A) of this section.
   (D)   Effect of holidays on work week. When a holiday is observed during any
employee's work week, such holiday will have the effect of reducing the work
week by seven or eight hours for each holiday observed for the purpose of
complying with the overtime provisions for payment at the overtime rate for
work performed beyond the normal work week.
   (E)   Work performed on Sundays. Any employee whose position is designated
as non- exempt under FLSA provisions and who is required to perform work on a
Sunday shall be compensated at a rate of time and one-half their regular rate
of pay for each hour worked, provided that such Sunday work is not part of
their regular work schedule.
   (F)   Witness duty fees. The city shall supplement witness fees paid by the
judiciary to city employees who are required by their employment to testify in
cases before the courts and who are required to appear as a witness during
their off-duty hours. Such witness duty supplemental fees shall be established
by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen. The witness duty supplemental fee is hereby
established at $10 per day effective January 1, 1973.
('71 Code, § 18-44) (Ord. passed 6-14-67; Am. Ord. passed 12-27-67; Am. Ord.
passed 8-7-73; Am. Ord. passed 12-17-74; Am. Ord. passed 11-4-98; Am. Ord.
passed 11-14-06; Am. Ord. passed 6-3-25)
§ 33.055 [RESERVED].
   (Previous section repealed on 6-3-25)
§ 33.056 NIGHT SHIFT PREMIUM.
   Any employee, except uniformed police and fire personnel, and part-time
employees, who is assigned to permanent night shifts or to night shifts on a
periodic rotating basis shall be paid at a rate two steps higher than their
normal rate. Such premium shall apply when half or more of the shift is
scheduled after 6:00 p.m. or before 8:00 a.m. and shall be paid only while the
employee is actually working on such shift or is on authorized vacation or sick
leave with pay, provided that they are assigned both immediately before and
after such leave.
('71 Code, § 18-63) (Ord. passed 6-14-67; Am. Ord. passed 12-27- 67; Am. Ord.
passed 6-3-25)
§ 33.057 [RESERVED].
   (Previous section repealed on 6-3-25)
§ 33.058 OUTSIDE INCOME DEDUCTIONS.
   In any case in which part of the compensation for services of any employee,
exclusive of pay for overtime service, is paid by any outside agency or from
private sources for work performed during normal duty hours, any such payments
shall be deducted from the compensation prescribed for the position in §§
33.020 through
33.082 of this chapter to the end that the total cash compensation paid to any
employee for regular full-time services from all sources combined for any
period shall equal the amount prescribed in §§
33.020 through
33.082 of this chapter.
('71 Code, § 18-61) (Ord. passed 6-14-67)
§ 33.059 CALL-BACK PAY.
   (A)   Any non-exempt employee who has left their normal place of work for
their residence and is called back for emergency or overtime work, shall be
paid for such overtime work in accordance with §
33.054 of this subchapter; provided that they shall receive a minimum
guaranteed payment equivalent to three hours of pay at the overtime rate of
time and one-half; provided further, that an employee who is called back for
overtime or emergency work and who completes the required task and returns to
their residence within the three-hour minimum guarantee may be called back for
additional emergency or overtime work without an additional three hours minimum
work guarantee. It is the purpose and intent of this section to assure an
employee of at least three hours of pay at overtime rates for the inconvenience
of being called back to work between the normal shifts, but not to be
separately paid for several call- backs within the three-hour minimum guarantee
period.
   (B)   Any employee who is called in one hour or less prior to the start of
their normal shift shall receive such time at the overtime rate, but is
excluded from the three-hour minimum guarantee outlined in division (A) of this
section.
   (C)   Departments may schedule employees to start their next day's shift at
a time earlier than the regular time without extra compensation under the call-
back provisions of this section, provided such change in schedule is made prior
to the completion of the shift the preceding day.
   (D)   Exempt employees shall not be entitled to call-back pay unless such
call-back pay is part of a collective bargaining agreement or is approved by
the Board of Mayor and Aldermen.
('71 Code, § 18-45) (Ord. passed 6-14-67; Am. Ord. passed 12-27-67; Am. Ord.
passed 5-6-69; Am. Ord. passed 8-7-73; Am. Ord. passed 11-4-98; Am. Ord. passed
6-3-25)
§ 33.060 STANDBY DUTY.
   (A)   Standby duty in general. Any employees who are assigned during their
normal off-duty hours by their departments to standby duty, in immediate
communication with the department during the standby period, and available at a
minimum notice for emergency call-back duty shall be compensated for the
inconvenience resulting thereby as follows.
   (B)   Standby pay. Except as otherwise provided in a collective bargaining
agreement, all standby pay for non-exempt employees shall be compensated at the
following rates:
      (1)   Monday through Friday (from the end of a normal work shift to the
beginning of the next normal work shift) at the rate of $25 per day;
      (2)   Saturday, Sunday and holiday (from the end of a normal work shift
on Friday to the beginning of the next normal work shift the following Monday
or the 24-hour period of a holiday) at the rate of $45 per day; and
      (3)   Should any collective bargaining agreement provide a higher standby
pay than indicated above, then any employees who are not members of that
bargaining agreement shall receive no less standby pay.
   (C)   Standby pay for exempt employees. Exempt employees shall not be
entitled to standby duty pay unless such standby duty pay is part of a
collective bargaining agreement or is approved by the Board of Mayor and
Aldermen
('71 Code, § 18-46) (Ord. passed 5-6-69; Am. Ord. passed 5-15-73; Am. Ord.
passed 11-4-98; Am. Ord. passed 12-7-99; Am. Ord. passed 6-3-25)
§ 33.061 TEMPORARY ASSIGNMENTS.
   (A)   In any case when an employee is qualified for and is temporarily
required to serve regularly in and accept the responsibility for work in a
higher class of position, such employee shall receive the entrance rate of that
class or one rate step above their present rate, whichever is higher, while so
assigned, subject to the approval of the Human Resources Director or Human
Resources and Insurance Committee. Such temporary assignment to a higher class
of positions, to qualify for the higher rate of pay, shall be regular and
continuous in character for at least one work day for FLSA non-exempt employees
and one work week for FLSA exempt employees. An employee may be temporarily
assigned to the work of any position of the same or lower class grade without
change in pay. In those cases when an FLSA non-exempt employee is assigned to
temporarily serve in a higher level FLSA exempt position, such as a
superintendent's position in the Highway Department, then such FLSA non-exempt
employees shall be granted the higher rate of pay in accordance with this
section if the assignment is for one full work day or longer.
   (B)   When a department head position is vacant, the Mayor, or Board as
appropriate, may appoint an individual as the acting department head. Such
employee shall be compensated at the entrance rate of the salary grade for the
vacant department head position or one rate step above their present rate,
whichever is higher while so assigned.
('71 Code, § 18-56) (Ord. passed 6-14-67; Am. Ord. passed 12-27-67; Am. Ord.
passed 5-20-75; Am. Ord. passed 11-4-98; Am. Ord. passed 8-5-03; Am. Ord.
passed 6-3-25)
§ 33.062 PART-TIME EMPLOYEES.
   (A)   Any employee occupying a position designated as FLSA exempt who is
regularly employed on a continuing work schedule of less than 40 hours per week
shall be compensated by multiplying the base pay rate by the number of regular
hours worked per week.
   (B)   An employee occupying a position designated as FLSA non-exempt and who
is employed on a part-time basis shall be paid on an hourly basis.
   (C)   An employee who is employed to work 32 hours per week in a position
that does not have an end date, shall be required to participate in the
Contributory Retirement System unless the position is designated as a Group II
position. (Current part-time employees who are working less hours, and who are
currently contributing to the Contributory Retirement System, may continue to
so.) Said employees shall be eligible to participate in the health insurance
program upon retirement.
('71 Code, § 18-58) (Ord. passed 6-14-67; Am. Ord. passed 8-20-68; Am. Ord.
passed 11-4-98; Am. Ord. passed 8-1-06; Am. Ord. passed 10-3-06; Am. Ord.
passed 6-3-25)
§ 33.063 TEMPORARY AND SEASONAL EMPLOYEES.
   Any temporary or seasonal employees occupying classified positions shall be
employed initially at the salary grade for his/her classification. Upon
recommendation of a department head, a temporary or seasonal employee may
advance one step in his/her salary grade upon satisfactory completion of 2080
hours of work. Such advancement within a pay grade may continue until the
maximum step is reached unless interrupted by a period of absence from work for
a period of 12 months or longer. In such event, the employee shall be
reemployed at the minimum initial pay step for the class to which he/she is
assigned.
('71 Code, § 18-59) (Ord. passed 6-14-67; Am. Ord. passed 5-1-84; Am. Ord.
passed 8-6-02)
§ 33.064 EMPLOYEES INJURED IN THE LINE OF DUTY.
   (A)   Any employee of the city who sustains an injury which is compensable
under the Workers Compensation Law and who is entitled to receive compensation
benefits either by agreement of award shall, in addition to workers
compensation benefits, receive supplemental pay benefits from the city so that
combined worker compensation, wages, and supplemental pay benefits shall equal
80% of regular gross salary if the employee is covered under Social Security,
and 87% if the employee is not covered under Social Security. Regular gross
salary means gross wages as shown in the salary and wage schedules in the city
and the school department compensation plans. The Human Resources Department
shall make such adjustments as are necessary to ensure that employees will
actually receive the supplemental pay benefit provided above.
   (B)   Pending determination of workers' compensation eligibility, the
employee may receive sick leave benefits (including sick leave bank benefits,
if eligible). On a determination that the employee is eligible for workers'
compensation benefits, the employee shall repay to the city all sick leave
benefits the employee has received. Upon repayment sick leave credit shall be
restored.
   (C)   To the extent authorized by law, the city, during the period the
employee is receiving supplemental pay benefits, shall continue to contribute
to the employee's retirement system on the employees' regular gross salary
provided the employee maintains their contributions to the system.
   (D)   Disabled employees may authorize deductions first from this
supplemental portion of their pay and then from their workers' compensation
disability payments for medical insurance, credit union payments, bonds or
savings plans, retirement, and United Fund contributions, or other authorized
deductions, upon approved forms.
   (E)   In cases of third party liability the city shall be entitled to the
same lien and rights with respect to supplemental pay as are afforded employers
under the Workers Compensation Law. As a condition to receiving supplemental
pay benefits, the employee shall execute a written assignment of such lien and
rights to the city in such form as is required by the Risk Manager. The Risk
Manager is authorized to make third party lien settlements on behalf of the
city and the employee with respect to supplemental pay benefits, provided
however, that a full report shall be made to the Aldermanic Human Resources/
Insurance Committee.
   (F)   It shall be the duty of each department head to monitor the payment of
supplemental pay benefits to employees within their department. On
recommendation of the department head, the Risk Manager may require employees
receiving supplemental pay benefits to be examined by a physician or physician
chosen by the city at the city's expense at intervals not more frequent than
the requirements set forth in R.S.A. 281-A:38.
   (G)   In no event shall this section provide more than 52 weeks of
supplemental pay benefits for the injury or any recurrence thereof. Employees
unable to resume normal work duties after one year shall be examined by a
physician or physicians chosen by the city at the city's expense. If on such
examination the employee is found to be unable to fulfill the requirements of
their normal work duties, such employee shall be terminated.
   (H)   Any employee so terminated shall be entitled to a hearing before the
Aldermanic Human Resources/Insurance Committee. Requests by employees for a
hearing must be submitted to the Committee no later than 15 calendar days after
the receipt of notification of termination. The Aldermanic Human Resources/
Insurance Committee shall hold a hearing within 30 calendar days of the receipt
of the request.
   (I)   If the employee prevails in the hearing before the Aldermanic Human
Resources/ Insurance Committee, employment will not be terminated but in no
event shall the supplemental pay benefits exceed the maximum of 52 weeks of
cumulative benefits. The determination of the Aldermanic Human Resources/
Insurance Committee is subject to review by that Committee each 30 calendar
days. The decision of the Aldermanic Human Resources/Insurance Committee shall
be final.
('71 Code, § 18-47) (Ord. passed 7-6-82; Am. Ord. passed 11-7-90; Am. Ord.
passed 6-28-94; Am. Ord. passed 7-5-94; Am. Ord. passed 5-20-08; Am. Ord.
passed 4-2-19; Am. Ord. passed 6-3-25)
LEAVES OF ABSENCE
§ 33.075 HOLIDAYS.
   (A)   Compensation for absence on holidays. Any employees of the city,
except temporary employees and part-time employees who work less than half the
regular work schedule for their assigned classes, shall receive their regular
compensation for the following legal holidays or parts thereof or any other day
proclaimed as a holiday by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen, during which the
public offices of the city are closed:
      (1)   New Year's Day;
      (2)   Washington's Birthday;
      (3)   Civil Rights Day;
      (4)   Memorial Day;
      (5)   Juneteenth;
      (6)   Fourth of July;
      (7)   Labor Day;
      (8)   Columbus Day;
      (9)   Election Day;
      (10)   Veteran's Day;
      (11)   Thanksgiving Day;
      (12)   Christmas Day.
   (B)   Compensation for a holiday falling on a regularly scheduled day off.
Except for employees regularly scheduled to work on a shift basis, when a
holiday listed in division (A) of this section falls on Saturday, the preceding
Friday shall be observed as the legal holiday, and when the legal holiday falls
on Sunday, the following Monday shall be observed as the legal holiday.
   (C)   Compensation for work performed on holidays. Any permanent full-time
employee, or permanent part-time employee who regularly works one-half or more
of the regular schedule for their assigned class, who is required to perform
work or to render services on one of the holidays listed in division (A) of
this section shall be compensated therefor as follows:
      (1)   Any employee in any class of positions, except those in the labor
and trades group, shall receive their regular pay for the holiday payment at
straight time for all hours worked on a holiday.
      (2)   Any employee in any class of positions in the labor and trades
group only shall receive their regular pay for the holiday plus payment at time
and one-half their regular rate of pay for all hours worked on a holiday.
   (D)   Forfeiture of holiday pay. Any employee shall be entitled to holiday
pay if the employee works the day preceding such holiday and on the next
regular work day following such holiday, but not otherwise except for an
excused absence. An excused absence shall be defined to include, but shall not
be limited to, preapproved vacation time, preapproved personal day, bereavement
leave, military leave or illness (if validated by a note from a medical
provider's office).
   (E)   Reserve Officers. Individuals who are hired to work as Reserve
Officers (compensated as Patrolmen) shall not be entitled to holiday pay.
('71 Code, § 18-48) (Ord. passed 6-14-67; Am. Ord. passed 12-27-67; Am. Ord.
passed 1-7-92; Am. Ord. passed 8-6-02; Am. Ord. passed 10-4-22; Am. Ord. passed
6-3-25)
§ 33.076 SPECIAL LEAVE.
   (A)   In addition to other leaves authorized by this subchapter, a
department head shall be authorized to grant an employee up to 90 days without
pay in a rotating year. Any additional requests for time off without pay during
the rotating year shall require the approval of the full Board of Mayor and
Aldermen.
   (B)   The Board of Mayor and Aldermen may authorize special leaves of
absence with or without pay for any period or periods not to exceed one
calendar year for the following purposes: Attendance at college, university or
business school for the purpose of training in subjects relating to the work of
the employee and which will benefit the employee and the city service; urgent
personal business requiring the employee's attention for an extended period,
such as settling estates, liquidating a business, serving on a jury and
attending court as a witness; and for purposes other than the above that are
deemed beneficial to the city service.
   (C)   The city shall pay an employee absent for jury service the difference
between his regular city pay and the payment he receives for jury service.
('71 Code, § 18-49) (Ord. passed 6-14-67; Am. Ord. passed 11-14-06)
§ 33.077 BEREAVEMENT LEAVE.
   (A)   Any permanent full-time or permanent part-time employee who works half
or more of the regular work schedule for the assigned class shall be excused
from work for not more than five work days with pay in the event of the death
of their immediate family member. "Immediate family member" for bereavement
purposes shall include: spouse or employee's significant other (who resides
with the employee), children (to include stepchildren, children-in-law, foster
children), parents (to include step-parents, parents-in-law), siblings (to
include step-siblings, half-siblings), grandparents, grandchildren, legal
guardian/ward, niece, nephew, aunt, uncle or a member of the employee's
immediate household. This definition may be expanded to include other persons
at the discretion of a requesting employee's supervisor on a case-by-case
basis.
   (B)   Under extenuating circumstances, two additional days with pay may be
granted under division (A) above, with written approval of the department head;
provided, however, such days are to be charged to the employee's accrued sick
leave. If sick leave is used for additional bereavement purposes, it shall not
be considered as sick leave for city purposes of monitoring sick leave usage.
   (C)   Employees shall be granted no more hours per day than their regular
working shift for bereavement leave and under no circumstances shall
bereavement leave be paid on an overtime basis.
   (D)   If bereavement leave is not to be taken at the time directly following
the death, employees are expected to notify their supervisor of the need to
delay such time off to allow for proper staffing. Bereavement leave may be
taken as needed from the time of death up to two weeks after the funeral/
memorial service, and does not need to be taken consecutively. In all
circumstances, bereavement leave must be taken no later than two weeks
following the date of the funeral/memorial service.
   (E)   Employees on a leave of absence (to include leave pursuant to FMLA,
PFML, ADA or a workers' compensation claim) are not eligible for bereavement
leave pay during the period of time such employee is on a leave of absence.
   (F)   In the event the death for which bereavement leave is taken occurs
during an employee's previously approved vacation period, the employee may
substitute the applicable amount of bereavement leave (in lieu of using the
applicable amount of vacation leave) during such vacation period.
   (G)   Employees may be required to submit official notice or medical
verification to substantiate the bereavement leave request.
('71 Code, § 18-50) (Ord. passed 12-27-67; Am. Ord. passed 9-1-81; Am. Ord.
passed 11-4-98; Am. Ord. passed 6-3-25)
§ 33.078 ABSENCE WITHOUT LEAVE.
   An employee without any leave time may not be absent unless such absence is
approved by the department head or their designee. All unauthorized and
unreported absences shall be considered absence without leave and deduction of
pay shall be made for the period of absence. Such absence may be the grounds
for disciplinary action, up to and including termination.
('71 Code, § 18-51) (Ord. passed 6-14-67; Am. Ord. passed 6-3-25)
§ 33.079 VACATIONS.
   (A)   Vacation eligibility.
      (1)   All employees in the city service, except part-time employees who
work less than one-half the regular work week, temporary, seasonal, and school-
term employees, shall be eligible for vacation leave with pay.
      (2)   Vacation credits for non-affiliated employees shall accrue during
the first six months of employment, and may be used with prior approval of the
department head (or designee). If an employee is terminated for any cause
during the first six months of employment, he shall not be eligible for payment
for any unused vacation credits.
   (B)   Credit for temporary employment. Employees who are initially employed
in a full-time temporal status and who are subsequently appointed to a
permanent status, without a break in service, shall be allowed credit for the
time served in the temporary status towards accrual of vacation leave benefits.
   (C)   Vacation leave credit shall accrue for eligible non-affiliated
employees on a weekly basis, as follows:
      (1)   First nine years. 2.31 hours per week for each completed week of
service, continuing at such rate until the completion of nine years of
continuous service.
      (2)   Ten through 14 years. 3.08 hours per week for each completed week
of service after the completion of nine years of continuous service, and
continuing thereafter at such rate until the completion of 14 years of
continuous service.
      (3)   Fifteen through 19 years. 3.85 hours per week for each completed
week of service after the completion of 14 years of continuous service, and
continuing thereafter at such a rate until the completion of 19 years of
continuous service.
      (4)   Twenty or more years. 4.62 hours per week for each completed week
of service after the completion of 19 years of continuous service and
thereafter.
      (5)   Vacation for part-time employees shall be pro-rated and accrue on a
basis of the portion of 40 hours worked per week. Maximum accrual will be on 40
hours per week.
      (6)   The practice of crediting the employee with 40 hours of vacation
upon change of accrual rate is no longer authorized.
      (7)   No vacation shall accrue on hours in excess of 40 hours per week.
      (8)   The rate and schedule of vacation accruals for affiliated employees
shall be governed by the applicable collective bargaining agreement.
   (D)   Use of vacation for other purposes. Absence on account of sickness,
injury, or disability in excess of that hereinafter authorized for such purpose
may, at the request of the employee and within the discretion of the department
head, be charged against earned vacation leave allowance.
   (E)   Scheduling of vacations. Each department or office head shall keep
records of vacation leave allowances and shall schedule vacation leaves with
particular regard to the seniority of employees, to accord with operating
requirements and, insofar as possible, with the request of the employee.
Vacations shall be scheduled at the discretion of the department heads to
provide the least disruption of departmental operations.
   (F)   Vacation pay. Vacation pay shall be based upon the regular daily rate
of pay for salaried employees. Fire Department employees' daily rate shall be
computed at one-fifth of a regular week's pay. Hourly rated employees shall be
paid at their regular straight time basis, not to exceed eight hours of pay for
a vacation day. No vacation benefits shall be paid at time and one-half.
   (G)   Legal holidays. In the event a paid legal holiday as prescribed in
this section falls during the week an employee is on vacation such holiday
shall not be charged against the vacation time, except for police and fire
personnel who are granted extra pay in lieu of taking holidays.
   (H)   Maximum vacation accrual. Vacation credits may accrue to two times the
employee's annual earned vacation with the following maximums: an employee who
earns 15 days of vacation per year shall have no more than 30 days earned
vacation to their credit at any time; and an employee who earns 20 days of
vacation per year shall have no more than 40 days earned vacation to their
credit at any one time; and an employee who earns 30 days of vacation per year
shall have no more than 60 days earned vacation to their credit at any one
time.
   (I)   On separation from city service, all unused accrued vacation leave up
to a maximum of 400 hours shall be payable to the employee. Upon the death of
the employee all unused accrued vacation leave up to a maximum of 400 hours
shall be payable to the designated beneficiary.
   (J)   Reserve Officers. Individuals who are hired to work as Reserve
Officers (compensated as Patrolmen) shall not be entitled to accrue any
vacation time whatsoever.
('71 Code, § 18-52) (Ord. passed 9-2-58; Am. Ord. passed 6-14-67; Am. Ord.
passed 7-3-73; Am. Ord. passed 11-4-98; Am. Ord. passed 6-17-99; Am. Ord.
passed 12-7-99; Am. Ord. passed 8-6-02; Am. Ord. passed 2-1-05; Am. Ord. passed
10-18-05; Am. Ord. passed 12-6-05; Am. Ord. passed 1-2-07; Am. Ord. passed 12-
18-12; Am. Ord. passed 1-8-19; Am. Ord. passed 12-20-22; Am. Ord. passed 6-3-
25)
§ 33.080 MILITARY OR OTHER SIMILAR SERVICE.
   (A)   Any employee who holds a position that is expected to continue
indefinitely or for a significant period of time or an official of the city who
is also a member of the National Guard or of a reserve component of the
uniformed forces of the United States as defined per USERRA, shall be entitled
to "military" leave when such duty is in conflict with the employee's or
official's regular work schedule. Employees and officials shall be entitled to
20 days of paid military leave per training year (October 1 to September 30) to
engage in temporary active duty or to attend military funerals when such duty
is in conflict with the employee's or official's work schedule.
   (B)   Under the Federal Uniform Services Employment and Reemployment Rights
Act of 1994 (USERRA) and related Acts, any reservist, service member or member
of the National Guard who is returning from active duty whose cumulative
absences for applicable service do not exceed five years or less, and possesses
an honorary or general discharge, shall be guaranteed a position equivalent to
the position that the employee vacated to perform the applicable duty unless
the re-employment causes undue hardship to the city pursuant to U.S.C. 4321(d).
To be eligible for re-employment, the reservist, services member or member of
the National Guard shall have:
      (1)   Been employed with the city in a position for which there was no
reasonable expectation of an end date or the position was expected to continue
for a significant period of time;
      (2)   Satisfactorily completed the period of applicable duty and possess
a certificate to that effect;
      (3)   Met the qualifications to perform the duties of the position or, if
unable to qualify, met the qualifications to perform the duties of a comparable
position; and
      (4)   Returned to work within one of the following time parameters:
         (a)   For service of less than 31 days, the employee shall return at
the next regularly scheduled work day on the first full day after release from
duty taking into account safe travel time plus an eight-hour rest period;
         (b)   For service of more than 30 days but less than 180 days, the
employee shall return to work within 14 days of release from active duty; or
         (c)   For service of more than 180 days, the employee shall report to
work within 90 days of release from military active duty.
   (C)   Upon expiration of the 20 annual days of paid military leave, an
employee may, but is not required to, use the employee's accrued vacation or
personal leave to receive pay during a period of military leave. If the
employee chooses not to use accrued vacation or personal leave, all such
remaining military leave granted pursuant to USERRA shall be unpaid.
('71 Code, § 18-53) (Ord. passed 11-7-01; Am. Ord. passed 10-3-06; Am. Ord.
passed 5-7-13; Am. Ord. passed 8-2-22; Am. Ord. passed 6- 3-2025)
§ 33.081 SICK LEAVE.
   (A)   All permanent employees in the city service, except part-time
employees who work less than one-half of the regular work week, temporary, and
seasonal employees, shall be eligible for sick leave with pay.
   (B)   Any unused sick leave credit may be accumulated up to a maximum of 120
work days.
   (C)   Any employee absent from work on legal holidays, during sick leave,
vacation, for disability arising from injuries sustained in the course of their
employment, for all authorized leaves of absence with pay and for authorized
leaves without pay for not over ten days in any one calendar year shall
continue to accumulate sick leave at the regularly prescribed rate during such
absence as though they were on duty, subject to the maximum limitation herein
provided.
   (D)   Any employee eligible for sick leave with pay may use such sick leave,
upon approval of their department or office head, for absence due to his or her
own illness, injury; the illness or injury of the employee's spouse, child, or
parent; or the illness or injury of a blood relative or ward residing in the
same household; or for the exposure to contagious disease. An employee on sick
leave shall inform their immediate supervisor of the fact and the reason
therefor as soon as possible. Failure to do so within a reasonable time may be
cause for denial of pay for the period of absence. In the case of a pandemic, a
doctor's certificate may not be required for a period or periods of more than
three work days.
   (E)   Absences for a fraction or part of a day that are chargeable to sick
leave in accordance with these provisions shall be charged proportionally in an
amount not smaller than one hour.
   (F)   During periods of absence for approved paid sick leave the employee
shall be entitled to full pay for such period at the regular rate of
compensation, provided, however, that hourly employees shall be compensated on
the basis of straight time pay not to exceed eight hours per day and not to
exceed 40 hours per week. No sick leave benefits shall be paid on the basis of
time and one-half.
   (G)   (1)   On separation from city service, all sick leave credits shall be
cancelled, except in case of retirement, duty disability retirement or death
while in active service. Accrued sick leave shall be paid to the employee or
their beneficiary under such conditions of separation from service as
prescribed in division (G)(4).
      (2)   Any employee who becomes a member of the contributory retirement
system pursuant to Laws 1973, 218:3 II shall, on separation from service, be
entitled to be paid the same accrued sick leave credits to which he would have
been entitled had he remained under the prior pension plan.
      (3)   On separation from service other than by retirement, duty
disability retirement, death, or circumstances provided above, any employee
with 15 consecutive years of city service, provided separation is other than by
discharge or resignation in lieu of discharge, shall be paid accrued sick leave
credits as set forth in division (G)(4).
      (4)   Payment for accrued sick leave credits shall be paid as follows:
         (a)   Upon death (while employed by the city) or paid retirement, all
accrued sick leave up to a maximum of 80 days, plus one-quarter of the balance
of the days accrued over 80 but not more than 120 days, shall be payable to the
employee or the designated beneficiary; and
         (b)   On separation from service under satisfactory conditions and 15
years of continuous service, employees may be paid up to 60 days of accrued
sick leave.
   (H)   Individuals who are hired to work as Reserve Officers (compensated as
Patrolmen) shall not be entitled to accrue any sick time whatsoever.
('71 Code, § 18-54) (Ord. passed 6-14-67; Am. Ord. passed 12-21-71; Am. Ord.
passed 4-15-80; Am. Ord. passed 4-7-87; Am. Ord. passed 11-4-98; Am. Ord.
passed 9-5-00; Am. Ord. passed 8-6-02; Am. Ord. passed 8-6-02; Am. Ord. passed
2-1-05; Am. Ord. passed 12-7-10; Am. Ord. passed 3-15-20; Am. Ord. passed 11-
10- 20; Am. Ord. passed 12-20-22; Am. Ord. passed 7-2-24; Am. Ord. 6-3-25)
§ 33.082 VACATION AND SICK LEAVE PAYMENT FOR DISABILITY-RELATED DEATH OR
RETIREMENT.
   (A)   Any permanent employee of the city who has (1) completed 20 years of
service; and (2) who retires from active service due to disability received
from injuries in the actual performance of their duties shall be allowed leave
with full pay equal to the number of vacation and/or sick leave days the
employee has accrued as of the date of injury or illness necessitating the
disability retirement.
   (B)   Where an employee of the city who, in any year has died while in the
actual performance of their duties for the city, a sum equal to the number of
vacation and/or sick leave days the employee has accrued as of the date of
death shall be paid to their estate.
('71 Code, § 18-55) (Ord. passed 4-15-69; Am. Ord. 6-3-25)
WORKER'S COMPENSATION AND INSURANCE
§ 33.090 ALDERMANIC HUMAN RESOURCES AND INSURANCE COMMITTEE.
   The Aldermanic Human Resources and Insurance Committee shall conduct a
continuing study of the city's worker's compensation and insurance needs. The
Committee shall from time to time recommend changes in the city's worker's
compensation and insurance programs to the Board of Mayor and Aldermen. The
Committee shall, to the extent necessary, confer with the city's insurance
consultant for guidance in the formulation of appropriate worker's compensation
and insurance programs.
('71 Code, § 2-150) (Ord. passed 2-7-78; Am. Ord. passed 11-4-98)
§ 33.091 RISK MANAGEMENT PROGRAM.
   (A)   A risk management program for the city is hereby adopted for the
protection of persons and property from accidental injury or damages through
the avoidance or reduction of risks over which the city has control, for the
protection of the city and its public officials against catastrophic financial
consequences of accidental losses which do occur, and for the containment of
employee health and life benefit costs.
   (B)   The program shall address and administer the following specific
objectives:
      (1)   Risk identification and evaluation. Identifying and measuring all
risks of accidental loss and evaluating the alternate methods of treating such
risks, including elimination, reduction, self-assumption, contractual transfer
and insurance.
      (2)   Safety and loss prevention. Maintenance of overall responsibility
for establishing, implementing and monitoring an integrated safety and loss
prevention program.
      (3)   Risk management information systems. Development and maintenance of
information systems for tracking asset information and values, loss data,
insurance premiums, deductible costs, uninsured losses, and all risk related
costs.
      (4)   Claims management. Establishment and implementation of a loss
reporting, claims processing, and follow-up system so as to ensure prompt
notification of loss and insurance reimbursement where applicable.
      (5)   Self-insured workers' compensation program administration.
Administration of the city's workers' compensation program in full compliance
with state law and in a manner which will minimize the city's costs.
('71 Code, § 2-151) (Ord. passed 2-7-78; Am. Ord. passed 12-17-85)
§ 33.092 OFFICE OF RISK MANAGEMENT.
   The Office of Risk Management under the direction of a Risk Manager is
established within the office of City Solicitor.
('71 Code, § 2-152) (Ord. passed 2-7-78; Am. Ord. passed 12-17-85; Am. Ord.
passed 6-27-94)
§ 33.093 DUTIES OF CITY SOLICITOR AS RISK MANAGER.
   (A)   The position of Risk Manager is hereby transferred to the office of
the City Solicitor.
   (B)   The City Solicitor acting as Risk Manager shall be responsible for the
risk management program and shall be head of the Office of Risk Management. The
duties of the Risk Manager shall include but not be limited to the following:
      (1)   The Risk Manager shall be responsible for the management of such
worker's compensation and insurance programs as the Board of Mayor and Aldermen
has adopted.
      (2)   The Risk Manager shall purchase insurance for the city and its
departments as directed by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen and shall be
responsible for the expenditure of all funds appropriated to the Office of Risk
Management.
      (3)   He shall carefully examine and audit all worker's compensation
claims and expenses; no payment shall be made or expense allowed until approved
by the Risk Manager.
      (4)   The Risk Manager shall be responsible for maintaining a record of
all worker's compensation and insurance claims in which the city is involved.
      (5)   The Risk Manager shall establish procedures for processing and
handling writs, petitions, notices, and other legal documents.
      (6)   It shall be the Risk Manager's responsibility (after discussion
with the city's insurance consultant, if necessary) to insure that all notices
of claims, writs, petitions, legal notices, accident reports, and other
documents are forwarded to such appropriate insurance carrier, to the Labor
Commissioner, to the city's worker's compensation service company or to such
other agency or individual as may be required by regulations promulgated
hereunder, by law or by contract.
      (7)   The Risk Manager shall establish standards and procedures
respecting the conduct of city employees who are involved in accidents or other
occurrences which may result in liability to the city.
      (8)   He shall attend all meetings of the Aldermanic Human Resources and
Insurance Committee and shall submit such information, statistics, or reports
as the Committee may direct.
      (9)   The Risk Manager, on the advice of the insurance consultant or
others, may recommend changes in the city's workmen's compensation and
insurance programs to the Aldermanic Human Resources and Insurance Committee.
      (10) The Risk Manager, on consultation where appropriate with other
counsel for the city, the insurance consultant, and others, is authorized to
settle claims and suits against the city in matters arising under this
subchapter subject to such guidelines as may be established by the Committee on
Insurance.
('71 Code, § 2-154) (Ord. passed 2-7-78; Am. Ord. passed 12-17-85; Am. Ord.
passed 10-15-91; Am. Ord. passed 6-27-94; Am. Ord. passed 11-4-98)
§ 33.094 INSURING PERSONAL PROPERTY OF EMPLOYEES.
   (A)   The city shall not be liable for the loss of any personal property of
its employees. The personal property of employees is not included under the
city's insurance coverage; therefore, all employees are expected to maintain
the proper insurance coverage for their personal property.
   (B)   Exceptions. Notwithstanding the above, the city recognizes that 16
employees of the Highway Department, one employee of the Fire Department, and
one employee of the Airport Authority are required as a term of their
employment to provide their own hand tools. In those instances, the city shall
pay a yearly allowance to enable the employees to obtain insurance coverage for
their hand tools. To obtain the allowance, each employee must provide his
department head with a complete inventory of all his personal tools used on the
job. The allowance shall be $25 per each $1,000 worth of tools up to a maximum
allowance of $150 per year.
('71 Code, § 2-154.1) (Ord. passed 6-19-84; Am. Ord. passed 11-4-98)
Cross-reference:
   
Chief Negotiator and Contract Administrator, see §§ 30.60 through 30.62
CITY OFFICERS AND DEPARTMENT HEADS
§ 33.100 RESIDENCY REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The Board of Mayor and Aldermen has determined that emergency
situations require that city officers and department heads as defined by the
City Charter be near to their place of employment for the public good.
   (B)   All city officers and department heads as defined by the City Charter
shall reside within the boundaries of the City of Manchester within 180 days of
their appointment, except as otherwise provided in this section.
   (C)   The provisions of this section relating to residency shall not apply
to city officers or department heads as defined by the City Charter who reside
outside of the City of Manchester as of the effective date of these provisions.
(Ord. passed 10-6-09)
CHAPTER 34: CITY POLICIES
Section
General Provisions
   
34.01   Policies of Board of Mayor and Aldermen
   
34.02   Processing by Policy Review Committee
   
34.03   Adoption by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen
   
34.04   Maintenance of buildings and clocks
   
34.05   Returned checks
Surplus City Property
   
34.15   Definitions
   
34.16   Policy statement
   
34.17   Requests to be in writing
   
34.18   Committee on Lands and Buildings
   
34.19   Assessors
   
34.20   Director of Planning and Community Development and Tax Collector
   
34.21   Manner of sale
   
34.22   Report of Committee on Lands and Buildings
   
34.23   Board of Mayor and Aldermen
   
34.24   Property list
   
34.25   Leases
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 34.01 POLICIES OF BOARD OF MAYOR AND ALDERMEN.
   Proposals for the adoption of policies by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen
authorized by
Charter, § 8.01 may be introduced by a member at any meeting of the Board of
Mayor and Aldermen. Unless otherwise ordered, such proposals shall be referred
to the Policy Review Committee for processing as hereinafter provided. Except
in emergency situations, policies shall become effective only after being
processed through the Policy Review Committee. If the Board of Mayor and
Aldermen determines an emergency exists, the policy may become effective
immediately and in such case the policy in question shall be referred to the
Policy Review Committee for processing and recommendation.
('71 Code, § 2-190) (Ord. passed 4-20-93)
§ 34.02 PROCESSING BY POLICY REVIEW COMMITTEE.
   In processing proposals referred by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen, the
Policy Review Committee shall:
   (A)   Consider the fiscal impact of the proposed policy;
   (B)   Identify the legal basis for adoption of the proposal;
   (C)   Solicit comments on the proposal from the public, city officials, or
others as deemed appropriate or as ordered by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen;
   (D)   Develop the proposal in language and format appropriate for inclusion
in the manual;
   (E)   Address other pertinent considerations; and
   (F)   Prepare a report of its findings and recommendations for the Board of
Mayor and Aldermen.
('71 Code, § 2-191) (Ord. passed 4-20-93)
§ 34.03 ADOPTION BY THE BOARD OF MAYOR AND ALDERMEN.
   Reports of the Policy Review Committee on referred proposals shall be
expeditiously submitted to the Board of Mayor and Aldermen and processed in the
same manner as the reports of standing committees. If adopted, such proposal
shall be enrolled in the manual by the City Clerk. Unless otherwise ordered,
such policies shall take effect on the first day of the month following
adoption. The City Clerk shall forward a copy of all adopted policies to all
city departments and officers.
('71 Code, § 2-192) (Ord. passed 4-20-93)
§ 34.04 MAINTENANCE OF BUILDINGS AND CLOCKS.
   (A)   The Committee on Lands and Buildings shall have the care of all
buildings belonging to the city except the police station, fire stations and
schoolhouses. The Committee shall also take charge and care of all tower clocks
and other clocks of the city.
   (B)   The Public Works Director or his designee shall attend all meetings of
the Committee on Lands and Buildings and shall make periodic reports as
required by the Committee of all work in progress and on the condition of all
city buildings and facilities under his charge.
('71 Code, § 2-8) (Am. Ord. passed 10-11-77; Am. Ord. passed 12-7-99)
Statutory reference:
   Maintenance of city property, see R.S.A. 47:5
§ 34.05 RETURNED CHECKS.
   Any person who issues an uncollectible check to the city shall be charged
the maximum fee allowed by law plus all protest, bank, and legal fees in
addition to the amount of the check.
(Ord. passed 6-21-94)
SURPLUS CITY PROPERTY
§ 34.15 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APPRAISAL. A written opinion of market value.
   PUBLIC SALE. Disposal by public auction, advertised sealed bids, or some
other open market procedure which provides the public an opportunity to
participate.
   SURPLUS CITY PROPERTY. Real estate owned by the city which is not required
for municipal purposes either presently or in the foreseeable future.
('71 Code, § 23½-1) (Ord. passed 4-4-89)
§ 34.16 POLICY STATEMENT.
   It is the policy of the city to return surplus city property to the tax
rolls and to obtain fair market value on the sale of all such property. This
section applies to tax-deeded property to the extent consistent with state law.
('71 Code, § 23½-2) (Ord. passed 4-4-89)
§ 34.17 REQUESTS TO BE IN WRITING.
   All requests relative to the purchase or sale of city real estate shall be
in writing addressed to either the Board of Mayor and Aldermen or the Committee
on Lands and Buildings. All such communications shall be placed on the next
aldermanic agenda for information purposes.
('71 Code, § 23½-3) (Ord. passed 4-4-89)
§ 34.18 COMMITTEE ON LANDS AND BUILDINGS.
   It shall be the responsibility of the Committee on Lands and Buildings to
process requests relative to the purchase or sale of city real estate in
accordance with the requirements of this subchapter and to make appropriate
reports and recommendations to the Board of Mayor and Aldermen.
('71 Code, § 23½-4) (Ord. passed 4-4-89)
§ 34.19 ASSESSORS.
   On receipt of requests relative to purchase or sale of city real estate, the
City Clerk on behalf of the Committee on Lands and Buildings shall immediately
refer the same to the assessors for an appraisal. On recommendations of the
assessors, the Committee may order an outside fee appraisal.
('71 Code, § 23½-5) (Ord. passed 4-4-89)
§ 34.20 DIRECTOR OF PLANNING AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT AND TAX COLLECTOR.
   The City Clerk shall likewise refer such requests to the Director of
Planning and Community Development for study and recommendations to the
Committee. The Planning and Community Development Department shall, as
appropriate, consult with other departments and city agencies. In addition,
requests relative to tax-deeded property shall be referred to the Tax
Collector.
('71 Code, § 23½-6) (Ord. passed 4-4-89; Am. Ord. passed 2-7-09)
§ 34.21 MANNER OF SALE.
   All such surplus city property shall be disposed of by public sale unless
otherwise ordered by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen on recommendation of the
Committee on Lands and Buildings in accordance with the provisions of § 34.22
of this subchapter. Disposition other than by public sale is authorized only
where such is in the best interest of the city, is required by justice or if
other good reason exists.
('71 Code, § 23½-7) (Ord. passed 4-4-89)
§ 34.22 REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON LANDS AND BUILDINGS.
   (A)   Upon completion of its review of requests relative to the purchase or
sale of city real estate, the Committee on Lands and Buildings shall report and
make recommendations to the Board of Mayor and Aldermen on the following:
      (1)   The market value of the property as reported by the assessors.
      (2)   Whether the property is surplus to the needs of the city including
the Director of Planning and Community Development's recommendations.
      (3)   The method, terms, and conditions of the sale including a minimum
bid price where appropriate.
   (B)   If the recommended method of disposal is other than by public sale,
the Committee shall specify the reason or reasons for such recommendation. The
report shall address such other considerations as the Committee deems
appropriate.
('71 Code, § 23½-8) (Ord. passed 4-4-89; Am. Ord. passed 2-7-09)
§ 34.23 BOARD OF MAYOR AND ALDERMEN.
   On receipt of the report of the Committee on Lands and Buildings, the Board
of Mayor and Aldermen subject to the requirements of this chapter shall
determine whether the property should be disposed of and the manner of sale.
The Mayor shall be authorized to convey the property by deed.
('71 Code, § 23½-9) (Ord. passed 4-4-89)
§ 34.24 PROPERTY LIST.
   The Director of Planning and Community Development shall compile and
maintain a list of all property owned by the city. The list shall contain a
detailed description of each parcel and, such other pertinent information as is
deemed appropriate by the Director or by the Committee on Lands and Buildings.
Parcels having no value may be omitted or deleted from the list with the
approval of the Committee.
('71 Code, § 23½-10) (Ord. passed 4-4-89; Am. Ord. passed 2-7-09)
§ 34.25 LEASES.
   This subchapter shall apply to all leases with terms of five or more years.
('71 Code, § 23½-11) (Ord. passed 4-4-89)
CHAPTER 35: FINANCES
Section
Finance Officer
   
35.015   Department established
   
35.016   Department head
   
35.017   Duties of Finance Officer
   
35.018   [Reserved]
Treasury
   
35.020   City Treasury depository of funds
   
35.021   Deposits
   
35.022   Making payment from treasury
   
35.023   Collection of unpaid accounts receivable
   
35.024   Payment of taxes, fees, and charges by credit card
Budget Procedures
   
35.030   Committee on Finance: Appointment, composition, and duties
   
35.031   Committee on Accounts
   
35.032   Revenue stabilization reserve account
   
35.033   Special revenue reserve account
   
35.034   Tax rate stabilization reserve account
   
35.035   Risk retention reserve accounts
   
35.0351   Severance reserve account
   
35.0352   Health services reserve account
   
35.036   Arts and cultural events reserve account
   
35.037   Geographic information system special revenue fund
   
35.0371   Land use change tax special revenue fund
   
35.038   Roadway improvement reserve account
   
35.0381   Winter weather reserve account
   
35.039   Tax deeded property reserve account
Reporting Violations
   
35.040   Mayor to investigate and report violations
Cross-reference:
   
Trustees of trust funds, see §§ 32.010 - 32.014
   
Taxation, see Ch. 36
Statutory reference:
   Financial responsibilities of cities, R.S.A. 47:6
FINANCE OFFICER
§ 35.015 DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED.
   Pursuant to
Charter § 3.02 there is established a Department of Finance.
(Ord. passed 11-4-98)
§ 35.016 DEPARTMENT HEAD.
   The department head shall be the Finance Officer who shall be appointed as
provided by
Charter § 3.07.
(Ord. passed 11-4-98)
§ 35.017 DUTIES OF FINANCE OFFICER.
   In addition to the powers, duties and functions otherwise vested by law in
the Finance Officer, he shall:
   (A)   Develop and implement, subject to approval by the Board of Mayor and
Aldermen, a long-range, six-year financial plan for the city.
   (B)   Attend all meetings of the Board of Mayor and Aldermen, answer
questions and give information relative to financial operations on the city and
its departments.
   (C)   Furnish to any aldermanic committee such aid and information regarding
the financial affairs of the city as it may request.
   (D)   Receive cooperation from all departments in providing information
which he shall request in order to carry out his statutory functions.
   (E)   Direct the city's fiscal account systems, using generally accepted
accounting principles and taking full advantage of all benefits of automated
data processing applications, to the end that the fiscal affairs of all city
departments will be adequately and uniformly serviced and that periodic
financial and management reports will be available to serve the various needs
of all city departments and the Board of Mayor and Aldermen in their decision-
making processes and investors.
   (F)   Develop, administer and, as necessary, revise an integrated system of
governmental cost accounting and financial reporting which accurately and
systematically accounts for all revenues, receipts, resources and property of
the city and each of its departments; and records information about the
financial activities of the city and its city departments necessary to compare
and control expenditures and commitments, within budgets and appropriations;
and from which it shall be possible to obtain accurate annual and interim
monthly and quarterly financial statements and other reports which present
fairly and with full disclosure the financial position and results of
operations of the city in conformance with generally accepted accounting
principles; and which makes it possible to determine and demonstrate compliance
with finance related legal and contractual provisions, including federal
grants, to which the city or any of its departments are subject.
   (G)   Review all city contracts for budget control.
   (H)   Pre-audit claims to be presented for the issuance of warrants and
certify to the Board of Mayor and Aldermen that such are just and proper claims
against the city and within appropriations.
   (I)   Prepare appropriation warrants and schedules of pre-audited manifests
supporting the same, for consideration and execution by the Board of Mayor and
Aldermen.
   (J)   Make such transfers of appropriation items within department budgets
and between non-departmental and/or departmental line items, when so authorized
by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen, as may be necessary or desirable to best
carry out the purpose of such department or functional unit.
   (K)   Make use of the most advanced and economical techniques within the
capabilities of the city's data processing system in carrying out his duties.
   (L)   Control all payment of monies into the City Treasury.
   (M)   Complete a comprehensive annual financial report concerning the
preceding fiscal year that details the financial condition and operation of the
city during that period in a manner consistent with generally accepted
accounting principles not later than 90 days after the close of the fiscal
year, unless the Board of Mayor and Aldermen, for good cause, shall extend such
period. Said report shall subsequently be audited by an independent certified
public accountant. Said audit shall be conducted in accordance with prevailing
standards and practices of governmental auditing specified by authoritative
national standard setting bodies.
   (N)   Provide coordination of all department financial information in order
to assure the compatibility, continuity and integrity of such information.
   (O)   Advise the Director of Information Systems with regard to planning,
management and operation of all internal department financial information
systems.
   (P)   Carry on a continuing analytical research and planning program in the
field of governmental financial management in order to provide for the most
effective and efficient information management systems possible.
   (Q)   Conduct a continuous study of financial operation, needs and resources
of the city and compile all information necessary for the preparation of the
budget so that each successive budget cycle shall have ready access to all
information contained in prior budgets.
   (R)   Assist the Mayor or his designee to compile a tentative budget and
budget document.
   (S)   Cooperate with the Department of Planning in long-range, financial
planning to meet the capital needs of the city.
   (T)   Provide information and reports to the Mayor or his designee, as the
Mayor or Board of Mayor and Aldermen shall request, in order to effectively
administer the budget.
   (U)   Consult with the respective department heads, relative to the
establishment, supervision and maintenance of uniform and effective business
records, business practices, and business management, and provide the necessary
direction to ensure that all financial management procedures and requirements
are complied with.
   (V)   At the request of the Board of Mayor and Aldermen, prepare analytical
reports of city programs and functions. Examinations will be conducted and
reports prepared in accordance with standards of governmental auditing and
program evaluation specified by authoritative national standard setting bodies.
Reports shall contain analysis, appraisals, comments and recommendations
relating to the accuracy and competence of accounting, financial, and
management procedures in use.
   (W) Monitor department activities based on priorities established by budget
program and statute in the following areas: revenues, expenses, staffing, space
utilization, fleet operations, and such other public service needs as the Board
of Mayor and Aldermen shall direct.
   (X)   Conduct such investigations, analyses, audits, or research into the
financial activities and condition or the financial management procedures, or
any specific area thereof, of any department for the information of the Board
of Mayor and Aldermen. In all such investigation analysis, or research, the
Finance Officer shall have the power to examine whatever accounts or records
of, or property or things of value held by said department that the Finance
Officer deems useful to said investigation, analysis, or research, and shall
conduct such investigation, analysis, or research in accordance with
governmental auditing standards as promulgated by the Comptroller General of
the United States.
   (Y)   Provide technical staff assistance in the areas of finance, accounting
and budgeting to aldermanic committees and such other committees, including
joint committees, as the Board of Mayor and Aldermen may from time to time
designate, upon the request of any such committees.
   (Z)   Prepare fiscal notes and amendments to fiscal notes on all proposed
labor contracts. Prepare fiscal impact statements requested by the Board of
Mayor and Aldermen.
   (AA)   Analyze and manage short-term and long-term cash flow requirements.
   (AB)   Maximize the returns on city investments, considering safety, cash
flow, liquidity, and risk.
   (AC)   Coordinate and monitor cash needs for investment and debt activity.
   (AD)   Develop a long-term debt plan, including criteria for the issuance of
debt and an evaluation of how much total debt is justified.
   (AE)   Prepare an investment policy covering the management of all city
funds for approval by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen, annually.
   (AF)   Evaluate revenue projections for each proposed revenue bond issue and
report findings to the Board of Mayor and Aldermen.
   (AG)   Advise the Board of Mayor and Aldermen on all investment and debt
matters, including but not limited to new bond issues, the status of city debt,
and the status of city investments.
   (AH)   Report quarterly or more often if required to the Board of Mayor and
Aldermen the total amount of funds in the City Treasury, the amount belonging
to each separate fund, a summary of the funds on deposit and the investments
held, and the interest income earned thereon, and any information pertaining to
the duties of his office he may think proper or that the Board of Mayor and
Aldermen may require.
   (AI)   Perform all other functions of the City Treasury relative to
investment and debt management, including but not limited to themaking of debt
service payments and the sale of bonds.
   (AJ)   Collect, maintain, and provide information on city debt authorized,
sold, and outstanding and serve as an information center for all city debt
issues.
   (AK)   Ensure the protection of the city's credit rating.
   (AL)   Maintain contact with municipal bond issuers, underwriters, credit
rating agencies, investors, and others to improve the market for city debt
issues.
   (AM)   Recommend changes in state law and local practices to improve the
sale and servicing of city debt.
(Ord. passed 5-6-97; Am. Ord. passed 10-4-05)
§ 35.018 [RESERVED].
   (Previous section repealed on 10-4-05)
TREASURY
§ 35.020 CITY TREASURY DEPOSITORY OF FUNDS.
   (A)   The Finance Officer shall be treasurer of and custodian of all money
and funds belonging to the city.
   (B)   No City Official or Clerk shall deposit any city money or funds except
in the City Treasury.
   (C)   All bills sent out by any departments for collection shall be paid to
the City Treasury. All cash receipts, including fees for licenses and permits,
reimbursements for services or sales made, and receipts from fines and
forfeits, shall be deposited into the City Treasury.
(Ord. passed 5-6-97)
§ 35.021 DEPOSITS.
   (A)   The Finance Officer shall establish deposit procedures for all city
departments receiving money for the city. Such procedures shall include, but
shall not be limited to, deposits into City Treasury bank accounts, transfers
to treasury bank accounts, electronically collecting city monies and
authorization of the Finance Officer for the opening of city bank accounts or
the usage of the Tax Identification Number (TIN).
   (B)   All city departments receiving money for the city from sources outside
of the City Treasury shall pay the full amount of all said monies intact into
the City Treasury daily, weekly, or as often as the Finance Officer shall
direct.
   (C)   When depositing funds, departments shall use only deposit tickets
designated for such purpose by the Finance Officer. For each individual
deposit, the respective department shall input into the financial system an
accurate accounting breakdown for each depository total. Additional detailed
information and substantiation, in whatever paper or electronic form as may be
required by the Finance Officer, must then be forwarded to the Finance Officer
for verification and determination that funds have been credited to the
appropriate accounts.
(Ord. passed 5-6-97)
§ 35.022 MAKING PAYMENT FROM TREASURY.
   No money shall be paid out of the City Treasury until the Mayor and Aldermen
have taken the necessary action to authorize the payment, either by voting an
appropriation covering general expenditures to which the payment may be legally
charged or by special order directing the Finance Officer to draw a treasury
warrant for such payment and specifying to which appropriation the payment
shall be charged; except, that any final judgment of court, city note, bond or
interest coupon shall be paid out of any money in the City Treasury warrant
signed by the Finance Officer.
(Ord. passed 5-6-97)
§ 35.023 COLLECTION OF UNPAID ACCOUNTS RECEIVABLE.
   Excepting taxes, assessments, and water utility bills due the city, the
Finance Officer shall:
   (A)   Send or cause to be sent by the Administrative Department, a "second
notice" or 30-day statement including new interest and penalty charges as
allowable by law for any unpaid account. Penalty and interest charges, in
compliance with truth-in-lending laws, shall be charged 30 days from the
billing date as allowed for by law. Proper truth-in-lending disclosures shall
be printed on invoice as follows:
   "A finance charge of 18%, annual percentage rate, will be added to any
amount, on this invoice, remaining unpaid thirty (30) days after the date of
this invoice."
   (B)   Send a report to the departments monthly indicating which accounts are
over 60 days overdue. Departments shall review the report and forward, at their
discretion, departmental billings subject to this section to the Finance
Officer (excepting EPD's sewer usage bills, which are forwarded to the Tax
Collector) for submission to a contracted collection agency for collection. The
Finance Officer shall forward such accounts to a collection agency selected
pursuant to the provisions of the Procurement Code, which agency shall resort
to the proper legal methods of collection. Agency costs incurred in the
collection of the accounts and any interest and penalty charges allowable by
law shall be included in the amount collected.
   (C)   Upon notification from the collection agency that all efforts have
been exhausted, for any amount (customer) balance remaining over $1,000 be
forwarded to the City Solicitor's office for further action in Small Claims
Court. City Solicitor shall notify Finance of judgement for proper recording.
   (D)   Upon notification of bankruptcy, agency fees not paid by the customer,
accounts over the three year statute of limitations, or accounts determined to
be uncollectible, by the collection agency that remain under $999 be
immediately placed on the Write Off List. Write offs will be submitted to the
Committee on Accounts quarterly. The Committee on Accounts shall have the
discretion to either approve the requested list or determine on a case-by-case
basis if further method of collection/legal action is appropriate for any
particular account.
   (E)   Put accounts submitted for write off, sent to Small Claims Court or by
request of any city department head immediately on a "cash up front" only basis
in the accounts receivable module in HTE. Finance will forward this request to
the Planning and Community Development and Citation Departments for their
modules as well.
   (F)   Ensure any account that owes amounts that have been previously written
off be allowed only to contract for city services only upon payment of all
outstanding old charges excepting bankruptcy proceedings.
   (G)   Any department head or Finance Officer may petition the Committee on
Accounts for exempt status of certain accounts or classes of accounts from this
section. Waterworks and airport have been granted special exception to this
section.
(Ord. passed 5-6-97; Am. Ord. passed 11-6-02; Am. Ord. passed 2-7-09)
§ 35.024 PAYMENT OF TAXES, FEES, AND CHARGES BY CREDIT CARD.
   (A)   The Finance Officer is hereby authorized to procure and enter into
agreements with credit card companies to enable the city to accept payment of
taxes, fees, and other charges by credit card.
   (B)   The procedure established for payment by credit card shall conform to
the requirements set forth in R.S.A. 80:52(c) or as amended.
(Ord. passed 5-6-97)
BUDGET PROCEDURES
§ 35.030 COMMITTEE ON FINANCE: APPOINTMENT, COMPOSITION, AND DUTIES.
   The Mayor shall, biennially, in the month of January, appoint a Committee on
Finance consisting of the Mayor and Aldermen. It shall be the duty of this
committee to prepare and lay before the Board of Mayor and Aldermen the annual
budget relating to the raising of money and making appropriations for the
ensuing fiscal year, and all resolutions relating to the raising of money by
taxation, loan, or otherwise, stating the amount necessary to be raised and the
objects and purposes for which it shall be expended.
(Ord. passed 5-6-97)
§ 35.031 COMMITTEE ON ACCOUNTS.
   (A)   There shall be appointed biennially by the Mayor a Standing Committee
on Accounts, consisting of five members of the Board of Mayor and Aldermen,
which Committee shall meet at least every month and carefully examine and audit
all accounts of the city, which shall be laid before them, and shall allow and
pass the same if found to be correct and justly due.
   (B)   In addition to any other reports required by law or by the Board of
Mayor and Aldermen to be submitted by the Finance Officer, he shall submit to
the members of the Aldermanic Accounts, Enrollment and Revenue Administration
Committee a report of the results of post-audits, program result audits, and
investigations he has conducted since the date of his last such report. The
Committee shall determine which Aldermanic policy committees shall receive
reports pursuant to this section.
(Ord. passed 5-6-97)
§ 35.032 REVENUE STABILIZATION RESERVE ACCOUNT.
   (A)   There is hereby established within the general fund a revenue
stabilization reserve account. At the close of each fiscal year, one-third of
any general fund operating surplus, as determined by the official audit
performed pursuant to §
35.017(Z) of this chapter, shall be transferred by the Finance Officer to a
special nonlapsing revenue stabilization reserve account. The Finance Officer
is hereby directed to establish the revenue stabilization reserve account in
which to transfer funds from any general fund operating surplus.
   (B)   In the event of a general fund operating deficit at the close of any
fiscal year, as determined by the official audit performed pursuant to §
35.017(Z) of this chapter, the Finance Officer shall notify the Board of Mayor
and Aldermen of such deficit and request that sufficient funds, to the extent
available, be transferred from the revenue stabilization reserve account to
eliminate such deficiency. Such a transfer shall be requested only when both of
the following conditions have been met:
      (1)   A general fund operating deficit occurred for the most recently
completed fiscal year.
      (2)   Unrestricted general fund revenues in the most recently completed
fiscal year were less than the budget forecast.
   (C)   The amount of the transfer requested shall not exceed a sum equal to
the lower of the amount of the deficit in division (B)(1) of this section or
the revenue shortfall in division (B)(2) of this section. Upon receipt of
approval from the Board of Mayor and Aldermen, the Finance Officer shall
immediately transfer the sums so approved to the general fund undesignated fund
balance.
   (D)   No available balance in the revenue stabilization reserve account
shall be utilized for any purpose other than those authorized by division (C)
of this section, without the specific approval of two-thirds of the Aldermen-
elect.
   (E)   If, after the requirements of divisions (A) through (D) of this
section and §
35.0351 have been met and the balance in the revenue stabilization reserve
account is in excess of an amount equal to five percent of the actual general
fund operating expenditures, as determined by the official audit performed
pursuant to §
35.017(M) of this chapter, for the most recently completed fiscal year, then
such excess shall be transferred, without further action, to the general fund
unrestricted fund balance.
(Ord. passed 5-6-97; Am. Ord. passed 6-5-18)
§ 35.033 SPECIAL REVENUE RESERVE ACCOUNT.
   (A)   There is hereby established within the general fund a special revenue
reserve account into which one-time, general fund revenues, as defined in
division (B) of this section, shall be deposited. The Finance Officer shall
segregate principal in the account from earnings realized from the investment
of the balance in the account.
   (B)   One-time revenues for the purpose of this section shall be defined as
those revenues considered to be nonrecurring in nature or infrequent in
receipt. Examples of one-time revenues include, but are not limited to:
proceeds from the sale of government assets, sale of tax deeded property,
development fees, and shared revenues from economic development projects,
settlement proceeds and insurance proceeds.
   (C)   The Board of Mayor and Aldermen may subdivide the balance in the
special revenue reserve account to designate a portion or portions for a
specific purpose or purposes subject to division (D) of this section.
   (D)   The Board of Mayor and Aldermen may appropriate the balance or a
portion of the balance during the development of the annual budget subject to
the following conditions:
      (1)   The Board of Mayor and Aldermen may appropriate principal, or any
investment earnings thereon, for capital purchases (i.e. motorized equipment,
building renovations).
      (2)   The Board of Mayor and Aldermen may appropriate an amount not to
exceed 75% of the investment earnings from the prior fiscal year for recurring
operating expenses (i.e. textbooks).
   (E)   No available balance in the special revenue reserve account shall be
utilized for any purpose other than those authorized herein, without the
specific approval of two-thirds of the Aldermen-elect.
(Ord. passed 11-6-02)
§ 35.034 TAX RATE STABILIZATION RESERVE ACCOUNT.
   (A)   There is hereby established within the general fund a tax rate
stabilization reserve account. At the close of each fiscal year, the balance of
the combined, city and school district, general fund undesignated fund balance,
as determined by the official audits performed pursuant to § 35.017(Z) of this
chapter, in excess of 1% of the total property tax commitment for the prior tax
year, as determined by the Department of Revenue Administration, shall be
transferred by the Finance Officer to a special nonlapsing tax rate
stabilization account. The Finance Officer is hereby directed to establish the
tax rate stabilization reserve account in which to transfer funds from any
general fund undesignated fund balance surplus.
   (B)   In the event the combined general fund undesignated fund balance, as
determined by the official audits performed pursuant to § 35.17(Z) of this
chapter, is less than 1% of the total property tax commitment for the prior tax
year, as determined by the Department of Revenue Administration, the Finance
Officer shall transfer funds from the tax rate stabilization reserve account to
the extent required to restore the combined general fund undesignated fund
balance to 1% of the total property tax commitment for the prior tax year.
   (C)   The Board of Mayor and Aldermen may apply the balance or a portion of
the balance against the subsequent year's property tax requirement subject to
the following conditions:
      (1)   The Board of Mayor and Aldermen may apply a maximum of 50% of the
balance against the projected tax rate during the development of the annual
budget, subject to division (C)(2) of this section.
      (2)   The amount applied against the projected tax rate during the
development of the annual budget shall not exceed the amount applied for the
prior fiscal year by more than 10%.
      (3)   In the event that no funds were transferred into the tax rate
stabilization reserve account for the prior fiscal year, the Board of Mayor and
Aldermen may apply the remaining balance or a portion of the remaining balance,
subject to division (C)(2) of this section, against the projected tax rate
during the development of the annual budget.
      (4)   After the adoption of the annual budget, the Board of Mayor and
Aldermen may apply the remaining balance, or reduce the amount applied against
the tax rate, if the non-property tax revenues or net assessed valuation report
to the Department of Revenue Administration are materially different, defined
herein as 1%, from those estimated during the budget development process. The
amount of the additional application or reduction shall be limited to the
amount required to equalize the actual tax rate with the projected tax rate.
   (D)   No available balance in the tax rate stabilization reserve account
shall be utilized for any purpose other than those authorized herein, without
the specific approval of two-thirds of the Aldermen-elect.
   (E)   If, after the requirements of divisions (A) and (B) of this section
have been met and the balance in the tax rate stabilization reserve account, as
determined by the official audits performed pursuant to § 35.017(Z) of this
chapter, is in excess of an amount equal to 5% of the property tax commitment
for the prior tax year, as determined by the Department of Revenue
Administration, then such excess shall be transferred, without further action,
to the general fund undesignated fund balance.
(Ord. passed 11-6-02)
§ 35.035 RISK RETENTION RESERVE ACCOUNTS.
   (A)   There is hereby established within the general fund a health claims
risk retention reserve account. At the close of each fiscal year, the general
fund annual budget surplus for health insurance, as determined by the official
audits performed pursuant to § 35.017(Z) of this chapter, shall be transferred
by the Finance Officer to a special nonlapsing health claims risk retention
reserve account. The Finance Officer is hereby directed to establish the health
claims risk retention account in which to transfer funds from any general fund
undesignated fund balance.
   (B)   There is hereby established within the general fund a workers'
compensation risk retention reserve account. At the close of each fiscal year,
the general fund annual budget surplus for workers' compensation insurance, as
determined by the official audits performedpursuant to § 35.017(Z) of this
chapter, shall be transferred by the Finance Officer to a special nonlapsing
workers' compensation risk retention account in which to transfer funds from
any general fund undesignated fund balance.
   (C)   There is hereby established within the general fund a casualty and
general risk liability risk retention reserve account. At the close of each
fiscal year, the general fund annual budget surplus for casualty and general
liability insurance, as determined by the official audits performed pursuant to
§
35.017(Z) of this chapter, shall be transferred by the Finance Officer to a
special nonlapsing casualty and general liability risk retention reserve
account. The Finance Officer is hereby directed to establish the casualty and
general liability risk retention reserve account in which to transfer funds
from any general fund undesignated fund balance.
   (D)   The general fund annual budget surplus for health insurance, workers
compensation insurance or casualty and general liability insurance shall be
determined on an individual, line-item basis as the difference between the
annual general fund-wide budget in excess of the annual general fund-wide
expenditures, respectively.
   (E)   In the event an annual budget deficit shall occur in the health
insurance workers' compensation insurance or casualty and general liability
insurance individual line-item, the Finance Officer shall transfer funds from
the respective risk retention account to the general fund undesignated fund
balance, as necessary, to cover the deficit.
   (F)   If, after the requirements of divisions (A) and (E) of this section
have been met and the balance in the health claims risk retention reserve
account exceeds 25% of the subsequent fiscal year's general fund appropriation,
then the excess shall be transferred into the severance reserve account subject
to the requirements of division (I) of this section.
   (G)   If, after the requirements of divisions (B) and (E) of this section
have been met and the balance in the workers' compensation risk retention
reserve account exceeds reserve requirements, as determined by the most recent
actuarial report, then the excess shall be transferred into the casualty and
general liability risk retention reserve account subject to the requirements of
division (I) of this section.
   (H)   If, after the requirements of divisions (C) and (E) of this section
have been met and the balance in the casualty and general liability risk
retention reserve account exceeds reserve requirements, as determined by the
most recent actuarial report, then the excess shall be transferred into the
health claims risk retention reserve account subject to the requirements of
division (I) of this section.
   (I)   In no event shall funds be transferred into a risk retention reserve
account if the balance in the account is at the maximum balance as determined
in divisions (F), (G), and (H) of this section.
   (J)   In the event that each risk retention account is funded to the maximum
balance as determined in divisions (F), (G), and (H) of this section, the
Finance Officer shall not transfer any additional funds into the accounts and
shall transfer any excess funds to the general fund undesignated fund balance.
   (K)   No available balance in a risk retention reserve account shall be
utilized for any purpose other than those authorized herein, without the
specific approval of two-thirds of the Aldermen-elect.
(Ord. passed 11-6-02)
§35.0351 SEVERANCE RESERVE ACCOUNT.
   (A)   There is hereby established within the general fund a severance
reserve account. At the close of each fiscal year, one-third of any general
fund operating surplus, as determined by the official audit performed pursuant
to §
35.017(Z) of this chapter, shall be transferred by the Finance
Officer to a special nonlapsing severance reserve account. The Finance Officer
is hereby directed to establish the severance reserve account in which to
transfer funds from any general fund operating surplus.
   (B)   No available balance in the severance reserve account shall be
utilized for any purpose other than those arising from employee retirement
without the specific approval of two-thirds of the Aldermen-elect.
   (C)   In the event an annual budget deficit shall occur in the severance
line-item, the Finance Officer shall transfer funds from the severance reserve
account to the general fund undesignated fund balance, as necessary to cover
the deficit.
(Ord. passed 6-5-18)
§ 35.0352 HEALTH SERVICES RESERVE ACCOUNT.
   (A)   There is hereby established within the general fund a health services
reserve account wherein the Board of Mayor and Aldermen may deposit funds. All
indirect costs billed for the administration of Health Department grants shall
be deposited in the Health Services Reserve Account.
   (B)   The Health Department Head may, subject to the approval of the Board
of Mayor and Aldermen, use the balance of the health services reserve account
to pay the costs of rendering health services affected by any reduction in
federal, state, or other grant funding. No available balance in the health
services reserve account shall be utilized for any purpose other than those
arising from providing such health services to the public without the specific
approval of two-thirds of the Aldermen-elect.
(Ord. passed 6-2-20)
§ 35.036 ARTS AND CULTURAL EVENTS RESERVE ACCOUNT.
   (A)   There is hereby established an arts and cultural events reserve
account into which arena revenues, as defined in division (B) of this section,
shall be deposited. The Finance Officer shall segregate principal in the
account from earnings realized from the investment of the balance in the
account.
   (B)   Arena revenues for the purpose of this section shall be defined as
those revenues received by the city as the city's share of the Verizon Wireless
Arena net operating revenues, as determined by the annual audit, in accordance
with the arena Management Agreement.
   (C)   The Board of Mayor and Aldermen may recognize a portion of the balance
as a current year revenue subject to the following conditions:
      (1)   The Board of Mayor and Aldermen may transfer principal, or any
investment earnings thereon to offset expenses for arts and cultural events,
arts and cultural grants, festivals and celebrations, banners and decorations
and/or other arts and cultural related budget items.
      (2)   The Board of Mayor and Aldermen may transfer an amount not to
exceed 50% of the balance in the account in any fiscal year.
   (D)   No available balance in the arts and cultural events reserve account
shall be utilized for any purpose other than those authorized herein, without
the specific approval of two-thirds of the Aldermen-elect.
(Ord. passed 10-26-04)
§ 35.037 GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION SYSTEM SPECIAL REVENUE FUND.
   (A)   There is hereby established a special revenue fund into which shall be
deposited revenues and fees charged and collected for the use of the city's
geographic information system.
   (B)   The Board of Mayor and Aldermen may appropriate the balance or a
portion of the balance of the fund during the development of the annual budget
subject to the following condition:
      (1)   To finance the completion and perpetuation of the city's geographic
information system.
   (C)   No available balance in the geographic information system special
revenue fund shall be utilized for any purpose other than those authorized
herein.
(Ord. passed 8-18-09)
§ 35.0371 LAND USE CHANGE TAX SPECIAL REVENUE FUND.
   There is hereby established separate from the general fund a special revenue
fund (“LUCT Fund”) to account for all revenues collected under the land use
change tax during a fiscal year. Fifty percent of the revenue deposited
annually in the LUCT Fund, up to a maximum of $25,000, shall be deposited in
the conservation fund established pursuant to §
32.093(E). The Board of Mayor and Aldermen may appropriate the remaining
balance or a portion of the remaining balance of the LUCT Fund for any purpose
not prohibited by the laws or by the constitution of the State of New
Hampshire. Any unappropriated balance of land use change tax revenue received
by the LUCT Fund during the prior fiscal year shall be recognized as general
fund revenue for the current fiscal year.
(Ord. passed 6-4-19)
§ 35.038 ROADWAY IMPROVEMENT RESERVE ACCOUNT.
   (A)   There is hereby established a roadway improvement reserve account into
which all fees generated from the roadway degradation fee shall be deposited.
The Finance Officer shall record earnings realized from the investment of the
balance in the account.
   (B)   The Board of Mayor and Aldermen may appropriate the balance or a
portion of the balance into the account during the annual budget for the
purpose of roadway improvements. Roadway improvements shall include but not be
limited to expenses associated with reconstruction, repaving, sidewalk
construction and repair.
   (C)   No available funds in the roadway improvement reserve account shall be
utilized for any purpose other than authorized herein without the specific
approval of two-thirds of the Aldermen-Elect.
(Ord. passed 5-4-10)
§ 35.0381 WINTER WEATHER RESERVE ACCOUNT.
   (A)   There is hereby established within the general fund a winter weather
reserve account. At the close of each fiscal year, the general fund annual
budget surplus, if any, for winter weather operations which includes overtime
and salt, as determined by the Director of Public Works and the Finance
Officer, shall be transferred by the Finance Officer to a special nonlapsing
account. The balance in the winter weather reserve account shall not exceed 50%
of the prior fiscal year's annual budget for winter weather operations.
   (B)   The Board of Mayor and Aldermen, by vote, may designate the balance or
a portion of the balance of the winter weather reserve account to cover a
shortfall in the current fiscal year general fund budget for winter weather
operations.
   (C)   No available funds in the winter weather reserve account shall be
utilized for any purpose other than authorized herein without the specific
approval of two-thirds of the Aldermen-Elect.
(Ord. passed 6-5-18)
§ 35.039 TAX DEEDED PROPERTY RESERVE ACCOUNT.
   (A)   There is hereby established within the general fund a non-lapsing tax
deeded property reserve account into which shall be deposited 10% of the net
proceeds from the sale of any tax deeded property. The balance in the tax
deeded property reserve account shall not exceed $120,000. Deposits shall first
be made to the tax deeded property reserve account with the remainder of the
proceeds from the sale of tax deeded properties being made to the §
35.033 special revenue reserve account where appropriate.
   (B)   The Tax Collector may use the balance in the tax deeded property
reserve account to pay costs incurred for the city's ownership of tax deeded
properties including, but not limited to, the hiring of a property management
company, the securing of properties against unauthorized entry and the cleanup
and maintenance of properties, including the cleanup of any environmental
hazards.
   (C)   No available balance in the tax deeded property reserve account shall
be utilized for any purpose other than authorized herein without the specific
approval of two-thirds of the Aldermen- Elect.
(Ord. passed 9-5-17)
REPORTING VIOLATIONS
§ 35.040 MAYOR TO INVESTIGATE AND REPORT VIOLATIONS.
   It shall be the duty of the Mayor to investigate all violations of this
chapter and report the facts as ascertained to the Board of Mayor and Aldermen.
(Ord. passed 5-6-97)
CHAPTER 36: TAXATION
Section
General Provisions
   
36.01   Payment
   
36.02   Date payable; notice; collection
   
36.03   Set-offs by city
   
36.04   Interest when not paid; collection and accounting
   
36.05   Real estate tax lien procedure
Board of Assessors
   
36.10   Board of Assessors established
   
36.11   [Reserved]
   
36.12   [Reserved]
   
36.13   [Reserved]
   
36.14   [Reserved]
   
36.15   Issuance of warrant for collection; notice to Independent City Auditor
and Finance Officer
   
36.16   Records and reports of abatements
   
36.17   Abatement before payment
   
36.18   Abatement after payment
Tax Collector
   
36.30   Office of the Tax Collector established
   
36.31   Performance bond required
   
36.32   Notice to persons taxed
   
36.33   Warrant required for collection
   
36.34   Surrender of property to successor
   
36.35   Special account for taxes and assessments
   
36.36   Board to appropriate money for office
Community Revitalization Tax Relief Incentive
   
36.40   R.S.A. Chapter 79-E Community Revitalization Tax Relief Incentive
Municipal Economic Development and Revitalization Districts
   
36.45   R.S.A. 162-K Municipal Economic Development and Revitalization
Districts
Custodian of Tax-Deeded Properties
   
36.50   Appointment; term
   
36.51   Oath of office
   
36.52   Term of office
   
36.53   Authority and duties
Cross-reference:
   
Attendance of City Solicitor at tax sales, see § 30.46
   
Finance, see Ch. 35
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 36.01 PAYMENT.
   All bills for taxes and assessments shall be paid to the Tax Collector.
('71 Code, § 24-1)
§ 36.02 DATE PAYABLE; NOTICE; COLLECTION.
   (A)   All taxes due the city shall be deemed due and payable at the office
of the Collector of Taxes immediately after September 1, and earlier if in the
judgment of the Collector of Taxes, the collection of the taxes would be
jeopardized by such delay, except that poll taxes shall be paid to the
Collector of Taxes on demand, without previous notice.
   (B)   The Collector of Taxes shall give a notice to all persons whose taxes
due the city remain unpaid, and if such taxes shall not be paid within 14 days
thereafter, together with $.20 for such notice, the Collector of Taxes shall
proceed to collect the same according to R.S.A. 80:5.
('71 Code, § 24-2)
§ 36.03 SET-OFFS BY CITY.
   The taxes due the city from any person shall in all cases be deducted from
any money which may become due such person from the city, and such person shall
only receive the balance over and above the amount due for taxes.
('71 Code, § 24-3)
§ 36.04 INTEREST WHEN NOT PAID; COLLECTION AND ACCOUTING.
   (A)   Upon all taxes remaining unpaid on December 1 in each year, interest
shall be paid by the delinquent taxpayer from and after December 1 in each year
until paid in full as provided for under R.S.A. 76:13 and 76:15-a.
   (B)   The Collector of Taxes is authorized and directed to collect such
interest, and to keep an account of all interest received, with the names of
the taxpayers and the time of payment, and lay the same before the Board of
Mayor and Aldermen on or before the last Saturday in February in each year.
('71 Code, § 24-4)
§ 36.05 REAL ESTATE TAX LIEN PROCEDURE.
   The city hereby adopts the provisions of R.S.A. 80:58 through 86, as it may
be amended from time to time, relative to Real Estate Tax Liens and Municipal
Tax Sale Practices, effective upon passage. The Collector of Taxes should be
responsible for carrying out the requirements of such provisions of state law.
('71 Code, § 24-5) (Ord. passed 4-19-88)
Statutory reference:
   Real estate tax liens and municipal tax sale practices, see R.S.A. 80:58 et
seq.
BOARD OF ASSESSORS
§ 36.10 BOARD OF ASSESSORS ESTABLISHED.
   (A)   Creation and composition. Pursuant to
Charter § 3.02 there is established a Board of Assessors consisting of three
full time assessors who shall be appointed as provided by
Charter § 3.07.
   (B)   Department head. The department head of the Board of Assessors shall
be one of the Board who shall be appointed as provided by
Charter § 3.07. The department head shall also be the Chairman of the Board of
Assessors.
   (C)   The Board of Assessors shall be responsible for the affixing of an
assessed valuation upon all properties liable to taxation for ad valorem
taxation, shall administer all tax abatement and statutory exemption requests
and oversee city-wide revaluations. The Board shall also collect, supervise and
preserve all data relative to taxable, non-taxable and tax exempt properties
within the city and shall perform such other duties as are prescribed by
federal, state and local law.
(Ord. passed 11-4-98)
§ 36.11 [RESERVED].
§ 36.12 [RESERVED].
§ 36.13 [RESERVED].
§ 36.14 [RESERVED].
§ 36.15 ISSUANCE OF WARRANT FOR COLLECTION; NOTICE TO INDEPENDENT CITY AUDITOR
AND FINANCE OFFICER.
   (A)   The Board of Assessors shall issue a warrant on the Collector of Taxes
for the collection of all taxes and assessments due the city and they shall
simultaneously notify the Independent City Auditor and Finance Officer of all
such warrants issued.
   (B)   The Independent City Auditor and Finance Officer shall charge the
Collector of Taxes on the city's general ledger with the amount of all warrants
issued.
('71 Code, § 24-15) (Ord. passed 10-4-05)
Statutory reference:
   Choice, see R.S.A. 48:12
   Authority to issue warrants for collection, see R.S.A. 48:13
   Assistants, see R.S.A. 48:14
   Warrants, see R.S.A. 48:15
§ 36.16 RECORDS AND REPORTS OF ABATEMENTS.
   The Board of Assessors shall keep a record of all taxes abated and shall
issue an annual report of total abatements, by levies. The records shall be
kept in such form as to show a separation by levies, of poll, personal and
property taxes and both assessments, abatements made before payments,
abatements made after payments, and reassessments, and the monthly report of
the Finance Officer shall accurately specify these details.
('71 Code, § 24-16) (Ord. passed 10-5-05)
Statutory reference:
   Abatement power, R.S.A. 48:13
§ 36.17 ABATEMENT BEFORE PAYMENT.
   Upon the abatement of any unpaid tax or taxes, the Board of Assessors shall
make certificates thereof, and of the amounts so abated, with the reasons
therefor, and shall thereupon deliver the certificates to the Collector of
Taxes, who has in his hands, for collection, the tax or taxes so abated, and
shall report to the Independent City Auditor and Finance Officer the sum or
sums so abated and certified, each month, and these abatements shall be
credited to the Collector.
('71 Code, § 24-17) (Ord. passed 10-4-05)
§ 36.18 ABATEMENT AFTER PAYMENT.
   If any abated tax has been previously paid into the city treasury, a
certificate from the Board of Assessors, approved by the Board of Mayor and
Aldermen, shall be sufficient authority for the Finance Officer to draw a
warrant on the City Treasurer for the amount so abated to the person in whose
favor the certificate shall be drawn. The amount shall be charged to the
appropriation for tax refund.
('71 Code, § 24-18) (Ord. passed 10-5-05)
TAX COLLECTOR
§ 36.30 OFFICE OF THE TAX COLLECTOR ESTABLISHED.
   (A)   Pursuant to
Charter § 3.02 there is established an Office of the Tax Collector.
   (B)   Department head. The department head shall be the Tax Collector who
shall be appointed as provided by
Charter § 3.03. The Tax Collector shall also be the custodian of tax deeded
property for the city.
   (C)   The Office of the Tax Collector shall be responsible for the
collection of taxes, central business service district assessments, and
delinquent wastewater bills and shall record liens on the delinquent real
estate as authorized by law. The Office of the Tax Collector shall also
administer motor vehicle registrations and shall perform such other duties as
are prescribed by federal, state and local law.
('71 Code, § 24-29) (Ord. passed 11-4-98)
Statutory reference:
   Appointment and removal, see R.S.A. 47:14
   Jurisdiction, see R.S.A. 48:11
§ 36.31 PERFORMANCE BOND REQUIRED.
   The Collector of Taxes shall give bonds with sureties satisfactory to the
Board of Mayor and Aldermen for the faithful performance of his duties.
('71 Code, § 24-30)
Statutory reference:
   Authority of city to impose bond, see R.S.A. 47:14
§ 36.32 NOTICE TO PERSONS TAXED.
   The Collector of Taxes shall immediately, on the receipt of the tax-list
from the Board of Assessors, notify every person taxed by delivering to him
personally, or by leaving at his usual place of abode, an itemized copy of his
tax bill, containing a list of all property, the location of same, and the
assessors' valuation, with a demand for immediate payment.
('71 Code, § 24-31)
§ 36.33 WARRANT REQUIRED FOR COLLECTION.
   The Collector of Taxes shall collect no money in payment of taxes or
assessments until after the receipt of a warrant from the Board of Assessors
duly authorizing such collection.
('71 Code, § 24-32)
§ 36.34 SURRENDER OF PROPERTY TO SUCCESSOR.
   The Collector of Taxes shall surrender to his successor in office all
moneys, books, papers, including the list of uncollected taxes, and other
property pertaining to his office.
('71 Code, § 24-35)
§ 36.35 SPECIAL ACCOUNT FOR TAXES AND ASSESSMENTS.
   The Finance Officer shall open an account with the Collector of Taxes,
wherein the Collector of Taxes shall be charged with the amount of assessments
and taxes placed in his hands for collection.
('71 Code, § 24-36) (Ord. passed 10-5-05)
§ 36.36 BOARD TO APPROPRIATE MONEY FOR OFFICE.
   The Board of Mayor and Aldermen shall make such appropriations as shall seem
to them just and necessary for the employment of deputies who shall be chosen
by the Collector of Taxes and for such other expenses as may be necessarily
incurred by the Collector of Taxes for the prompt and efficient discharge of
the duties of his office.
('71 Code, § 24-37)
COMMUNITY REVITALIZATION TAX  RELIEF INCENTIVE
§ 36.40 R.S.A. CHAPTER 79-E COMMUNITY REVITALIZATION TAX RELIEF INCENTIVE.
   The provisions of R.S.A. Chapter 79-E Community Revitalization Tax Relief
Incentive are hereby adopted, subject to the following limitations.
   (A)   Pursuant to R.S.A. 79-E:2 II, QUALIFYING STRUCTURE means a building
located within the Central Business Service District (CBSD) as defined by the
Board of Mayor and Aldermen pursuant to §
37.02, or the Redevelopment District (RDV) as defined by  Article 4.01 A.10 of
the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Manchester.
   (B)   Pursuant to R.S.A. 79-E:2 IV, SUBSTANTIAL REHABILITATION shall mean
rehabilitation of a qualifying structure which costs at least 15% of the pre-
rehabilitation assessed valuation or at least $75,000, whichever is greater.
   (C)   Pursuant to R.S.A. 79-E: 5, the Board of Mayor and Aldermen, in its
discretion, may grant a tax relief period of up to, but not exceeding, five
years. The Board of Mayor and Aldermen may grant up to an additional two years
of tax relief for a project that results in new residential units and up to an
additional four years for a project that includes at least two-thirds new
affordable housing units.
   (D)   Pursuant to R.S.A. 79-E: 5 IV, Sub-stantial rehabilitation or
replacement shall commence within 12 months of the date of the Board of Mayor
and Aldermen’s decision granting tax relief. Failure to timely commence
substantial rehabilitation or replacement shall cause said tax relief to
expire.
(Ord. passed 4-7-15; Am. Ord. passed 3-5-19; Am. Ord. passed 5-2-23_
MUNICIPAL ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AND REVITALIZATION DISTRICTS
§ 36.45 R.S.A. 162-K MUNICIPAL ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AND REVITALIZATION
DISTRICTS.
   The provisions of R.S.A. Chapter 162-K Municipal Economic Development and
Revitalization Districts are hereby adopted.
(Ord. passed 9-5-23)
(Ord. passed 4-7-15; Am. Ord. passed 3-5-19; Am. Ord. passed 5-2-23)CUSTODIAN
OF TAX-DEEDED PROPERTIES
§ 36.50 APPOINTMENT; TERM.
   The Board of Mayor and Aldermen shall appoint an able and competent person
to be titled “custodian of tax-deeded properties.”
('71 Code, § 24-48)
§ 36.51 OATH OF OFFICE. 
   The custodian of tax-deeded properties shall be sworn to the faithful
discharge of his duty and all moneys belonging to the city which shall come
into his hands shall be deposited with the City Treasurer.
('71 Code, § 24-49)
§ 36.52 TERM OF OFFICE.
   The custodian of tax-deeded properties shall hold office for a term of two
years or until such time that his successor is named and qualified.
('71 Code, § 24-50)
§ 36.53 AUTHORITY AND DUTIES. 
   The custodian of tax-deeded properties shall have full supervision over all
properties deeded to the city for nonpayment of taxes and it shall be his duty
to make all necessary arrangements with the former owners relative to redeeming
their property, or properties, all arrangements made to be subject to the
approval of the Special Tax Committee; provided, however, that any conveyance
of the property, or properties, shall be subject to the approval of the Board
of Mayor and Aldermen.
('71 Code, § 24-51)
CHAPTER 37: CENTRAL BUSINESS SERVICE DISTRICTS
Section
   
37.01   Establishment
   
37.02   Proposed district
   
37.03   Advisory Board
   
37.04   Consultation
   
37.05   Budget
   
37.06   Services
   
37.07   Assessment and collection
   
37.08   Interest and penalty charges
§ 37.01 ESTABLISHMENT.
   Central Business Service Districts as authorized by R.S.A. 31:120 through
31:125 shall be established in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
('71 Code, § 7½-1) (Ord. passed 6-5-84)
§ 37.02 PROPOSED DISTRICT.
   Whenever the Board of Mayor and Aldermen shall find that consideration
should be given to the establishment of a Central Business Service District, it
shall specifically define the proposed district and shall provide for the
appointment of an Advisory Board as provided in § 37.03 of this chapter.
('71 Code, § 7½-2) (Ord. passed 6-5-84)
§ 37.03 ADVISORY BOARD.
   The Advisory Board shall consist of seven members, not less than five of
them shall be owners or tenants of property within the proposed district.
Owner-tenant members shall be known as district members. Other members shall be
known as at-large members. All members shall serve for a term of three years.
Should a district member cease to be anowner-tenant within the district, a
vacancy shall occur. At-large members shall be residents of the city, and on
removal from the city, a vacancy shall occur. Terms of membership shall
initiate on the first of May.
('71 Code, § 7½-3) (Ord. passed 6-5-84; Am. Ord. passed 3-20-07)
§ 37.04 CONSULTATION.
   Proposed new Business Service Districts shall be referred to the Advisory
Board for study and recommendation and the Board of Mayor and Aldermen shall
consult with the Advisory Board in defining the Business Service District. The
Board of Mayor and Aldermen shall consult with the Advisory Board before making
any changes in the boundary of any existing Business Service District.
('71 Code, § 7½-4) (Ord. passed 6-5-84)
§ 37.05 BUDGET.
   The Board of Mayor and Aldermen shall appropriate a budget to a Central
Business Service District account during the annual city budget process. This
Central Business Service District account shall be administered by the City
Coordinator or his designee.
('71 Code, § 7½-5) (Ord. passed 6-5-84)
§ 37.06 SERVICES.
   The Board of Mayor and Aldermen shall consult with the Advisory Board of the
Business Service District in selecting specific services and levels of services
to be provided in the district. These services shall be administered by the
City Coordinator, his designee, or in the absence of the City Coordinator, the
Director of Planning and Community Development or his designee.
('71 Code, § 7½-6) (Ord. passed 6-5-84; Am. Ord. passed 12-19-95; Am. Ord.
passed 2-7-09)
§ 37.07 ASSESSMENT AND COLLECTION.
   (A)   The Board of Mayor and Aldermen may levy an assessment in an amount
not greater than the appropriated budget against the owners of property within
the Business Service District. The assessment shall be determined at the
completion of the budget process.
   (B)   The assessment shall be made upon the owners of property within the
Business Service District as of April 1 of each year or to the current owner if
known.
   (C)   The assessment made against each property shall be based upon the
assessed value of the property as a percentage of the total assessed value of
the district. The assessed values of the properties shall be determined by the
Board of Assessors.
   (D)   The Board of Assessors shall submit all Business Service District
assessments to the Collector of Taxes with a warrant under their hands and seal
requiring him to collect them; and he shall have the same rights and remedies
and be subject to the same liabilities in relation thereto as in the collection
of taxes as set forth in R.S.A. Ch. 80.
('71 Code, § 7½-7) (Ord. passed 6-5-84; Am. Ord. passed 10-1-85; Am. Ord.
passed 9-5-95)
§ 37.08 INTEREST AND PENALTY CHARGES.
   Delinquent accounts are subject to such interest and late payment charges as
are provided in the case of real estate taxes.
('71 Code, § 7½-8) (Ord. passed 6-5-84)
CHAPTER 38: CODE ENFORCEMENT
Section
   
38.01   Citation authority
   
38.02   Departments authorized to issue citations
   
38.03   Ordinance violations bureau established
   
38.04   Citation defined; contents
   
38.05   Service of citation
   
38.06   Citation penalties
 
   
38.99   Penalty
§ 38.01 CITATION AUTHORITY.
   City departments or officials charged with the responsibility for enforcing
the ordinances and codes of the city are hereby authorized to issue citations
for any violation of the ordinances or codes that they are responsible for
enforcing. The enforcement authority provided hereby is in addition to the
authority for ordinance and code enforcement that currently exists.
('71 Code, § 17¾-6) (Ord. passed 9-1-87)
§ 38.02 DEPARTMENTS AUTHORIZED TO ISSUE CITATIONS.
   The heads of the Fire, Planning and Community Development, and Health
Departments and the City Clerk's office and/or employees designated by the
heads of those departments are hereby authorized to issue such citations.
('71 Code, § 17¾-7) (Ord. passed 9-1-87; Am. Ord. passed 6-21-94; Am. Ord.
passed 10-1-96; Am. Ord. passed 2-7-09)
§ 38.03 ORDINANCE VIOLATIONS BUREAU ESTABLISHED.
   An Ordinance Violations Bureau is hereby established for the purpose of
processing citations issued by the department authorized to do so. The Bureau
shall administratively be part of the Police Department and shall, in
conjunction with the departments involved, be responsible for preparing
citation forms, distributing these forms to the departments as needed, and
collecting, accounting for, and depositing all monies received from citation
penalties according to procedures established by the Finance Officer.
Additionally, the Bureau shall be responsible for initiating the appropriate
judicial proceedings with regard to citations that are not paid.
('71 Code, § 17¾-8) (Ord. passed 9-1-87)
§ 38.04 CITATION DEFINED; CONTENTS.
   A citation is a written and/or printed notice describing a specific
violation of a city ordinance or code which is served on the person responsible
for the violation. Each day on which a violation exists or occurs is a separate
offense, and a citation may be issued for each offense. A citation shall be
served in the manner described in this chapter, and shall contain the following
information:
   (A)   A clear and concise description of the violation.
   (B)   The location of the violation and the date and time on which it was
observed.
   (C)   The name and address of the person responsible for the violation.
   (D)   The penalty for the violation as provided for in this chapter.
   (E)   A statement or table describing the penalties for future occurrences
of the same violation.
   (F)   A statement as to whether the citation is being issued for a first,
second, or subsequent offense.
   (G)   The name and address of the office to which the payment of the penalty
may be made.
   (H)   The time period during which a reduced penalty may be paid in full
satisfaction of the citation.
   (I)   Notification that failure to pay the penalty will result in court
action.
   (J)   The signature and printed name and department of the individual
issuing the citation.
('71 Code, § 17¾-9) (Ord. passed 9-1-87)
§ 38.05 SERVICE OF CITATION.
   (A)   Any citation shall be served by the official issuing it in any one of
the following ways:
      (1)   In hand to the person responsible for the violation.
      (2)   At the abode of the person responsible for the violation.
      (3)   By certified, registered or U.S. Postal Service first class mail,
to the last known address of the person responsible for the violation, or as
listed with the NH Division of Motor Vehicles.
      (4)   In any other manner permitted by the laws of the state.
   (B)   The official serving the citation shall maintain a record of the date,
time, and mannerof service of the citation including the post office receipt if
service was accomplished by registered or certified mail.
('71 Code, § 17¾-10) (Ord. passed 9-1-87; Am. Ord. passed 8-18-09)
§ 38.06 CITATION PENALTIES.
   (A)   (1)   The penalties for any offense relating to the following sections
for which a citation has been issued shall be as follows:
Code Section First Offense Second Offense Third Offense
Code Section First Offense Second Offense Third Offense
70.08        $50           $100           Court Appearance
70.28        $300          $500           $1,000
70.40        $100          $200           Court Appearance
72.22        $10           $25            Court Appearance
90.04        $100          $200           Court Appearance
90.12        $25           $50            Court Appearance
91.64        $200          $300           $500
91.65        $200          $300           $500
91.66        $200          $300           $500
91.67        $200          $300           $500
91.68        $500          Court Appearance
91.69        $200          $300           $500
91.70        $500          Court Appearance
91.71        $200          $300           $500
91.72        $500          Court Appearance
91.73        $200          $300           $500
91.74        $200          $300           $500
91.75        $200          $300           $500
94.02        $100          $250           Court Appearance
94.03        $100          $250           Court Appearance
96.04        $50           $100           Court Appearance
97.16        $25           $50            Court Appearance
97.17        $25           $50            Court Appearance
99.04        $1,000        $1,000         $1,000
110.02       $200          $300           Court Appearance
110.05       $100          $200           Court Appearance
111.51       $500          $500           Court Appearance
115.40       $200          $300           Court Appearance
119.20       $200          $300           Court Appearance
130.01       $50           $100           Court Appearance
130.02       $50           $100           Court Appearance
130.04       $100          $200           Court Appearance
130.06       $50           $100           Court Appearance
130.20       $100          $200           Court Appearance
130.23       Court Appearance
130.24       $50           $100           Court Appearance
130.36       $100          $200           Court Appearance
130.38       $25           $50            Court Appearance
130.39       $50           $100           Court Appearance
130.40       $100          $200           Court Appearance
150.023      $200          $300           $500
150.060      $200          $300           $500
150.061      $200          $300           $500
150.062      $200          $300           $500
150.063      $200          $300           $500
150.064      $200          $300           $500
 
      (2)   If any penalty set forth in this subsection is not paid within
seven days of the date of the citation was issued the penalty shall be twice
the amount set forth in this subsection up to a maximum of $1,000.
   (B)   The penalties for any other offense for which a citation has been
issued shall be as follows:
      (1)   First offense - $50 if paid within seven days; $100 thereafter.
      (2)   Second offense - $100 if paid within seven days; $200 thereafter.
      (3)   Subsequent offense - $200 if paid within seven days; $400
thereafter.
('71 Code, § 17¾-11) (Ord. passed 9-1-87; Am. Ord. passed 10-1-96; Am. Ord.
passed 5-6-97; Am. Ord. passed 4-6-99; Am. Ord. passed 8-3-99; Am. Ord. passed
12-7-99; Am. Ord. passed 12-18-01; Am. Ord. passed 4-16-02; Am. Ord. passed 4-
15-03; Am. Ord. passed 10-5-04; Am. Ord. passed 3-6-07; Am. Ord. passed 10-2-
07; Am. Ord. passed 5-3-16; Am. Ord. passed 9-3-19)
§ 38.99 PENALTY.
   Whenever any person fails to pay any penalty imposed pursuant to a citation
issued under the authority granted by this chapter, such person shall be guilty
of a violation and shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine not to exceed
the maximum allowed by R.S.A. 47:17 or other law for each offense. Each
citation penalty which is not paid shall constitute a separate offense.
('71 Code, § 17¾-2) (Ord. passed 9-1-87)
CHAPTER 39: PROCUREMENT CODE
Section
   
39.01   Purpose
   
39.02   Application of provisions
   
39.03   Definitions
   
39.04   Department purchasing responsibility
   
39.05   General procurement and award provisions
   
39.06   Authority to award and availability of funds
   
39.07   Source selection
   
39.08   Prequalification of bidders
   
39.09   Professional services
   
39.10   Negotiated procurement actions
   
39.11   Specialized procurement actions
   
39.12   Cooperative procurement
   
39.13   Special procurement methods
   
39.14   Prohibitions
§ 39.01 PURPOSE
   (A)   The procurement code shall promote fair and equitable treatment to all
suppliers or prospective suppliers of goods and services, promote effective
competition among prospective suppliers of goods and services, make as uniform
as possible the procedures among various departments and agencies of the city
by the standardization of the procurement process, to prevent abuses and
favoritism, and promote the economical, effective, and efficient use of the
city's total resources.
   (B)   The purpose of the procurement code is to provide to the purchasing
agency flexibility and defined guidelines for the purchasing of goods and
services. These guidelines define maximum allowed procurement limits. The
purchasing agency has the flexibility to reduce these limits in order to insure
that the best interest of the city is being served. Any questions relating to
this procurement code should be addressed in writingto the City Solicitor and/
or the Finance Officer. The purchasing agency will at all times retain adequate
records, based on the size of the procurement, as to the type of procurement
utilized and the basis of award.
(Ord. passed 5-3-05)
§ 39.02 APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS.
   (A)   This code applies to every expenditure of public dollars irrespective
of their source, including federal assistance dollars, for the procurement of
materials, supplies, services and construction. Nothing in this code shall
prevent the city from complying with the terms and conditions of any grant,
gift, bequest or cooperative agreements. Procurement actions involving federal
or state funding shall comply with their mandatory rules that may not be
reflected in this procurement code.
   (B)   The following procurement actions are not subject to this code:
      (1)   Intergovernmental agreements.
      (2)   Agreements negotiated by the Risk Manager or City Solicitor for the
settlement of litigation or threatened litigation.
      (3)   Contracts awarded for professional witnesses for the purpose of
providing testimony relating to existing or probable judicial proceedings.
      (4)   Contracts awarded for real property transactions.
      (5)   Other specific procurement actions based on recommendation of the
Chief Executive Officer and approval by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen.
   (C)   Purchases made with federal funds, cither direct or pass through, will
in addition to the requirements of the City Procurement Code adhere to the
requirements of 2 CFR 200 Uniform Administrative Requirements, Cost Principles
and Audit Requirements for Federal Awards. Such requirements include: Cash
Management, Determination of Allowable Costs, Employee Travel, and Procurement
of Sub-Recipient Monitoring. If federal requirements arc in conflict with the
City Code then the federal requirements take precedence.
(Ord. passed 5-3-05; Am. Ord. passed 10-2-18)
§ 39.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AMENDMENT. A mechanism by which parties can agree to modify, delete or add
to the original scope of work, terms and conditions of a contract. Typically,
amendments are used to modify contracts for professional services and/or to
modify contracts for the furnishing of materials and services.
   ADVANTAGEOUS. In the best interest of the city.
   AUDITOR. The City of Manchester's Auditor.
   BRAND NAME or EQUAL SPECIFICATION means a specification using one or more
manufacturer's names or catalog numbers to describe the standard of quality,
performance and other characteristics to meet city requirements.
   BRAND NAME SPECIFICATION. A specification limited to one or more items by a
manufacturer's name or catalog numbers.
   CHANGE ORDER. A written order signed by an authorized agent of the city and
by the contractor authorizing an addition, deletion, or a revision in work or
an adjustment in the contract price or contract time, issued on or after the
effective date of the contract, as provided for in the original contract.
Typically, change orders are used to modify construction contracts.
   CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER. The Mayor of the City of Manchester.
   CITY. The City of Manchester, NH.
   CONSTRUCTION. The process of building, altering, repairing, improving or
demolishing any public structure or building, or other public improvements of
any kind to public real property or any public infrastructure.
   CONSTRUCTION MANAGEMENT. A project delivery method that provides a
comprehensivearray of management and/or consulting services spanning all phases
of the design and construction process from conception to completion of the
construction project.
   CONTRACT. All types of city agreements, regardless of what they may be
called for the procurement of materials, supplies, services and purchase orders
shall be used as the contract for procurement of materials and supplies. Formal
written agreements shall be used for the procurement of services, construction
and complex actions.
   CONTRACTOR. Any person or firm who has a contract with the city.
   DEBARMENT. An action taken by the city, under the provisions of this code,
to prohibit a person from participating in city procurements.
   DESIGN REQUIREMENTS. The written description of the infrastructure facility
or service to be procured, including:
      (1)   Required features, functions, characteristics, qualities, and
properties that are required;
      (2)   The anticipated schedule, including start, duration, and
completion;
      (3)   Estimated budgets (as applicable to the specific procurement) for
design, construction, operation and maintenance. The DESIGN REQUIREMENTS may,
but need not, include drawings and other documents illustrating the scale and
relationship of the features, functions and characteristics of the project.
   EMPLOYEE. An individual drawing a salary or wages from the city whether
elected or not. Any noncompensated individual performing personal services for
the city or any department agency, commission, council, board, or any other
entity established by the executive or legislative branch of the city.
Noncompensated individuals, serving as elected City officials or serving on a
City Department Board, are also considered employees.
   FINANCE OFFICER. The Finance Director of the City of Manchester.
   GRATUITY. A payment, loan, subscription, advance, deposit of money, service,
or gift, presented or promised.
   INDEPENDENT PEER REVIEWER SERVICES. Additional architectural and engineering
services provided to review design build proposals. The function of this review
is to provide an independent professional peer review to confirm that the key
elements of the professional engineering and architectural designs provided by
the contractors are in conformance with the applicable standard of care.
   INFRASTRUCTURE FACILITY. A building; structure; or networks of building,
structures, pipes, controls, and equipment that provide transportation,
utilities, public education, or public safety services.
   INVITATION FOR BIDS. All documents, whether attached or incorporated by
reference, which are used for soliciting bids according to the city's
procurement policies and procedures.
   MAY. Shall be construed as being permissive.
   MULTI-STEP SEALED BIDDING. A two-phase competitive process. The first phase
consists of a technical phase composed of one or more steps in which bidders
submit unpriced technical offers to be evaluated by the city. The second phase
consists of a firm and final bid from those bidders whose technical offers were
deemed acceptable by the city.
   PROCUREMENT. Buying, purchasing, renting, leasing or otherwise acquiring any
materials, supplies, professional services and construction services. It also
includes the description of requirements, selection and solicitation of
sources, preparation and award of contract and all phases of contract
administration.
   PROFESSIONAL SERVICES. Those services requiring special knowledge, education
or skill and where the qualifications of personsrendering the services and the
experience of the firm are of primary importance. Professional services shall
include, but not be limited to, appraisers, attorneys, architects, engineers,
surveyors, accountants, psychologists, physicians and other health care
providers.
   PROPOSAL DEVELOPMENT DOC-UMENTS. Drawings and other design related documents
that are sufficient to fix and describe the size and character of an
infrastructure facility as to architectural, structural, mechanical and
electrical systems, materials, and such other elements as may be appropriate to
the applicable project delivery method.
   PURCHASING AGENCY. The city department making the proposed procurement.
   PURCHASING AGENCY DIRECTOR or DIRECTOR. The department head in charge of the
city department making the proposed procurement acting either directly or
through authorized representatives.
   REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS. All documents, whether attached or incorporated by
reference, which are used for soliciting proposals according to the city's
procurement policies and procedures.
   RESPONSIBLE BIDDER. A person or firm who submits a bid or proposal that
conforms in all material respects to the invitation for bid or request for
proposals and who has the financial capabilities and expertise to perform the
contract requirements and the integrity and reliability that will assure good
faith performance.
   SERVICE. The furnishing of labor, time or effort by a contractor that does
not involve the delivery of a specific end product other than required reports
and performance. Service does not include employment agreements or collective
bargaining agreements.
   SHALL. Construed as being mandatory.
   SOLICITATION. An invitation for bids, a request for technical offers,
proposals, quotations or any other invitation or request by which the city
invites a person to participate in a procurement action.
   SPECIFICATION. Any description of the physical or functional characteristics
of materials, supplies, services or construction requirements. It may also
include a description of any requirement for inspecting, testing, preparing
materials, supplies services or construction projects for delivery.
(Ord. passed 5-3-05)
§ 39.04 DEPARTMENT PURCHASING RESPONSIBILITY.
   Department heads and city officers shall be responsible for making purchases
from funds appropriated to their respective departments. The Highway Department
shall be responsible for coordinating and overseeing the purchases of motor
vehicles by city departments. See §
 39.11, Specialized Procurement Actions for procurements exclusively delegated
to a purchasing agency.
(Ord. passed 5-3-05)
§ 39.05 GENERAL PROCUREMENT AND AWARD PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Prohibition against subdivision. No procurement action shall be
subdivided to avoid the requirements of this procurement code.
   (B)   Bulk purchases. Whenever feasible, procurements shall be done in bulk
to take full advantage of discounts. Purchasing agencies shall be responsible
for anticipating their needs in a timely fashion in order to consolidate and
expedite procurement of the same type of items. A lead purchasing agency shall
be identified for procurement of commodities or services that are most common
in their department. The lead purchasing agency shall accomplish the bulk
citywide procurement action based on requirements identified by other
departments. Capital outlay requirements shall be planned and scheduled for
periodic bulk procurement actions based on approved budget quantities.
   (C)   Awards. Contracts for the procurement of supplies, materials and
construction shall be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder unless otherwise
provided for in the bidding documents or in the procurement code. The basis of
award shall always be defined in the bidding documents. Among other factors
that may be considered in determining lowest responsible bidders are the
following:
      (1)   Capability. The ability and skill of the bidder to perform the
contract.
      (2)   Timeliness. Whether the bidder can perform the contract or furnish
the supplies promptly, in accordance with plans and specifications, or within
the time specified, without delay or interference.
      (3)   Previous performance. The character, integrity, reputation,
judgment, experience and efficiency of the bidder.
      (4)   Quality. The quality of supplies or performance on previous
purchases or contracts, including known quality based on previous use, and the
quality, availability and adaptability of the suppliers or contractual services
to the particular use.
      (5)   Legal compliance. Previous and existing compliance by the bidder
with laws and ordinances relating to the contract.
      (6)   Conditions. The number and scope of conditions attached to the bid
by the bidder.
      (7)   Inclusion. The company has a non-discrimination policy that
expressly covers, but is not limited to, race, ethnicity, color, gender, age,
national origin, religion, marital status, sexual orientation, gender identity,
results of genetic testing, physical or mental disability or veteran status.
   (D)   Award to other than low dollar bidder. Award to other than the low
bidder is not allowed unless the bidder is not responsible or unless the award
formula specifically allowed for other items to be taken into account to decide
who is the lowest responsible bidder. When it appears appropriate not to make
an award to the lowest dollar bidder, the purchasing agency Director shall
prepare a written statement of the reasons for the project files.
   (E)   Multi-term contracts.
      (1)   Purchase orders or written agreements or contracts may be awarded
for a maximum of five years in one-year increments. Multi-term contracts shall
contain provisions for cancellation by the city in the event funds are not
appropriated for the continuance of the contract. Any yearly increases in unit
prices/rates shall be tied to an established CPI with a maximum yearly cap.
      (2)   Multi-year contracts without a "cancellation by the city" provision
or contract committing future unappropriated funds or a contract without a set
maximum yearly adjustment must be approved by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen.
Multi year contracts that have been totally funded do not have to conform to
this section.
      (3)   The Airport Director or his or her designee is authorized by the
Board of Mayor and Aldermen to enter into multi-year agreements which do not
conform to this section when, in the opinion of the Airport Director,
situations arise that require immediate commitment or approval of agreements.
   (F)   Late bids or proposals. A bid, proposal, modification or withdrawal is
late if it is received at the location designated in the invitation for bids or
request for proposals, after the time and date set in the solicitation
documents. Late bids or proposals shall be rejected.
   (G)   Mistakes in bids. A bidder may correct mistakes discovered before the
time and date set for the opening of bids based on procedures in the
solicitation documents. After a bid is opened, mistakes based on an error in
judgment shall not be corrected or withdrawn, unless it is obvious to the city
that an egregious error was made. Minor or administrative mistakes may be
waived by the purchasing agency director.
   (H)   Cancellation of solicitations. An invitation for bids, a request for
proposals, or other formal solicitations may be cancelled or rejected in whole
or in part if deemed advantageous to the city.
   (I)   Pre-bid specifications. All specifications shall be written to promote
overall economy for the purposes intended and encourage competition in
satisfying the city's needs and shall not beunduly restrictive. General
performance specifications may be used in a request for Proposals and Multi-
step procurements when it is not desirable or feasible to prepare detailed
specifications.
   (J)   Cost or pricing data. The submission of current cost or pricing data
may be required in situations where analysis of the proposed price is essential
to determine that the price is reasonable and fair. A contractor shall, when
requested, submit current cost or pricing data and shall certify that the cost
or pricing data submitted is accurate, complete and current as of a mutually
determined specified date.
   (K)   Change orders. Change orders to contracts may be executed according to
change order clauses provided for in the original contract provided the change
order does not materially change the scope of the original procurement.
   (L)   Pre-bid or pre-proposal conferences. A pre-bid or pre-proposal
conference may be conducted within a reasonable time before bid opening or
receipt of proposals. Pre-bid or pre-proposal conferences may be mandatory. If
mandatory, only those bidders attending the mandatory pre-bid conference, shall
be allowed to participate in the bid or proposal. Any changes to the
solicitation documents shall be provided to all eligible bidders.
   (M)   Prequalification. The purchasing agency may require prequalification
of prospective bidders for the procurement of supplies, materials, services and
construction if the procurement is less than $250,000. If the procurement is
over $250,000 the purchasing agency shall conform to §
39.08 of this procurement code. Bidders have a continuing duty to provide the
purchasing agency director with information on any material changes affecting
the basis of prequalification.
   (N)   Bid or performance bonds. The purchasing agency may require the use of
bid or performance bonds or other securities for the procurement of supplies,
materials, services or for construction, in order to guarantee satisfactory
completion of the procurement. However, any procurements over $150,000 shall
require a bid and performance bond or other security satisfactory to the
Purchasing Agency after consulting with the Finance Officer and the City
Solicitor. Bonds required by statute will not be waived. Any such bonding or
security requirements shall be set forth in the solicitation. Failure of the
bidder to comply with the security requirements in the solicitation may result
in the rejection of the bid or proposal.
   (O)   Right to inspect. The city may, at reasonable times, inspect the place
of business of a contractor or any subcontractor that is related to the
performance of any contract awarded or to be awarded by the city.
   (P)   Right to audit. The city may, at reasonable times and places, audit
the books and records of any contractor who submits cost or pricing data
required by solicitations. If the city determines that there may be a need to
audit a procurement, the contract agreement shall define these rights and who
will assume the cost of the audit.
   (Q)   City procurement records. All determinations and other written records
pertaining to the solicitation, award or performance of a contract shall be
maintained for the city in a contract file by the purchasing agency. All
procurement records shall be retained and disposed of by the city according to
the records retention guidelines, Internal Revenue requirements and schedules
of the city.
(Ord. passed 5-3-05; Am. Ord. passed 8-3-21)
§ 39.06 AUTHORITY TO AWARD AND AVAILABILITY OF FUNDS.
   (A)   Authority to award. All procurement actions made based on approved
department budgets and authorized CIP allocations shall be awarded by the
purchasing agency having delegated authority provided by this Procurement Code.
Procurement actions not authorized to a department or multi-year contracts
without a "cancellation by the city" provision requiring future city
appropriations, shall be approved by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen.
   (B)   Availability of funds. Unencumbered funds to cover the entire purchase
order or contract must be available in the appropriate budget of the purchasing
agency prior to award of any purchase order or contract. Purchase orders and
contracts are subject to the annual appropriation of funds. Multi-term purchase
orders or contracts shall have adequate unencumbered funds available for the
first year except as noted.
(Ord. passed 5-3-05)
§ 39.07 SOURCE SELECTION.
   (A)   Small purchases. Small purchases are considered informal procurement
actions. Procurement requirements shall not be artificially divided so as to
constitute a small purchase.
      (1)   Total price is $10,000 or less, it shall be made after adequate
inquiry based on the director or his or her designee's knowledge of a
reasonable price and satisfactory quality.
      (2)   Total price more than $10,000 to $25,000. When the total price is
greater than $10,000, and not more than $25,000 purchases shall be made using
documented oral or written price or rate quotations from an adequate number of
suppliers. If available, a minimum of three quotations from qualified suppliers
shall be obtained. Such price and rate quotations, the date of such quotations
and the names of suppliers shall be documented.
   (B)   Competitive sealed bidding. Competitive sealed bidding is considered a
formal procurement action. Except as provided in this procurement code, all
purchases in excess of $25,000 shall be made by competitive sealed bidding.
Purchase orders and contracts shall be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder
except as provided for in this code. Competitive sealed bidding procedures
shall at a minimum, incorporate the following:
      (1)   Formal bid specifications that at a minimum include the general
terms and conditions of the proposed purchase, requirements of the bidder, form
of contract, the forms for submission of bids and the basis of award.
      (2)   Product or service specifications that accurately describe the
product or service required in such a manner as to not preclude competition. If
specific manufacturer's names or models are used to describe the product or
service, a minimum of two manufacturers' names should be used if available.
There shall be a provision for approval of an equal product or service. Also,
see §
39.10(5).
      (3)   Adequate public notice of a minimum of five business days, prior to
the date established for the opening of bids. At a minimum, public notice shall
consist of:
         (a)   Notifying electronically, or otherwise, vendors registered on
the city’s bid list (email notification list); and
         (b)   Posting all competitive solicitations on the city’s website;
         City department personnel shall have the option of notifying selected
commercial subscription services, “Bid Houses,” of all relevant competitive
bids or publishing selected competitive solicitations in the local newspaper.
      (4)   Sealed bids shall be opened publicly at the time and place
designated in the invitation for bids. A tabulation of all bids received shall
be available for public inspection within a reasonable period of time.
Departments shall determine an adequate amount of time.
      (5)   The purchasing agency may negotiate with the two low bidders in
order to reduce the bid to fall within available funds and/or to obtain a lower
bid amount, provided that the original intent of the procurement is not
materially changed. The right to negotiate a lower total bid must be a
condition of the bidding documents.
      (6)   The award of bids shall be formalized through the execution of a
purchase order or written contractual agreement.
      (7)   The purchasing agency may reject any or all bids or parts thereof
when such rejection has been determined to be in the city's best interest.
   (C)   Multi-step sealed bidding. When it is considered impractical to
readily prepare a detailed specification to support an award based on price, a
two-step bid process may be used. The first step is a request for proposals,
based on a general or performance specification, requesting the submission of
unpriced technical proposals. The second step is an invitation for firm and
final priced bids to those bidders whose proposals have been determined to be
technically acceptable under the criteria set forth in the first step.
       (1)   The multi-step sealed bidding method may be used if the purchasing
agency determines that:
         (a)   Available specifications or purchase descriptions are not
sufficiently complete to permit full competition without technical evaluations
and discussions to ensure mutual understanding between each bidder and the
city.
         (b)   Definite criteria exist for evaluation of technical offers.
         (c)   More than one technically qualified source is expected to be
available.
         (d)   A fixed price contract will be used.
      (2)   The invitation to bid must provide notice that a multi-step process
is being used. The notice should explain the multi-step process and that only
those bidders providing technically acceptable proposals, will be allowed to
participate in submitting a fine and final bid price.
      (3)   Adequate public notice of a minimum of ten working days prior to
the date established for the opening of bids shall be provided. Such notice
shall include as a minimum publication in a newspaper of general circulation.
      (4)   Award shall be made to the lowest dollar responsible bidder.
   (D)   Competitive sealed proposals.
      (1)   When competitive sealed bidding is not practical or advantageous to
the city, the purchasing agency director, may authorize the use of competitive
sealed proposals and negotiations as the procurement method.
      (2)   In determining whether competitive sealed bidding is practical or
advantageous to the city, the purchasing agency director, shall consider the
following factors:
         (a)   Whether the cost to develop formal technical bid specifications
sufficient to insure open competitive bids, would make the total cost of the
procurement excessive.
         (b)   Whether the proposed purchase is to be accompanied by land,
development, or other related economic transactions, therefore the bid price
may not accurately reflect the total economic effect of the purchase.
         (c)   Whether the product or service is specialized or custom
produced, and the development of terms, conditions, specifications, and other
provisions specifically defining the procurement requires interaction with
prospective suppliers.
         (d)   Where no responsible bidder has submitted a bid in response to
the invitation.
      (3)   If the purchasing agency director determines that competitive
sealed bidding is not practical and that competitive sealed proposals and
negotiations should be used, the purchasing agency shall:
         (a)   Develop terms, conditions and general or performance
specifications for the product or service required.
         (b)   In such cases where the award is not necessarily to be based on
the lowest negotiated price, the request for proposals shall indicate and
define the relative importance of price and other significant evaluation
factors.
         (c)   Provide adequate public notice as in the case of competitive
sealed bids.
         (d)   Sealed proposals shall be received at the time and place
designated in request for proposals. A proposal received after the closing date
and time set for the receipt of proposals, is late and shall not be considered.
No proposals shall be handled so as to permit disclosure of the contents of any
proposal to competing offerers during the process of negotiation. Submission of
the proposal shall be conditioned on not disclosing the proposals content until
the completion of negotiations and award of a contract. Proposals shall be
opened in the presence of witnesses. Proposals and modifications shall be shown
only to city personnel having a legitimate interest in them or persons
assisting in the city evaluation.
      (4)   After the opening and evaluation of competitive sealed proposals,
written or verbal negotiations may be conducted with one or more parties who
have submitted proposals. Such negotiations are designed to achieve terms and
conditions most favorable to the city. Negotiations need not be conducted where
time constraints preclude additional negotiations or where the purchasing
agency certifies that acceptance of an initial offer without discussion, would
result in fair and equitable prices. The request for proposals shall clearly
define the city's rights pertaining to negotiations.
      (5)   Award shall be made to the proposer whose proposal has been
determined to be responsive and most advantageous to the city. The contract
file shall contain, in writing, the basis on which award is made.
(Ord. passed 5-3-05; Am. Ord. passed 12-6-11)
§ 39.08 PREQUALIFICATION OF BIDDERS.
   (A)   Prequalification of potential bidders shall be accomplished for all
contracts for construction, reconstruction, alteration and repair or
refurbishing of real property with an estimated project cost in excess of
$250,000. Prequalification of contractors based on the type of work and dollar
limits may be done annually. The invitations for bids shall be issued only to
firms that have, in the city's sole determination, been prequalified.
   (B)   The purchasing agency involved shall establish rules and regulations
that govern prequalification of bidders. The rules and regulations shall take
into consideration:
      (1)   The ability, capacity, and skill of the bidder to perform the
contractor provide the service required.
      (2)   Whether the bidder can perform the contract or provide the service
promptly, or within the time specified, without delay or interference.
      (3)   The character, integrity, reputation, judgment, experience and
efficiency of the bidder.
      (4)   The quality of performance on previous contracts.
      (5)   The previous and existing compliance by the bidder with laws and
ordinances relating to the contract.
      (6)   The sufficiency of financial resources and ability of the bidder to
perform the contract.
      (7)   The quality, availability, and adaptability of the supplies or
contractual services to the particular use required.
      (8)   The ability of the bidder to provide future maintenance and
service.
      (9)   The number and scope of bidder conditions attached to the bid.
      (10)   The amount of total direct and indirect costs that would be
incurred by the city because of the bid.
      (11)   The ability of the bidder to meet the city's bonding and insurance
requirements.
      (12)   Applicant must certify that all tradespeople employed on the site
have gone through OSHA 10-hour training class. If a trades person is found not
to have completed the OSHA 10-hour training class, they must undergo the
training and provide a copy of their OSHA 10 card within five business days of
discovery of the deficit.
      (13)   Applicant must possess an OSHA incidence rate no greater than 50%
above the national US Bureau of Labor Statistics ("BLS") average for the
company's North American Industry Classification code for the two most recently
published years of BLS data. (For companies with fewer than 100 employees, a
three-year average may be used. For companies with fewer than 50 employees, a
five-year average may be used.)
      (14)   Whether the applicant has any New Hampshire State Department of
Labor, or United States Federal Department of Labor issued "Willful Violations"
determinations for violation of employment discrimination laws or labor laws
within the last two years.
      (15)   Whether the applicant has provided a certificate demonstrating
that it provides workers' compensation insurance for its employees.
      (16)   Whether the applicant certifies that its workers are properly
classified.
   (C)   These rules and regulations may also include other special
considerations as authorized by law.
(Ord. passed 5-3-05; Am. Ord. passed 9-3-24)
§ 39.09 PROFESSIONAL SERVICES.
   The procurement of accounting, architectural, auditing, engineering,
financial, legal, data processing, medical services and independent consultant
services for personnel, insurance and actuarial planning and management, human
resource and public relations, may be accomplished using the following
procedures:
   (A)   Professional services $25,000 or less. The purchasing agency may
solicit one or more proposals for the procurement of professional services at a
fee which is deemed fair and reasonable. The purchasing agency will document
the basis of the procurement in the project file. In no case shall more than
three awards be made to the same vendor in any 12 months without the prior
written notification to the Finance Officer.
   (B)   Professional services greater than $25,000. A formal request for
proposal process shall be used. The purchasing agency shall develop a request
for proposals to include terms, conditions, scope of service, desired results,
end product and consultant qualification. Selection criteria and the method of
determining a final fee by the city will be included in the request for
proposals. This process can be accomplished in a request for qualification
phase and a request for proposals phase. The request for proposal process shall
include the following:
      (1)   Adequate public notice of a minimum of ten business days prior to
the date established for the receipt of qualifications and/or proposals shall
be provided. Such notice shall include as a minimum, publication in a newspaper
of general circulation.
      (2)   A minimum of three proposals, if available, shall be evaluated and
selection made based on demonstrated competence, qualifications and project
approach for the services required. Where applicable to a particular project,
factors such as the following shall be used in tentatively selecting a firm:
         (a)   Specific experience with similar projects.
         (b)   Specific experience with earlier phases of the same project.
         (c)   Background and experience of staff members who would be assigned
to the job.
         (d)   Availability.
         (e)   Locality of firm.
         (f)   Ability to communicate ideas.
         (g)   Ability to supply all of the major disciplines necessary to
perform the work.
         (h)   Qualifications of subcontractors/ subconsultants.
         (i)   Conceptual design/project approach.
         (j)   Accuracy of the firm in estimating time and cost requirements.
         (k)   Responsiveness to require-ments contained in the RFP.
         (l)   Financial capabilities of the firm.
      (3)   The purchasing agency may interview one or more of the proposers in
order to clearly understand the proposers qualifications and the submitted
proposal.
      (4)   Selection criteria may be established in order to determine the
best overall proposal. The criteria may incorporate a weighting system for the
proposals received.
      (5)   Fees for professional services are an important consideration,
which must not be taken lightly. However, selection shall be ultimately based
on demonstrated competence, qualifications and project approach at a reasonable
fee. Depending on the complexity of the project, the purchasing agency may
utilize one of the following procedures to determine a fee:
         (a)   The fee can be requested as part of the requested proposal and
considered in imitatively selecting a firm.
         (b)   A multi-step sealed procurement can be requested where the
sealed fee is not opened until a proposer has been tentatively selected.
         (c)   A fee can be negotiated after a proposer has been selected and a
final scope of services has been determined.
      (6)   If necessary, the purchasing agency may negotiate with one or more
responsive firms in order to make a tentative selection. Once a tentative
selection has been made, a final scope of services and fee shall be negotiated
with the selected firm in order to enter into a contract deemed to be in the
best interest of the city.
      (7)   On award, all contracts for professional services shall be
formalized in awritten agreement signed by the applicant and the purchasing
agency.
(Ord. passed 5-3-05)
§ 39.10 NEGOTIATED PROCUREMENT ACTIONS.
   (A)   Purchase orders or written agreements shall be awarded without benefit
of formal or informal bidding in one or more of the following cases.
Negotiation methods may be used to award the contracts.
      (1)   Purchases required in the event of an emergency that necessitates
the immediate purchase of goods or services.
      (2)   Purchases where the cost of the service is fixed by law.
      (3)   Purchases that can be procured through cooperative
intergovernmental purchase agreements with other government jurisdictions.
      (4)   Sole source procurements, where the proposed purchase is
manufactured by only one company.
      (5)   Purchases from a sole manufacturer, where it is determined to be
more efficient and economical to reduce costs of maintenance of additional
repair parts, suppliers or services.
      (6)   Purchases that have been preceded by competitive scaled bidding,
where no responsive bidder has responded.
      (7)   Purchases under extensions of contracts when the same or lower
price is extended for another year or part of a year. The maximum extensions
shall not exceed five years without written notification to the Finance
Officer.
      (8)   Purchases under intergovernmental agreements or contracts that
require use of procurement procedures inconsistent with the provisions of this
section.
      (9)   City share contracts that include contracts with developers for the
construction of public improvements whereby the city shares in the cost of
construction.
      (10)   Used, discontinued or otherwise unique equipment or commodities
that become available (such as at an auction) or are offered only for a limited
time and may be acquired below the cost of similar new items.
      (11)   Service on existing equipment when it is advantageous to the city
to obtain parts, repair or service on existing equipment from a factory
authorized dealer or distributor.
      (12)   Perishable supplies that cannot be purchased by ordinary
procurement methods because of imminent spoilage or decay.
      (13)   Standardized parts, modules or accessories that will minimize
excessive inventory or maintain compatibility with existing furnishings or
installations.
      (14)   Open ended purchase orders or written agreements with local
suppliers in order to provide for emergencies, reduced down time of equipment
or projects, and for supplies and materials not stored in a city warehouse.
(Ord. passed 5-3-05)
§ 39.11 SPECIALIZED PROCUREMENT ACTIONS.
   (A)   The procurement of the following goods and services shall be made
exclusively by the delegated purchasing agency. Exceptions may only be granted
with a written waiver from the Board of Mayor and Aldermen:
      (1)   Insurance and actuarial services by the Risk Manager and/or the
Finance Officer.
      (2)   Legal services by the City Solicitor.
      (3)   Information technology services, hardware, software and network
capable devices including telephones by the Information Services Director.
      (4)   Accounting and banking services by the Finance Director.
      (5)   Auditing services by the Auditor.
      (6)   Other purchases from non-departmental appropriations shall be made
by the Finance Officer unless otherwise indicated in the budget.
   (B)   When purchasing insurance, a prequalification process may be used
inviting agents and brokers to submit a questionnaire regarding their
experience and qualifications. Only firms that, in the city's sole
determination qualified, shall be selected for the bid process. Each firm
selected to bid shall submit common specifications to their assigned insurance
carriers. Awards for such purchases shall be made to the lowest responsible
bidder. The city may retain the agency, and/or carrier receiving the contract
for a period not to exceed three years, reasonable premium increases
notwithstanding, before any renewal of this bidding procedure.
   (C)   In any award, the city may take into consideration any costs of
conversion involved.
(Ord. passed 5-3-05)
§ 39.12 COOPERATIVE PROCUREMENT.
   The purchasing agency shall have authority to join with any other municipal,
state or federal governmental agency in cooperative procurement actions.
(Ord. passed 5-3-05)
§ 39.13 SPECIAL PROCUREMENT METHODS.
   The purchasing agency proposing to utilize this section of the procurement
code must detail in the project file why utilizing this section of the code is
in the best interest of the city.
   (A)   Procurement methods.
      (1)   Design-build is a project delivery method in which the procuring
agency enters into a single contract for design and construction of an
infrastructure facility. Procurement of design-build services shall generally
follow procedures outlined in the "Design Build Manual of Practice", as
published by the "Design Build Institute of America".
      (2)   Design-bid-build means a project delivery method in which the
purchasing agency sequentially awards separate contracts, the first for
Architectural and Engineering Services to design the project and the second for
construction of the project according to the design.
      (3)   Operation and maintenance is a project delivery method whereby the
procuring agency enters into a single contract for the routine operation,
routine repair, and routine maintenance of an infrastructure facility.
Operation and Maintenance services shall be procured from prequalified
contractors by utilizing competitive scaled proposals submitted in response to
a request for proposals, which has established the supplies and services
required to maintain and operate infrastructure facilities.
      (4)   Design-build-operate-maintain is a project delivery method in which
the procuring agency enters into a single contract for design, construction,
maintenance, and operation of an infrastructure facility over a contractually
defined period. All or a portion of the funds required to pay for the services
provided by the contractor during the contract period are either appropriated
by the city prior to award of the contract or secured by the city through fee
or user charges. Procurement of design-build-operate-maintain services shall
generally follow procedures outlined in the "Design Build Manual of Practice",
as published by the "Design Build Institute of America".
      (5)   Design-build-finance-operate is a project delivery method in which
the procuring agency enters into a single contract for design, construction,
finance, maintenance, and operation of an infrastructure facility over a
contractually defined period. No funds are appropriated to pay for any part of
the services provided by the contractor during the contract period. Procurement
of design-build-finance-operate- maintain services shall generally follow
procedures outlined in the "Design Build Manual of Practice", as published by
the "Design Build Institute of America". A preliminary determination by the
City should have been made that project revenues are sufficient, over the
length of the proposed contract, to cover design, construction, finance, and
operations.
      (6)   Design-build-finance-operate-maintain means a project delivery
method in which the purchasing agency enters into a single contract for design,
construction, finance, maintenance, and operation of an infrastructure facility
over a contractually defined period. No city funds are appropriated to pay for
any part of the services provided by the contractor during the contract period.
This deliver method does not preclude the city from providing financing as long
as the city ultimately is reimbursed all of its costs over the life of the
contract agreement.
      (7)   Construction management services is a project delivery process by
which a qualified third party provides construction leadership with a defined
scope throughout various phases of the project (e.g. planning, design and
construction). The Construction Manager would typically provide advice and the
construction leadership, contract management, direction, supervision,
coordination and control of the work during the construction phase. The
Construction Manager would strive to integrate the expertise of the design
professional with the contractors knowledge of project constructability in
order to obtain a cost effective end result. The Construction Manager could
hold the dual role of design professional and contractor. The procurement of
Construction Management Services shall generally follow procedures outlined by
the Association of General Contractors "Owners Guidelines for Selection of a
Construction Manager".
      (8)   Other special project delivery methods or combinations of the above
may be utilized provided that the purchasing agency can demonstrate that the
delivery method meets the intent of this procurement code and receives the
approval of the Board of Mayor and Aldermen.
   (B)   Evaluation factors. The request for proposals shall state all
evaluation factors and subfactors that will be separately rated and the weights
to be given to each factor and subfactor in the evaluation. Evaluation factors
may consist of the following:
      (1)   Demonstrated compliance with design requirements;
      (2)   Qualifications and experience;
      (3)   Financial capacity;
      (4)   Project schedule;
      (5)   Price (or life-cycle price for design-build-operate-maintain and
design-build-finance-operate-maintain procurements); and
      (6)   Other evaluation factors if any.
   (C)   The request for proposals may require each offerer to identify an
Independent Design Peer Reviewer whose competence and qualifications to provide
such services shall be an additional evaluation factor in the award of the
contract. The city reserves the right to choose its own Independent Design Peer
Reviewer.
(Ord. passed 5-3-05)
§ 39.14 PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   Conflict of interest. No employee, officer or agent of the city shall
participate in the award or administration of a contract in which they or any
member of their immediate family has an interest. No employee, officer or agent
shall participate in the award or administration of a contract with any person,
firm, partnership or corporation in which they or any member of their immediate
family is an officer or employee or is about to become an officer or employee.
   (B)   Pecuniary benefit. No employee, officer or agent of the city who is
participating or is about to participate in the award or administration of a
contract, shall either solicit or accept any kickback, gratuity, contingent
payment or other pecuniary benefit from any firm, person, partnership or
corporation involved in such contract. For the purpose of this section,
PECUNIARY BENEFIT means any advantage in the form of money, property,
commercial interest, travel, offer of employment or anything else, the primary
significance of which is economic gain.
   (C)   Standards of conduct. Every employee, officer or agent of the city is
expressly prohibited from knowingly participating in the following:
      (1)   Underestimating or exaggerating requirements to certain prospective
bidders for the purpose of influencing bids.
      (2)   Misrepresenting competitor's prices, quality or service to obtain
concessions.
   (D)   Savings provision. Nothing in this chapter is intended to invalidate
or in any way limit the term of any contract or special service agreement
lawfully made prior to the effective date of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 5-3-05)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
            Chapter
               
50.     [RESERVED]
               
51.     WATER
               
52.     SEWERS
               
53.     ON-SITE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS
               
54.     STORM WATER
CHAPTER 50: [RESERVED]
(Previous chapter repealed on 4-16-02)
CHAPTER 51: WATER
Section
Water Works Department
   
51.001   Department established
   
51.002   Department head
Water Usage Regulations
   
51.01   Contractual nature of regulations
   
51.02   Record of consumers
   
51.03   Responsibility for maintenance
   
51.04   Wasting water; concealing use
   
51.05   Damaging, tampering with facilities
   
51.06   Alterations or extensions of city facilities on private plumbing
   
51.07   Supplying unauthorized consumers
   
51.08   Regulations governing introduction, use of water
   
51.09   Police to report leaks and violations
Rates and Charges
   
51.20   Establishment of rates
   
51.21   Revision of rates
   
51.22   Disposition of receipts
   
51.23   When charges payable
   
51.24   Discontinuing service for nonpayment
   
51.25   Abatements in charges
Board of Water Commissioners
   
51.40   Management vested in Board
   
51.41   Appointments to Board
   
51.42   Alderman not to be Commissioner
   
51.43   Conflicts of interest
   
51.44   Officers of the Board
   
51.45   Annual report of Board
   
51.46   Duties of President; President Pro Tem
   
51.47   Regulations relating to officers appointed by the Board
   
51.48   General powers and duties of the Board
   
51.49   Right of entry of personnel
   
51.50   Power to make repairs and improvements; approval by Highway Department
   
51.51   Expenditures of Board
   
51.52   Sale of personal property
   
51.53   General duties of Director; annual report
Statutory reference:
   Municipal water systems, R.S.A. Ch. 38
WATER WORKS DEPARTMENT
§ 51.001 DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED.
   Pursuant to
Charter § 3.02 there is established a Water Works Department.
(Ord. passed 11-4-98)
§ 51.002 DEPARTMENT HEAD.
   The department head shall be the Water Works Director who shall be appointed
as provided by
Charter § 3.03.
(Ord. passed 11-4-98)
WATER USAGE REGULATIONS
§ 51.01 CONTRACTUAL NATURE OF REGULATIONS.
   The regulations adopted by the Water Commissioners shall be considered a
part of the contract with every person who takes city water, and every such
person by taking the water shall be considered to express his consent to be
bound thereby. They shall be printed upon every bill for water rent, and
whenever any one of them is violated, although two or more parties may receive
water through the same pipe, the water shall be cut off, and shall not be let
on again except by the order of the Board and the payment of a fee as
determined by the Board of Water Commissioners, and in case of any such
violation, the Board shall have the right to declare any payment made for
water, by the person committing such violation, to be forfeited, and the same
shall thereupon be forfeited.
('71 Code, § 26-23) (Am. Ord. passed 10-26-65; Am. Ord. passed 6-6-78)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 51.02 RECORDS OF CONSUMERS.
   The Water Works Director shall keep suitable books, in which shall be
entered the names of all persons who take water, the kind of building, the name
and number of the street, the nature of the use, the number of takers, the
amount charged, and amounts of abatements, which shall always be open to the
inspection of the Water Commissioners and any committee of the Board of Mayor
and Aldermen.
('71 Code, § 26-21) (Am. Ord. passed 11-4-98)
§ 51.03 RESPONSIBILITY FOR MAINTENANCE.
   All persons taking the water shall keep the service pipes within their
premises in good repair, and protected from frost, at their own expense, and
they will be held liable for all damage which may result from their failure to
do so. All repairs upon meters made necessary by the negligence of a building
owner or occupants shall be made under the superintendence and direction of the
Board of Water Commissioners and at the expense of the building owner.
('71 Code, § 26-24) (Ord. passed 10-26-65)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 51.04 WASTING WATER; CONCEALING USE.
   All users of city water shall prevent all unnecessary waste of water, and
there shall be no concealment of the purposes for which it is used.
('71 Code, § 26-25) (Ord. passed 10-26-65)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 51.05 DAMAGING, TAMPERING WITH FACILITIES.
   No person shall injure any public pipe or reservoir, or other property
connected with the waterworks, or break and enter the same, or draw-off, or
cause to be removed, any of the water therefrom, or shall turn on or off the
water in any such water pipe or reservoir, or remove the cover of any hydrant,
except in case of fire, without permission from the Board of Water
Commissioners or by authority of the Board of Mayor and Aldermen.
('71 Code, § 26-26)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 51.06 ALTERATIONS OR EXTENSIONS OF CITY FACILITIES ON PRIVATE PLUMBING.
   No alterations shall be made in any of the pipes or fixtures inserted by the
city, except by its agents, who are to be allowed to enter the premises
supplied, to examine all apparatus, and ascertain whether there is any
unnecessary waste. All alterations and extensions of pipes in a house shall be
made in accordance with the applicable plumbing code under the jurisdiction of
the Planning and Community Development Department.
('71 Code, § 26-27) (Ord. passed 10-26-65; Am. Ord. passed 11-4-98; Am. Ord.
passed 2-7-09)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 51.07 SUPPLYING UNAUTHORIZED CONSUMERS.
   No water is allowed to be supplied to parties not entitled to the use of it
under the city ordinances, unless by special permission.
('71 Code, § 26-28) (Ord. passed 10-26-65)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 51.08 REGULATIONS GOVERNING INTRODUCTION, USE OF WATER.
   The Board of Water Commissioners shall have the power to establish such
regulations as it may deem expedient for the introduction and use of water, and
the water shall not be applied to any building unless the pipes and fixtures
shall be conformable to such regulations.
('71 Code, § 26-29)
§ 51.09 POLICE TO REPORT LEAKS AND VIOLATIONS.
   It shall be the duty of the police of the city to report to the Mayor all
cases of leakage, waste, or unnecessary profusion in the use of water, and all
violations of the ordinances relating to the supply of water that may be
brought to their notice.
('71 Code, § 26-30)
   RATES AND CHARGES
§ 51.20 ESTABLISHMENT OF RATES.
   The Board of Water Commissioners is authorized to determine and establish,
from time to time, a tariff of water rates.
('71 Code, § 26-15)
§ 51.21 REVISION OF RATES.
   The Board of Water Commissioners shall readjust the water rates so that the
receipts are equal, as near as practicable, to the interest on the cost of the
works and the current expenses of the same, such tariff of revised rates to
take effect at the next payment thereafter.
('71 Code, § 26-16)
§ 51.22 DISPOSITION OF RECEIPTS.
   All moneys received on accounts of the waterworks shall be paid weekly, or
more often, into the city treasury and a receipt taken for the same.
('71 Code, § 26-17)
§ 51.23 WHEN CHARGES PAYABLE.
   The rent for the use of water shall be payable in arrears either monthly or
quarterly. Charges for specific supplies shall be payable in advance and before
the water is put on.
('71 Code, § 26-18) (Ord. passed 11-4-98)
§ 51.24 DISCONTINUING SERVICE FOR NONPAYMENT.
   In all cases of nonpayment of the water rent in 30 days after the same is
due, the Water Works Director shall cut off the supply; and the water shall not
again be let on except upon the payment of the sum fixed by the Board of Water
Commissioners, and not for the same occupant or owner except upon the payment
also of the whole amount due; provided, that in case of specific supplies, or
for fractional parts of the year when the water has been let on, it may be cut
off immediately after notice given at the place that the rent is not paid, and
may be let on again upon the conditions before mentioned. The foregoing
provisions shall apply when two or more parties take the water through the same
service pipes, although one or more may have paid the proportion due from him
or her.
('71 Code, § 26-19) (Am. Ord. passed 10-26-65; Am. Ord. passed 6-6-78; Am. Ord.
passed 11-4-98)
§ 51.25 ABATEMENTS IN CHARGES.
   The Water Works Director, under the direction of the Board of Water
Commissioners, may make abatements in the water rents in all proper cases.
('71 Code, § 26-20) (Am. Ord. passed 11-4-98)
BOARD OF WATER COMMISSIONERS
§ 51.40 MANAGEMENT VESTED IN BOARD.
   The management of the city waterworks shall be vested in seven persons, to
be titled the Board of Water Commissioners, consisting of the mayor ex officio,
and six other persons, one of whom shall go out of office on the first Tuesday
of January in each year.
('71 Code, § 26-1)
§ 51.41 APPOINTMENTS TO BOARD.
   Members of the Board of Water Commissioners shall be appointed as provided
by
Charter § 3.14.
('71 Code, § 26-2) (Ord. passed 11-4-98)
§ 51.42 ALDERMAN NOT TO BE COMMISSIONER.
   No member of the Board of Mayor and Aldermen shall be elected a member of
the Board of Water Commissioners.
('71 Code, § 26-3)
§ 51.43 CONFLICTS OF INTEREST.
   No member of the Board of Water Commissioners, and no person appointed to
any office, or employed by virtue of this chapter or of any act of the
legislature, shall be interested, directly or indirectly, in any contract,
bargain, sale, or agreement in relation to the waterworks, or any matter or
thing connected therewith wherein the city is interested, and any and all
contracts, bargains, sales, or agreements made in violation of this section
shall be utterly void as to the city. Nothing in this section shall prohibit
the use of the water to any person by paying the established rates therefor.
('71 Code, § 26-4)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 51.44 OFFICERS OF THE BOARD.
   The President of the Board of Water Commissioners shall be elected by the
Board, and shall be one of the six persons mentioned in § 51.40. The
Commissioners may choose a clerk.
('71 Code, § 26-5)
§ 51.45 ANNUAL REPORT OF BOARD.
   The Board of Water Commissioners, on or before January 1 in each year, shall
present to the Board of Mayor and Aldermen a report containing a statement of
the condition of the waterworks and of the lands and other property connected
therewith, with an account of all receipts and expenditures, together with any
information or suggestions which they may deem important, and they shall at the
same time transmit to the Board of Mayor and Aldermen the report of the
Director or other officers of whom reports are required.
('71 Code, § 26-6) (Am. Ord. passed 11-4-98)
§ 51.46 DUTIES OF PRESIDENT; PRESIDENT PRO TEM.
   The President of the Board of Water Commissioners shall exercise a general
supervision over all the waterworks, and the materials and property connected
therewith, and over all subordinate officers and agents. In case of his absence
or disability, his duties shall be performed by a President Pro Tempore, to be
chosen by the Board.
('71 Code, § 26-7)
§ 51.47 REGULATIONS RELATING TO OFFICERS APPOINTED BY THE BOARD.
   The Board of Water Commissioners may make such rules and regulations for
their own government, in relation to officers appointed by them, as it may deem
expedient.
('71 Code, § 26-8)
§ 51.48 GENERAL POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE BOARD.
   The Board of Water Commissioners, so constituted and organized, shall have
and exercise all the powers vested in the city by an act of the legislature of
the state, approved on June 30, A.D. 1871, entitled, “An act to enable the City
of Manchester to construct waterworks,” so far as the same shall be legally
delegated to them by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen; and they shall have power
to appoint a Director, and all subordinate agents and assistants, and may fix
their compensation and that of the clerk before mentioned. They shall proceed
as early as practicable to construct adequate waterworks; provided, that no
expenditure shall be made or work contracted for, exceeding in the whole the
sum appropriated therefor by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen; but all the
powers mentioned in this section shall be subject to any limitations and
restrictions contained in the ordinances, regulations, and orders of the Board
of Mayor and Aldermen.
('71 Code, § 26-9) (Am. Ord. passed 11-4-98)
§ 51.49 RIGHT OF ENTRY OF PERSONNEL.
   The Water Works Director, with the necessary agents and assistants, may
enter the premises of any water taker to examine the quantity used, and the
manner of use, and to cut off the water for nonpayment of rents or fines for
any violation of this chapter or the rules of the Board of Water Commissioners.
('71 Code, § 26-10) (Ord. passed 10-26-65; Am. Ord. passed 11-4-98)
§ 51.50 POWER TO MAKE REPAIRS AND IMPROVEMENTS; APPROVAL BY HIGHWAY DEPARTMENT.
   The Board of Water Commissioners shall have full power to make all necessary
repairs, extensions, or improvements on said works, and to provide new supply
pipes; all hydrants established by the city shall be constructed, and all
repairs upon such hydrants made, and the streets, if broken up, again put in
good order, to the satisfaction of the Department of Highways by and under the
direction of the Board.
('71 Code, § 26-11)
§ 51.51 EXPENDITURES OF BOARD.
   All bills for expenditures for the waterworks shall be approved by the Board
of Water Commissioners, or by some person by it designated, examined by the
City Auditor, and allowed by the Committee on accounts, before they are paid by
the Treasurer.
('71 Code, § 26-12)
§ 51.52 SALE OF PERSONAL PROPERTY.
   The Board of Water Commissioners is authorized to sell such of the personal
property connected with the waterworks is it may deem expedient, subject to the
approval of the Mayor; and all necessary papers shall be executed by the Mayor.
('71 Code, § 26-13)
§ 51.53 GENERAL DUTIES OF DIRECTOR; ANNUAL REPORT.
   The Water Works Director shall take charge of the aqueduct, lands,
reservoirs, and other works and property connected with the waterworks, as the
Board of Water Commissioners may from time to time direct; he shall perform all
such services in relation thereto as may be required of him by said Board, and
shall annually, on or before January 1 present to the Board a report of the
general condition of the works, a statement of the receipt and expenditures,
the number of water takers, the number of cases in which the water has been cut
off, the number and amount of abatements, and such other matters as he or the
Board of Water Commissioners may deem expedient.
('71 Code, § 26-14) (Am. Ord. passed 11-4-98)
CHAPTER 52: SEWERS
Section
General Provisions
   
52.001   Purpose
   
52.002   Definitions
   
52.003   Interpretation of provisions
   
52.004   Unlawful deposits and discharges
   
52.005   Specifications of public sewers and drains
   
52.006   Private sewage
Use of Public Sewers
   
52.020   Connection to public sewer required
   
52.021   Sewers for intended uses only
   
52.022   Applicable permits required
   
52.023   Use of sanitary sewers
   
52.024   Use of storm drains
   
52.025   Use designation
   
52.026   Prohibited discharges
   
52.027   Pretreatment facilities
   
52.028   Effluent monitoring devices
   
52.029   Grease, oil, and sand interceptors
   
52.030   Monitoring records; analytical methods
   
52.031   Special agreements
   
52.032   Compliance with state and federal limitations
   
52.033   Information required
   
52.034   Septage
   
52.035   Dilution prohibited
   
52.036   Slug discharge plans
Industrial Pretreatment
   
52.050   Compliance
   
52.051   Permit required
   
52.052   Industrial discharge permit contents
   
52.053   Appeals; permit enforceable
   
52.054   Compliance reports
   
52.055   Certification statement on reports
   
52.056   Record keeping requirements
   
52.057   Permit duration; reapplication
   
52.058   Transfer and modifications
   
52.059   Approval for changes to industrial user discharges
   
52.060   City notifications of regulations
   
52.061   Categorical standards
   
52.062   Notification of hazardous waste discharges
   
52.063   Slug discharges
   
52.064   Compliance monitoring
   
52.065   Public information
   
52.066   Public participation
   
52.067   Violations of limits; actions required
Septage Disposal
   
52.080   State permit
   
52.081   City permit
   
52.082   Discharge prohibited
   
52.083   Permit revocable
   
52.084   Billing; funds
Sewer Rental Charges
   
52.095   Sewer rental charge
   
52.096   Payment
   
52.097   Service charges
   
52.098   Usage charges
   
52.099   Water meter removal
   
52.100   Sewer fund
   
52.101   Billing periods; delinquent accounts
Building Sewers and Connection
   
52.115   Building connection permits required
   
52.116   Sewer improvement area
   
52.117   Certified pipe layers
   
52.118   Permits outstanding
   
52.119   Nontransferable
   
52.120   Suspension; revocation
   
52.121   Indemnification
   
52.122   Separate connections
   
52.123   Excavation
   
52.124   Protection
   
52.125   Size and slope
   
52.126   Building connection
   
52.127   Cover and alignment
   
52.128   Material specifications
   
52.129   Connection to city
   
52.130   Inspection and records
   
52.131   Abandoned connections
   
52.132   New building connections required
   
52.133   Stormwater prohibited
   
52.134   Separate systems required
   
52.135   Approval to discharge
Construction and Repair
   
52.145   Sewer and drains
   
52.146   Permit required
   
52.147   Authorized persons
   
52.148   Plumbers
   
52.149   Contractor responsibility
Rates and Charges
   
52.160   Sewer rental charges
   
52.161   Septage service charge
   
52.162   Other fees
Administration and Enforcement
   
52.175   Access to facilities
   
52.176   Information access
   
52.177   Easements
   
52.178   Safety
   
52.179   Notification of violations
   
52.180   Show cause hearing
   
52.181   Annual publication of significant violators
   
52.182   Consent orders
   
52.183   Termination of permit
   
52.184   Termination of service
   
52.185   Recovery of expenses
   
52.186   Harm to city property
   
52.187   Injunctive relief; other actions
   
52.188   Appeals
 
   
52.999   Penalty
GENERAL REGULATIONS
§ 52.001 PURPOSE.
   In order to insure proper removal and disposal of sewage wastes and
wastewaters within the city; to insure the proper operation and maintenance of
public sewers, drains, sewage treatment plants, and other drainage or sewerage
works within the city; and to provide for keeping adequate records of sewers,
drains, and appurtenances and connections thereto; the following chapter
regulating the construction, use, repair, alteration and discontinuance or
abandonment of sewers, drains, and appurtenances; the connections thereto,
including drains and pipe substances to be discharged directly or indirectly
into and through sewers, drains, and appurtenances of the public sewerage
system and storm drainage system of the city is hereby enacted by the city,
Board of Mayor and Aldermen, and provided by the Charter of the city including
special acts approved by the state legislature and by the laws of the state of
New Hampshire.
(Ord. passed 1-17-95)
§ 52.002 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ASTM. The American Society for Testing and Materials.
   B.O.D. (BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND). The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures in
five days at 20° Centigrade expressed in parts per million by weight, as
determined by Standard Methods.
   BUILDING CONNECTION. A pipe connecting a public sewer with a building for
the purpose of conveying sewage of any kind from said building (measured from
outside face of building wall) to the public sewer.
   BUILDING DRAIN. A sewer provided for the conveyance of stormwater,
groundwater, or other waters as may be approved from a building to a storm
drain or other conveyance excluding sanitary sewers.
   BUILDING SEWER. That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a sanitary
wastewater system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other
sanitary pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building
connection outside of the building wall.
   CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STAN- DARDS. Any regulation containing pollutant
discharge limits promulgated by EPA under the Clean Water Act, applicable to a
specific category of industrial users, and which are found in the Code of
Federal Regulations, 40 CFR, Subchapter N, Parts 401 through 471.
   CHIEF ENGINEER (CE). The duly authorized representative in responsible
charge of the Environmental Protection Division of the Department of Highways,
or his duly authorized representative.
   CHLORINE DEMAND. The amount of chlorine, expressed in parts per million by
weight, that is required to produce a residual of 0.5 parts per million of
chlorine after 30 minutes contact of chlorine with sewage, as determined by
Standard Methods.
   CITY. Or any other word in common usage designating a legally constituted
unit of local government, shall mean the City of Manchester, New Hampshire.
   C.O.D. (CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND). A measure of the oxygen equivalent of the
organic matter content of a sample that is susceptible to oxidation by a strong
chemical oxidant, as determined by “Standard Methods for Examination of Water
and Wastewater.”
   COMBINED SEWER. A sewer intended to receive both sewage and storm or surface
water.
   COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT. For billing purposes shall mean any business or
professional concern which provides a service and shall include any such
concern occupying one or more rooms for the sole purpose of conducting a
business in a building with available sanitary facilities whether such
facilities are located within the space occupied by such concern or elsewhere
in the building.
   COMMISSION. The Highway Commission of the City of Manchester, New Hampshire.
   CONDO/CONDEX. For billing purposes is defined as buildings serviced by at
least one water meter with two or more dwellings units which are assessed as
separate properties by the Tax Assessor’s Office.
   CONSUMPTION. For billing purposes is the water usage, either actual or
estimated, as recorded by Manchester Water Works (MWW).
   CONTRACTOR. Either an individual, partnership, or corporation and the proper
agents and representatives thereof, approved by the Commission and the Public
Works Director and to whom the Department, acting through the Public Works
Director, shall have issued an authorization to install and repair sewers,
during the period when such authorization is valid.
   DEPARTMENT. The Department of Highways of the City of Manchester, New
Hampshire.
   DWELLING UNIT. A single living quarter, arranged for the use of one or more
individuals, with cooking, living, sanitary, and sleeping facilities.
   EASEMENT. An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by
others.
   GARBAGE. The animal and vegetable wastes from the preparation, cooking, and
dispensing of food and from handling, storage, and sale of produce.
   GARBAGE DISPOSAL UNIT. A mechanical device used for the grinding, shredding,
or macerating of food products preparatory to disposal thereof into the public
sewerage system and intended for installation and service for such purposes in
any building or structure.
   GREASE. Volatile and nonvolatile residual fats, oils, fatty acids, soaps,
waxes, mineral oils, and other similar materials.
   GREASE, OIL, AND/OR SAND INTER- CEPTOR. A device which receives oil, grease,
sand, and other harmful or hazardous substances to the POTW. Receives drainage
from fixtures and equipment having grease laden wastes from food preparation
areas or from vehicle or equipment repair facilities or factories where oily or
flammable liquid wastes are likely to be present. Prevents heavy solids such as
sand or rags from entering the sewer.
   HUMAN EXCREMENT (PUTRESCIBLE MATERIAL). And other putrescible material shall
mean liquid or solid waste matter discharged from the intestinal canal of man
or other liquid or solid waste materials which are likely to undergo bacterial
decomposition; provided, however, that these terms shall not include garbage as
defined elsewhere in this section.
   INDUSTRIAL ESTABLISHMENT. For purposes of billing, shall mean any business
concern which manufactures or produces a product or houses an industrial user
who is regulated by a Class I, II or III authorized discharge permit.
   INDUSTRIAL SEWAGE or INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER. The wastewater from industrial
processes, trade, or business as distinct from sanitary sewage or unpolluted
waters.
   INDUSTRIAL USER. Any person or business concern contributing industrial
wastewater or nondomestic source of pollutants into the POTW who is regulated
by a Class I, II, or III authorized discharge permit.
   INSPECTOR. The person, or persons, duly authorized by the Department of
Public Works Director to inspect and approve the installation of building
sewers and their connection to the public sewerage system.
   INTERFERENCE. A discharge which, alone or in conjunction with the
wastewaters from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the sewage treatment
plant, its treatment processes or operations, or its sludge processes, use or
disposal and therefore is a cause of a violation of:
      (1)   The sewage treatment plant's NPDES permit (including an increase in
the magnitude or duration of a violation) or of the prevention of sewage sludge
use or disposal in accordance with groundwater protection rules, WS 410, solid
waste rules, Env-Wm-100-2800, hazardous waste rules, Env-Wm 1000 and Appendix
III.
      (2)   The Clean Water Act, The Toxic Substance Control Act, the Marine
Protection Research and Sanctuaries Act, the Clean Air Act, the Solid Waste
Disposal Act and the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act.
      (3)   The 40 CFR Part 503 Standards for Sewage Sludge Use and Disposal,
or of any regulation or permits issued under these standards.
   MAY. Is permissive.
   MULTI-FAMILY. For billing purposes is defined as a building serviced by at
least one water meter with two or more dwelling units which is assessed as a
single property by the Tax Assessor’s Office.
   MULTIPLE DWELLING UNITS. Buildings or structures comprising two or more
dwelling units.
   NATURAL OUTLET. Any outlet, including storm sewers and combined sewer
overflows, into a watercourse, pond, ditch, or other body of surface or
groundwater.
   NEW SOURCE.  
      (1)   Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which there
is (or may be) a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced
after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under Section 307(c)
of the Act which will be applicable to such source if such standards are
thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that:
         (a)   The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed
at a site at which no other source is located; or,
         (b)   The building, structure, facility, or installation totally
replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of
pollutants at an existing source; or,
         (c)   The production of wastewater generating processes of the
building, structure, facility, or installation are substantially independent of
an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are
substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility
is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility
is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source, should
be considered.
      (2)   Construction on a site at which an existing source is located
results in a modification rather than a NEW SOURCE if the construction does not
create a new building, structure, facility, or installation meeting the
criteria of subsection (1)(b) or (c) of this definition but otherwise alters,
replaces, or adds to existing process or production equipment.
      (3)   Construction of a new source as defined under this subsection as
commenced if the owner or operator has:
         (a)   Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous on-site
construction program, any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or
equipment, or significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation,
or removal of existing building, structures, or facilities which is necessary
for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source facilities or
equipment; or,
         (b)   Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase
of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation
within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be
terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility,
engineering, and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation
under this definition.
   NPDES PERMIT. The National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System Permit.
   OWNER. Both the owner of fee in any real estate and all tenants, lessees or
other in control, or possession and use, of the property in question, or having
any interest therein, and his, her, its or their agents, or representatives, as
the interest, duties, powers or liabilities of each may be.
   PASS-THROUGH. The discharge of pollutants through the sewage treatment plant
into waters of the U.S. in quantities or concentrations, which, alone or in
conjunction with discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of
any requirement of the sewage treatment plant's NPDES permit (including an
increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation) or of applicable water
quality criteria.
   PERMITTEE. Any person, establishment, firm, corporation, municipal
subdivision, or institution granted a permit under this chapter by the Public
Works Director of the Department of Highways of the city.
   PERSON. Any individual, establishment, firm, company, association,
corporation, governmental authority, legal entity, or other group.
   pH. The logarithm of the reciprocal of hydrogen ion concentration in gram
equivalents per liter of solution.
   PHARMACEUTICAL WASTE. Means a prescription drug, as defined by R.S.A. 318:1,
XVIII, or a nonprescription or proprietary medicine, as defined by R.S.A. 318:
1, XVIII, that is no longer suitable for its intended purpose or is otherwise
being discarded.
   PIPE LAYER. Any person in the business of, and certified by the Department
for laying building connections from existing public sewers to the building
sewer of residential, commercial, or industrial buildings, and similar
structures and properties.
   PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENT. Any substantive requirement related to
pretreatment imposed on a user, other than a pretreatment standard.
   PRETREATMENT STANDARDS. Prohibited discharge standards, categorical
pretreatment standards, and local limits.
   PRIVATE SEWER. All sewers other than public sewers.
   PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE. Garbage that has been shredded to such a degree
that all particles will be carried freely in the public sewers.
   PUBLIC SEWER. The main line of pipe or conduit, owned, controlled, and
maintained by the city for the conveyance of waste or sewage from several
properties, and shall not be understood to include building connections or
private sewers, which are maintained by the owners of the properties using
them.
   PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR. The Public Works Director of the Department of
Highways of the City of Manchester, New Hampshire, or his authorized deputy,
agent or representative.
   POTW, (PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS). The treatment works owned by the
city. This includes any devices used in the storage, treatment, recycling, and
reclamation of municipal sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature. It
also includes sewers, pipes, and other conveyances that convey wastewater to
the treatment plant. The term also means the city which has jurisdiction over
the indirect discharges to and the discharges from such treatment works.
   RESIDENTIAL. Buildings intended for providing full-time living
accommodations as opposed to commercial or industrial establishments.
   SANITARY SEWAGE OR SANITARY WASTEWATER. Normal water-carried household and
toilet wastes or wastewater from sanitary conveniences of residences,
commercial establishments, industrial plants or institutions, excluding ground,
surface or storm water, and industrial wastewater.
   SANITARY SEWER. A sewer intended to convey sanitary sewage or industrial
sewage from residences, commercial or industrial establishments together with
minor quantities of ground, storm, and surface waters that are not admitted
intentionally.
   SCREENING LEVEL. Concentrations above which a particular pollutant is
expected to cause problems due to health, flammability, chemical reactivity, or
organic/solids loading in the POTW.
   SEPTAGE. Any liquid or solid (sludge or scum) pumped from chemical toilets,
vaults, septic tanks, or cesspools into which have been received only sanitary
wastewaters.
   SEPTAGE TRUCK. Any watertight vehicle which is used for the collection and
hauling of septage from septic tanks, vaults, and chemical toilets or
cesspools, or industrial or commercial wastewaters from industrial pretreatment
facilities, and complies with the regulations of the New Hampshire Department
of Environmental Services.
   SEPTIC TANK. An approved type of watertight compartment made of concrete or
other approved material into which the outflowing domestic wastewater from
dwellings or other buildings may be discharged.
   SERVICE CHARGE. A basic charge to customers connected to the sewage system
for the convenience and availability of the sewage collection, conveyance,
treatment, and disposal service.
   SEWAGE or WASTEWATER. A combination of the liquid and water-carried wastes
discharged from residences, businesses, institutions, and industrial
establishments.
   SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT or WASTEWATER TREATMENT FACILITY. Any arrangement of
devices and structures used for treating sewage or for the control of water
pollution.
   SEWAGE WORKS or SEWERAGE SYSTEM. All public facilities for collecting,
pumping, treating, and disposing of sewage and for the control of water
pollution.
   SEWER. The main pipe or conduit, manholes, and other structures and
equipment appurtenance thereto, provided to carry sewage, industrial wastes, or
storm water, cooling water, similar wastes, subject in each particular case to
the purpose and limitations imposed upon the particular pipe or conduit.
   SEWER RENTAL CHARGE. A charge for defraying the capital and operation/
maintenance costs of the sewerage system. Said charge consists of a service
charge and usage charge.
   SEWER IMPROVEMENT AREA.
      (1)   The span of land listed below, as requiring a major expansion or
upgrading of the current sewer system serving the area to allow continued or
expanded development. Each sewer improvement area, within which new
construction is proposed, will require an off-site sewer improvement cost
recovery fee.
      (2)   No area at this time is scheduled.
   SHALL. Is mandatory.
   SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER.  
      (1)   All industrial users subject to Categorical Pretreatment Standards
under 40 CFR 403.6;
      (2)   Any other industrial user that discharges an average of 10,000
gallons per day or more of process wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary,
noncontact cooling and boiler blowdown wastewater); contributes a process
wastestream which makes up 5% or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or
organic capacity of the POTW; discharges medical/infectious waste,
pharmaceutical waste, or radiological waste; or is designated as such by the
Control Authority as defined in 40 CFR 403.12(a) on the basis that the
industrial user has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW’s
operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement in
accordance with 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6).
   SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE. Federal Regulations define certain violations or
patterns of violations as significant noncompliance (SNC). These are identified
to establish enforcement priorities, provided for publication in the newspaper
and for annual reporting to the U.S. EPA. Instances of SNC are industrial user
violations, which meet one or more of the following criteria:
      (1)   SNC is defined as chronic violations of wastewater discharge
limits, in which 66% or more of all of the measurements taken for the same
pollutant parameter during a six-month period exceed (by any magnitude) a
numeric Pretreatment Stand or Requirement, including instantaneous limits, as
defined by 40 CFR 403.3(1);
      (2)   SNC is also defined as Technical Review Criteria (TRC) violations,
in which 33% or more of all of the measurements taken for the same pollutant
parameter during a six- month period equal or exceed the product of the numeric
pretreatment standard or requirement including instantaneous limits, as defined
by 40 CFR 403.3(1) multipled by the applicable TRC (TRC=1.4 for BOD TSS, fats,
oil, and grease and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH);
      (3)   Any other violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement as
defined by 40 CFR 403.3(1) (daily maximum, long-term average, instantaneous
limit, or narrative Standard) that the POTW determines has caused, alone or in
combination with other discharges, interference or pass through (including
endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public);
      (4)   Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment
to human health, welfare or to the environment or has resulted in the POTW’s
exercise of its emergency authority under paragraph 40 CFR 403.3(f)(1)(vi)(B)
to halt or prevent such a discharge;
      (5)   Failure to meet, within 90 days after the schedule date, a
compliance schedule milestone contained in a local control mechanism or
enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or
attaining final compliance;
      (6)   Failure to provide, within 30 days after the due date, required
reports such as baseline monitoring reports, 90-day compliance reports,
periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance
schedules;
      (7)   Failure to accurately report non-compliance;
      (8)   Any other violation or group of violations, which may include a
violation of Best Management Practices, which the POTW determines will
adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment
program.
   SLUG. Any discharge of water, wastewater, sewage, or industrial sewage
which, in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow,
exceeds for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times
the average 24 hour concentration or flow during normal operation, or which
shall adversely affect the collection system and/or performance of the POTW.
   STANDARD METHODS. The latest approved edition of “Standard Methods for the
Examination of Water and Wastewater” as published by the American Public Health
Association.
   STORM DRAIN or DRAIN. A sewer provided and intended for the conveyance of
storm water, groundwater, subsurface water, or other waters as may be approved
for any particular drain, but excluding sewage or contaminated industrial
wastewaters.
   STORM WATER. The runoff or discharge of rain and melted snow or other water
from roofs, surfaces of public or private lands or elsewhere.
   SUBSOIL DRAINAGE. Water from soil percolating into subsoil drains and
through foundation walls, basement floors, or underground pipes or from similar
sources.
   SUSPENDED SOLIDS (SS). The solids that either float on the surface of, or
are suspended in water, sewage or other liquids; and which are removable by
laboratory filtering, as determined by Standard Methods.
   UNPOLLUTED WATER. Water of quality equal to or better than the effluent
criteria in effect or water that would not cause a violation of receiving water
quality standards and would not be benefited by discharge to the sanitary
sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided.
   USAGE CHARGE. A charge based on the volume and strength of wastewater
discharge.
   USAGE CHARGE FORMULA. The following formula to be used in computing the
usage charge portion of the sewer rental charge as provided in this chapter:
C = Vc (Vu/1000) + Bc (Bu/100) + Sc (Su/100), where:
C = the usage charge for the billing period.
Vc = the unit cost for the treatment per 1000 gallons of water: water volume at
the rate specified in
§ 52.160.
Vu = the volume in gallons of wastewater discharged during the billing period.
Bc = the unit cost for the treatment per 100 pounds of BOD at the rate
specified in
§ 52.160.
Bu = the BOD content in pounds of wastewater discharged during the billing
period.
Sc = the unit cost for the treatment per hundred (100) pounds of suspended
solids at the rate specified in
§ 52.160.
Su = the suspended solids content in pounds of wastewater discharged during the
billing period.
   WATERCOURSE. A natural or artificial channel for the passage of water either
continuously or intermittently.
   WSPCD. The Water Supply and Pollution Control Division of the NH Department
of Environmental Services.
(Ord. passed 1-17-95; Am. Ord. passed 1-7-97; Am. Ord. passed 12-2-14)
§ 52.003 INTERPRETATION OF PROVISIONS.
   The provisions of this chapter with respect to the meaning of technical
terms and phrases, the classification of different types of sewers, the
regulations with respect to making connections to sewers or drains, and other
technical matters shall be interpreted and administered by the Public Works
Director acting in and for the city, through its Highway Commission.
(Ord. passed 1-17-95)
§ 52.004 UNLAWFUL DEPOSITS AND DISCHARGES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be
deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the
city, or any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any human or animal
excrement, garbage, or objectionable waste.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the
city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any sanitary sewage,
industrial sewage, or other contaminated or polluted waters, except where
suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions
of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 1-17-95)
Penalty, see § 52.999
§ 52.005 SPECIFICATIONS OF PUBLIC SEWERS AND DRAINS.
   Public sewers and drains shall meet all applicable requirements of the
standard specifications of the Department and this chapter and the requirements
of the WSPCD.
(Ord. passed 1-17-95)
§ 52.006 PRIVATE SEWAGE.
   (A)   Private sewage pumping stations.
      (1)   Standard specifications. Private sewage pumping stations shall meet
all applicable requirements of the “Standard Specifications of the Department,”
the Department's Policy on Private Sewage Pump Stations, the New Hampshire
Water Supply and Pollution Control Division, and this chapter. Plans and
specifications, including shop drawings, of all items to be furnished shall be
submitted to the Public Works Director and the New Hampshire Water Supply and
Pollution Control Division for approval. Plans and specifications for a
proposed private sewage pumping station shall be the result of the design of a
professional engineer licensed in the state of New Hampshire. This does not
include individual grinder pumps.
      (2)   Owner responsibility. The owner shall retain sole responsibility
for the regular inspection, maintenance, service, and repair of all private
sewage pumping stations. All costs inherent to such services shall be borne by
the owner. The Department shall be allowed access to all private sewage pumping
stations for periodic inspection.
      (3)   Repairs and maintenance. Any repairs to the private sewage pumping
station deemed necessary by the Public Works Director shall be completed in a
reasonable time with the total cost borne by the owner. A reasonable time
period shall be understood to mean 30 calendar days unless otherwise directed
by the Public Works Director. If said repairs are not made as directed, the
Department shall cause the work to be completed and appropriate charges made to
the owner.
   (B)   Private sewage treatment plants.
      (1)   Specifications. Private sewage treatment plants shall meet all
applicable requirements of the “Standard Specifications of the Department” and
this chapter. Plans and specifications of all items to be furnished shall be
submitted to the Public Works Director and the New Hampshire Water Supply and
Pollution Control Division for review and approval. No construction of such
facilities shall be commenced until said approvals are obtained in writing.
Plans and specifications for a proposed private sewage treatment plant shall be
the result of the design of a professional engineer licensed in the state of
New Hampshire. Upon completion of construction, certification by a professional
engineer must be submitted to the Department certifying that the plant was
built in accordance with the approved plans and specifications. All structures
shall be designed in such a manner to withstand degradation from a moist
environment. Treatment plants shall be so located as to be protected against
damage from 100-year frequency floods. Treatment plants shall be readily
accessible on a year-round basis and be suitably fenced around the perimeter,
as required.
      (2)   Owner responsibility. The owner shall retain sole responsibility
for the regular operation, inspection, maintenance, service, and repair of all
private sewage treatment plants. All costs inherent to such services shall be
borne by the owner. The Department shall be allowed access to all private
sewage treatment plants for periodic inspection and sampling.
      (3)   Repairs and maintenance. Any repairs to the private sewage
treatment plant deemed necessary by the Public Works Director shall be
completed in a reasonable time with the total cost borne by the owner. A
reasonable time period shall be understood to mean 30 calendar days unless
otherwise directed by the Public Works Director.
(Ord. passed 1-17-95)
Penalty, see § 52.999
USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS
§ 52.020 CONNECTION TO PUBLIC SEWER REQUIRED.
   The owner of any house, building, or property used for human occupancy,
employment, recreation, or other purpose, situated within the city and abutting
on any street, alley, or right-of-way in which there is now located or in the
future may be located a public sewer of the city, is hereby required at his
expense to install suitable sanitary facilities therein, and to connect such
facilities directly with the public sewer in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter, within 90 days after the date of official notice to do so,
provided that said public sewer is accessible and available within 100 feet of
said owner's building, as determined by the Public Works Director.
(Ord. passed 1-17-95)
Penalty, see § 52.999
§ 52.021 SEWERS FOR INTENDED USERS ONLY.
   No person shall discharge into or put into any public sewer or drain of the
city, or into any sewer, drain, or fixture which thereafter discharges into any
public sewer, drain, or appurtenance thereof, any waste or substance other than
such kinds or types of waters or water-carried wastes for the conveyance of
which the particular sewer, drain, or appurtenance is intended, designed, or
provided.
(Ord. passed 1-17-95)
Penalty, see § 52.999
§ 52.022 APPLICABLE PERMITS REQUIRED.
   No person shall discharge into or put into any public sewer or drain of the
city, or into any sewer, drain, or fixture which thereafter discharges into any
public sewer, drain, or appurtenance thereof, any waste or substance until all
applicable permits have been obtained.
(Ord. passed 1-17-95)
Penalty, see § 52.999
§ 52.023 USE OF SANITARY SEWERS.
   Except as specifically provided with reference to some particular sewer,
sanitary sewers shall be used only for the conveyance and disposal of sanitary
sewage as defined in §
52.002, and for water-carried industrial sewage which are not objectionable as
hereinafter provided. No sanitary sewer shall be used to receive and convey or
dispose of any storm or surface water, as defined in §
52.002, or of subsoil drainages, as defined in §
52.002, or of unpolluted water.
(Ord. passed 1-17-95)
Penalty, see § 52.999
§ 52.024 USE OF STORM DRAINS.
   Stormwater, and all other approved drainage, shall be discharged into storm
drains, or to a natural outlet, as approved by the Public Works Director.
Industrial cooling water or uncontaminated process waters may be discharged,
upon approval by the Public Works Director and the New Hampshire Water Supply
and Pollution Control Division, to a storm sewer or natural outlet. However, no
materials, the discharge of which into natural streams, ponds, lakes or other
natural bodies of water is prohibited by state or federal law or regulations,
shall be discharged into any storm drain. Also, a National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NPDES) permit shall be obtained by the industrial
establishment for any such discharge of cooling or process waters.
(Ord. passed 1-17-95)
Penalty, see § 52.999
§ 52.025 USE DESIGNATION.
   If the intended or designated use of any particular sewer or drain and
allowable discharge thereto is unclear, the Public Works Director will consider
the pertinent facts and make a determination. Said determination will be final
and binding.
(Ord. passed 1-17-95)
§ 52.026 PROHIBITED DISCHARGES.
   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following
described water or wastes to any public sewer or drain:
   (A)   Any gasoline, benzene, naptha, fuel oil, or other flammable or
explosive liquid, gas, or solid, or any substance which may generate or form
any flammable, explosive, or combustible substance, fluid, gas, vapor, or
mixture when combined with air, water, or other substances commonly found in
sewers. This includes, but is not limited to, pollutants which cause an
exceedance of 10% of the lower explosive limit (LEL) at any point in the POTW
or wastes with a closed cup flash point in the POTW or wastes with a closed cup
flash point of less than 140°F or 60°C, using the test method specified in 40
CFR 261.21.
   (B)   Any waters or wastewaters that either independently or by interaction
with other wastewaters, pass through or cause interference with any part of the
POTW, exceed any national pretreatment standard, or constitute a hazard to
humans or animals in the receiving waters or the POTW. This includes but is not
limited to interference, substances which cause pass through or other problems
caused by:
      (1)   Solid or viscous pollutants.
      (2)   Oxygen demanding pollutants.
      (3)   Waste causing POTW upsets.
      (4)   Pollutant discharges at specific rates or concentrations.
      (5)   Heat in amounts which would inhibit biological activity or cause
the POTW influent to exceed 104° F.
      (6)   Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral
oil origin.
      (7)   Color or odor causing substances.
      (8)   Table of limited pollutants.
 
COMPOUND    mg/l
Copper      4.55
Cyanide (T) 2.86
Lead        0.94
Mercury     0.023
Silver      0.90
Zinc        10.42
 
   (C)   Any waters or wastewaters having a pH lower than 5.0 or higher than
11.5 or having any other corrosive property which may be cable of causing
damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and/or personnel of the POTW. In no
case shall the quantities of waters or wastewaters be such that the pH of the
influent to the POTW is caused to exceed a pH of 8.0.
   (D)   Any waters or wastewaters which result in the presence of toxic bases,
vapors, or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker
health and safety problems.
   (E)   Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points
designated by the POTW.
   (F)   Any medical/infectious wastes, pharmaceutical waste, or radiological
waste except as specifically authorized in a discharge permit.
   (G)   Any wastewater causing the wastewater treatment plant's effluent or
sludge to fail a toxicity test.
   (H)   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded by an approved garbage
disposal unit.
   (I)   Any waters or wastewaters containing heavy metals, solvents, and
similar objectionable or toxic substances to such degree that any such material
discharged to the public sewer exceeds the limits established by the Public
Works Director, the New Hampshire Water Supply and Pollution Control Division
or the EPA for such materials.
   (J)   Any waters or wastewaters containing suspended solids, BOD, COD, or
color of such character and quantity that would impose deleterious effects on
the operation of the POTW or require more than normal attention or expense to
handle.
   (K)   Any radioactive wastes of such half-life or concentration as may
exceed limits established by the Public Works Director in compliance with
applicable State or Federal regulations.
   (L)   (1)   Any hazardous waste listed or designated by State or Federal
regulations.
      (2)   Daily concentrations are the concentration of a pollutant
discharged, determined from the analysis of a flow composited sample (or other
sampling procedure approved by the Public Works Director) representative of the
discharge over the duration of a 24 hour day or industrial operating schedule
of less than 24 hours. For industrial discharge applications, the above limits
shall apply at the end of the process train prior to dilution with
nonindustrial wastewaters.
   (M)   Screening levels. Any waters or wastewaters with any of the following
constituents at daily concentration greater than those indicated in the table
of screening levels below:
      (1)   Table of screening levels.
COMPOUNDS mg/l
COMPOUNDS                         mg/l
Benzene                           0.13
BOD                               350
Carbon disulfide                  0.06
Chlorine                          1,500
Chloroform                        0.41
1.2 Dichloroethylene              0.28
Sulfide                           1.0
Sulfate (for Type II concentrate) 1,500/150
Sulfite                           280
Suspended solids                  350
Tetrachloroethylene:              0.53
1,1,1 trichloroethane             1.55
Trichloroethene                   0.71
OIL AND GREASE
Petroleum or mineral origin       100 ppm
Animal and vegetable origin       350 ppm
 
      (2)   Screening levels are concentrations above which a particular
pollutant is expected to create problems due to health, flammability, chemical
reactivity, or organic/solids loadings.
      (3)   If any of the screening levels are exceeded and repeat analyses
indicate noncompliance with the screening level, then the Industrial User may
be required at the discretion of the city, to implement a study to evaluate the
potential impact of the discharge of this pollutant to the city's collection
system or wastewater treatment facility. This study must be conducted under the
supervision and approval of the city.
      (4)   Upon evaluation of pH, temperature, dilution, type of sewer
construction, other toxic fumes and ventilation present at the site of the
particular discharge, screening levels shall then be adjusted and administered
as limits for the specific discharge.
(Ord. passed 1-17-95; Am. Ord. passed 10-1-96; Am. Ord. passed 8-5-97; Am. Ord.
passed 12-2-14) Penalty, see §
52.999
§ 52.027 PRETREATMENT FACILITIES.
   (A)   If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be
discharged to the public sewers, containing the substances or possessing the
characteristics enumerated in § 52.026, the Public Works Director may:
      (1)   Reject the wastes.
      (2)   Require pretreatment to any acceptable condition for discharge to
the public sewers.
      (3)   Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge.
      (4)   Pursue enforcement action.
   (B)   If the pretreatment of waste flows is required, the design and
installation of the pretreatment facilities shall be subject to the review and
approval of the Public Works Director and the WSPCD, and be subject to the
requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances, and laws. No construction of
such facilities shall commence until approvals are obtained in writing, plans
designed by a professional engineer licensed in the state. Such approval shall
not relieve the owner of the responsibility of discharging treated waste
meeting the requirements of this chapter. Following completion of the
pretreatment system, the city shall be provided with a certification by a
professional engineer licensed in the state of New Hampshire, certifying that
the facility has been constructed in accordance with the approved plans and
specifications.
   (C)   All pretreatment facilities shall be maintained continuously in
satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at no expense to the city. In
the maintaining of the facilities, the owner shall be responsible for the
proper removal and disposal by appropriate means of the captured material and
shall maintain records of the dates, and means of disposal which are subject to
review by the Public Works Director. Any removal and hauling of the collected
materials, not performed by owner personnel, must be performed by currently
licensed waste disposal firms.
(Ord. passed 1-17-95)
Penalty, see § 52.999
§ 52.028 EFFLUENT MONITORING DEVICES.
   At premises where any of the substances or wastes prescribed as being or to
be excluded from any public sewer or drain are present and liable to be
discharged contrary to the limitations of this chapter, the Public Works
Director may require that the owner of said premises operate and maintain
suitable monitoring devices on any or all building sewers or drains from said
building sewers or premises near the point or points where said building sewers
or drains connect to any public sewer or drain. By means of said devices, the
owner, owners and occupants of said premises and the Public Works Director, or
any public officer charged with any duty involving the supervision of the
disposal of wastewaters, may secure samples of or examine the wastes and
wastewaters discharged into said public sewer or drain and measure the
quantities thereof for the purpose of ascertaining the compliance or
noncompliance with the requirements of this chapter. All such devices and
facilities shall be accessible and safely located, shall be constructed in
accordance with plans approved by the Public Works Director, shall be installed
by the owner at his expense, and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe
and accessible at all times.
(Ord. passed 1-17-95)
Penalty, see § 52.999
§ 52.029 GREASE, OIL, AND SAND INTERCEPTORS.
   (A)   Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the
opinion of the Public Works Director, they are necessary for the proper
handling of wastewater containing of grease, oil, sand or other materials which
will damage or interfere with the operation of sewers or drains or give rise to
hazardous conditions therein; except that such interceptors shall not be
required for residential users. Interceptors shall be required on sewer mains
or services directly or indirectly tributary to the sanitary sewerage system
from existing or new garages, service stations, enclosed parking areas, and
other establishments capable of discharging petroleum-based oil or grease,
flammable wastes, sand, or other harmful substances. All interception units
shall be located to be easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Such
interceptors shall be inspected, cleaned, and repaired regularly, as needed, by
the user at their expense.
   (B)   All interceptors shall be installed and maintained continuously in
satisfactory and effective operation by and at the expense of the owner or
user. Both the owner of the premises where an interceptor is required, and the
owner or operator of the establishment or business conducted on the premises
shall be jointly and severally responsible for installing, properly servicing
and maintaining the interceptor. The owner or user shall maintain records
(which are subject to review by the Public Works Director) of the dates, and
means of disposal of accumulated interceptor wastes. Any removal and hauling of
the collected materials not performed by the user's personnel must be performed
by currently licensed waste disposal firms.
   (C)   To facilitate compliance with this section, the user shall apply for a
permit and furnish as part of the permit application a plan and description of
the device. Where grease, oil, or sand interceptors or similar appurtenances
are involved, approval must be granted from both the Planning and Community
Development Department and the Public Works Director.
(Ord. passed 1-17-95; Am. Ord. passed 2-7-09; Am. Ord. passed 1- 7-2025)
Penalty, see §
52.999
§ 52.030 MONITORING RECORDS; ANALYTICAL RECORDS.
   The owner shall keep records of all monitoring and/or sampling data as
required by the Public Works Director and submit said records upon request to
the Department, the New Hampshire Water Supply and Pollution Control Division
and the EPA. All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of
water and wastewater to which reference is made in this chapter shall be
determined in accordance with the EPA Approved Methods published in the Code of
Federal Regulations, Title 40, Part 136 (40 CFR 136) and amendments thereto.
Where 40 CFR Part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for
the pollutant in question, or where the EPA determines that the Part 136
sampling and analytical techniques are inappropriate for the pollutant in
question, sampling and analysis shall be performed by using validated
analytical methods or any other applicable sampling and analytical procedures,
including procedures suggested by the POTW or other parties, approved by EPA.
Analytical measurements shall be determined at the sampling manhole provided,
or upon suitable samples taken at said sampling manhole or at the end of the
pretreatment process prior to discharge to the city sewer. In the event that a
special sampling manhole has not been required, the sampling manhole shall be
considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the
point at which the building sewer is connected. Sampling will be carried out by
customarily accepted methods which, in the opinion of the Public Works
Director, reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and
determine the existence of hazards to life, limb, and property.
(Ord. passed 1-17-95)
Penalty, see § 52.999
§ 52.031 SPECIAL AGREEMENTS.
   No statement contained in this subchapter except for
§ 52.026(A) - (B) shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or
arrangement between the city and any industrial user or commercial
establishment, whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may
be accepted by the city for treatment, subject to payment therefore by the
industrial or commercial establishment, and provided that such agreements do
not contravene any requirements of existing federal or state laws and/or
regulations promulgated thereunder, are compatible with any user charge now in
effect, and do not waive applicable National Categorical Pretreatment
standards. The city may submit a proposal to EPA to modify its maximum
headworks loading allocations to allow for IU specific limitations to be
included in its industrial discharge permits.
(Ord. passed 1-17-95)
§ 52.032 COMPLIANCE WITH STATE AND FEDERAL LIMITATIONS.
   All industrial wastewaters shall be pretreated in accordance with Federal
and State regulations and this chapter to the extent required by applicable
National Categorical Pretreatment standards, state pretreatment standards or
standards established by the Public Works Director, whichever is more
stringent.
(Ord. passed 1-17-95)
Penalty, see § 52.999
§ 52.033 INFORMATION REQUIRED.
   (A)   The Public Works Director may require a user of sewer services to
provide information needed to determine compliance with this chapter.
   (B)   This information may include:
      (1)   Wastewater discharge peak rates and volumes over a specified time
period.
      (2)   Chemical analyses of wastewaters.
      (3)   Information on raw materials, processes, and products affecting
wastewater volume and quality.
      (4)   Quantity and disposition of specific liquid, sludge, oil, solvent,
or other materials important to sewer use control.
      (5)   A plot plan of sewage works on the user's property showing building
sewer and pretreatment facility location.
      (6)   Plans and specifications of wastewater pretreatment facilities.
      (7)   Details of systems to prevent and control the losses of materials
through spills to the public sewer or drain.
(Ord. passed 1-17-95)
§ 52.034 SEPTAGE.
   No septage shall be discharged to the city's public or private sewers or
drains.
(Ord. passed 1-17-95)
Penalty, see § 52.999
§ 52.035 DILUTION PROHIBITED.
   It shall be illegal to meet requirements of this chapter by dilution of
wastewater in lieu of proper pretreatment.
(Ord. passed 1-17-95)
Penalty, see § 52.999
§ 52.036 SLUG DISCHARGE PLANS.
   Based on inspection and surveillance activities of industrial users, the
Public Works Director may require a plan to prevent and control slug
discharges. This may require descriptions of discharge practices, descriptions
of stored chemicals, notification procedures in the event of a discharge,
procedural practices for spill prevention, containment structures, and
equipment for control, cleanup, and monitoring.
(Ord. passed 1-17-95)
INDUSTRIAL PRETREATMENT
§ 52.050 COMPLIANCE.
   All persons or industrial or commercial establishments discharging
industrial wastewaters into a public sewer or drain, shall comply with
applicable requirements of federal and state industrial pretreatment
regulations, in addition to the requirements of this chapter. The national
categorical standards, found in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, parts 405-471,
are hereby incorporated into this chapter.
(Ord. passed 1-17-95)
Penalty, see § 52.999
§ 52.051 PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   All persons, industrial or commercial establishments subject to these
rules shall submit an application for an industrial discharge permit (IDP), as
required by the city, containing information required under applicable federal,
state, and local industrial pretreatment reporting regulations. Such
information, as a minimum, shall include:
      (1)   The name and address of the facility, including the name of the
operators and owners.
      (2)   A list of all environmental permits held by or for the facility.
      (3)   A brief description of the nature, average rate of production, and
standard industrial classification of the operations carried out at such
facility.
      (4)   An identification of the categorical pretreatment standards
applicable to each regulated process.
      (5)   An analysis identifying the nature and concentration of pollutants
in the discharge. A new source shall give estimates of its anticipated quantity
of pollutants to be discharged.
      (6)   Information showing the measured averaged daily and maximum daily
flow, in gallons per day, to the public sewer or drain from regulated process
streams and from other streams.
      (7)   A schedule of actions to be taken to comply with discharge
limitations.
      (8)   Additional information as required by the Public Works Director.
   (B)   All permit applications must be signed and certified in accordance
with procedures set out in § 52.055 of this chapter.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for significant industrial users to discharge
wastewater, either directly or indirectly, into the city's sewer system without
first obtaining an industrial discharge permit from the city. Any violation of
the terms and conditions of an industrial user permit shall be deemed a
violation of this chapter. Obtaining an industrial discharge permit does not
relieve a permittee of its obligation to obtain other permits required by
federal, state, or local law.
   (D)   The city may require that other industrial users, including liquid
waste haulers, obtain industrial discharge permits as necessary to carry out
the purposes of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 1-17-95)
Penalty, see § 52.999
§ 52.052 INDUSTRIAL DISCHARGE PERMIT CONTENTS.
   (A)   The IDP will outline the general and specific conditions under which
the industrial process waste will be accepted for discharge into the city's
public sewers and drains.
   (B)   Specifically, the IDP will include, but need not be limited to, the
following:
      (1)   Pretreatment and self-monitoring facilities required.
      (2)   Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and record-
keeping requirements. These requirements shall include an identification of
pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample
type based on federal, state, and local law.
      (3)   Effluent limitations on the industrial process waste.
      (4)   A statement that indicates IDP duration, which in no event shall
exceed five years.
      (5)   A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is nontransferable
without prior notification to the city in accordance with § 52.057.
      (6)   A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for
violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable
compliance schedule. Such schedule may not extend the time for compliance
beyond that required by applicable federal, state, or local law.
(Ord. passed 1-17-95)
Penalty, see § 52.999
§ 52.053 APPEALS; PERMIT ENFORCEABLE.
   Conditions of the industrial discharge permits may be appealed in accordance
with § 52.188. The conditions of the IDP will be strictly enforceable by the
city.
(Ord. passed 1-17-95)
§ 52.054 COMPLIANCE REPORTS.
   Significant industrial users shall submit periodic compliance reports at
least once every six months or as required by the Public Works Director,
indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the discharge from the
regulated processes governed by pretreatment standards and the average and
maximum daily flow for these process units. The reports shall state whether the
applicable categorical pretreatment standards and effluent limitations are
being met on a consistent basis and, if not, what additional operation and
maintenance practices and/or pretreatment are necessary in order to meet all
standards on a consistent basis. The reports shall also include compliance with
Best Management Practices when applicable. All compliance reports must be in
conformance with § 52.055 of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 1-17-95; Am. Ord. passed 12-2-14)
§ 52.055 CERTIFICATION STATEMENT ON REPORTS.
   (A)   All wastewater discharge permit applications and user reports must be
signed by an authorized representative of the user and contain the following
certification statement:
“I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were
prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed
to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information
submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system,
or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the
information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true,
accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for
submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and
imprisonment for knowing violations.”
   (B)   An authorized representative is:
      (1)   A president, secretary, treasurer, or vice president of the
corporation in charge of a principle business function, or any other person who
performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the corporation; or
      (2)   The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operating
facilities, provided, the manager is authorized to make management decisions
which govern the operation of the regulated facility including having the
explicit or implicit duty of making major capital investment recommendations,
and initiate and direct other comprehensive measures to assure long-term
environmental compliance with environmental laws and regulations can ensure
that the necessary systems are established or actions taken to gather complete
and accurate information for control mechanism requirements; and where
authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in
accordance with corporate procedures.
      (3)   By a general partner or proprietor if the industrial user
submitting the reports required is a partnership or sole proprietorship
respectively.
      (4)   By a duly authorized representative of the individual described in
subsection (B)(1), (2), or (3) above of this section if:
      (5)   The authorization is made in writing by the individual described in
subsection (B)(1), (2), or (3);
      (6)   The authorization specifies either an individual or a position
having responsibility for the overall operation of the facility from which the
industrial discharge originates, such as the position of plant manager,
operator of a well, or a well field superintendent, or a position of equivalent
responsibility, or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for
the company; and
      (7)   The written authorization is submitted to the Control Authority.
      (8)   If the authorization under subsection (B)(4) is no longer accurate
because a different individual or position has responsibility for the overall
operation of the facility, or overall responsibility for environmental matters
for the company, a new authorization satisfying the requirements of subsection
(B)(4) of this section must be submitted to the Control Authority prior to or
together with any reports to be signed by an authorized representative.
(Ord. passed 1-17-95; Am. Ord. passed 12-2-14) Penalty, see §
52.999
§ 52.056 RECORD KEEPING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Industrial users subject to the reporting requirements under this
section shall maintain records of all information resulting from any monitoring
activities required by this section, including documentation associated with
Best Management Practices.
   (B)   Such records shall include for each sample:
      (1)   The date, exact place, method, and time of sampling and the names
or persons taking the sample.
      (2)   The name and signature of each person who handles the sample in the
chain of custody.
      (3)   The dates when analyses were performed.
      (4)   The name of the laboratory performing the analyses.
      (5)   The techniques, methods, measurement units, and detection limits
used in all analyses.
      (6)   The results of all analyses.
   (C)   Any industrial user or POTW subject to the reporting requirements
established in this section (including documentation associated with Best
Management Practices) shall be required to retain for a minimum of three years
any records of monitoring activities and results (whether or not such
monitoring activities are required by this section) and shall make such records
available for inspection and copying by the Director and the Regional
Administrator ofthe U.S. EPA (and POTW in the case of an industrial user). This
period of retention shall be extended during the course of any unresolved
litigation regarding the industrial user or POTW or when requested by the
Public Works Director, the state, or the U.S. EPA.
(Ord. passed 1-17-95; Am. Ord. passed 12-2-14) Penalty, see §
52.999
§ 52.057 PERMIT DURATION; REAPPLICATION.
   (A)   (1)   The IDP shall be in effect for five years, unless the applicant
is notified otherwise by the city. The user shall apply for permit reissuance
by submitting a complete permit application a minimum of 60 days prior to the
expiration date of the user’s existing permit. Under no circumstances shall the
permittee continue to discharge without an effective permit.
      (2)   The Public Works Director shall allow the Chief Engineer or their
designee to sign Authorized Discharge permits to all applicants that are
required to be permitted.
   (B)   An expired permit will continue to be effective and enforceable until
the permit is reissued if:
      (1)   The industrial user has submitted a complete permit application at
least 60 days prior to the expiration date of the user's existing permit.
      (2)   The failure to reissue the permit, prior to expiration of the
previous permit, is not due to any act or failure to act on the part of the
industrial user.
(Ord. passed 1-17-95; Am. Ord. passed 12-2-14)
§ 52.058 TRANSFER AND MODIFICATIONS.
   (A)   In the event that the permittee undergoes a major change in ownership
of either its corporate voting stock or control of its corporate stock or of
the building to which this contract relates, then the permit may be reassigned
or transferred if:
      (1)   At least 30 days advance notice is provided to the Public Works
Director.
      (2)   The new owner provides written notice that there is not immediate
intent to change the facility's operations and processes, and identifies the
specific date on which the transfer is to occur.
      (3)   The new owner enters into a new permit which embodies the terms of
this permit.
   (B)   The IDP may be modified, suspended, or revoked in whole or in part
during its term for causes including but not limited to the following:
      (1)   Violation of any term or condition of this permit.
      (2)   Providing false information, misrepresentation of facts, or failure
to disclose fully all relevant facts in permit applications, reports, and
inspections.
      (3)   A change in conditions or the existence of a condition which
requires either a temporary or permanent reduction of elimination of the
authorized discharge.
      (4)   Promulgation of a more stringent pretreatment standard by city,
state, or federal agencies having jurisdiction over receiving waters. Permits
modified under this section may include implementation schedules, self-
monitoring requirements, revised effluent limitations, and other provisions
necessary to assure compliance.
      (5)   To reflect transfer of the facility ownership and/or operation of a
new owner/operator.
(Ord. passed 1-17-95; Am. Ord. passed 12-2-14)
§ 52.059 APPROVAL FOR CHANGES TO INDUSTRIAL USER DISCHARGES.
   An industry proposing a new discharge, a flow increase of 20% or greater
than currently permitted, or any change in character or pollutants than
currently permitted, including the listed or characteristic hazardous wastes
for which the IU has submitted initial notification under 40 CFR 403.12 (p),
must submit a completed IDP application to the city at least 60 calendar days
prior to the commencement of such discharge. The submitted application must
include the information as enumerated in
§ 52.033. Upon approval of the IDP application by the city, a discharge permit
request will be submitted by the city to the New Hampshire Water Supply and
Pollution Control Division on behalf of the industry. Upon approval of the
Discharge Permit Request by the New Hampshire Water Supply and Pollution
Control division, the industry and the city will enter into a new or amended
IDP in accordance with the procedure outlined in this section.
(Ord. passed 1-17-95)
§ 52.060 CITY NOTIFICATIONS OF REGULATIONS.
   The city, through duly authorized agents, shall provide timely notification
to appropriate industries of applicable categorical pretreatment standards and
revisions thereto.
(Ord. passed 1-17-95)
Penalty, see § 52.999
§ 52.061 CATEGORICAL STANDARDS.
   (A)   Compliance with categorical pretreatment standards shall be achieved
within three years of the date such standards are effective, unless a shorter
compliance time is specified in the standards.
   (B)   An industrial user subject to categorical pretreatment standards shall
not discharge wastewater directly or indirectly to the city's public sewers or
drains after the compliance date of such standards unless an amendment to the
IDP has been issued by the city.
   (C)   Within 120 calendar days after the effective date of a categorical
pretreatment standard, (or, for a new source, 90 days prior to the commencement
of discharge) an industry subject to such standards shall submit an application
for an IDP amendment. The application shall contain the information outlined
under
§ 52.051. An attachment shall state whether the applicable pretreatment
standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not, what additional
operation and maintenance and/or pretreatment is necessary to bring the
industrial user into compliance with the applicable pretreatment standards.
This statement shall be signed and certified in accordance with the procedures
set out in
§ 52.055 of this chapter and certified to by a professional engineer licensed
in the state. Such application shall be considered a baseline monitoring
report.
   (D)   Each user subject to a compliance schedule as required under
§ 52.051 or 40 CFR 403.12(b) (7), shall report on progress toward meeting
compliance with these regulations as follows:
      (1)   Not later than 14 days following each date in the schedule, and the
final date for compliance, the industrial user shall submit a progress report
to the city indicating whether or not it complied with the increment of
progress to be met on such date and, if not, the date on which it expects to
comply, the reason for the delay, and the steps being taken by the industrial
user to return the progress to the schedule established.
      (2)   The time for any increment in the schedule, or the interval between
reports required in subsection (1) of this division, shall not exceed nine
months. An increment is the time between the dates for commencement and
completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of
pretreatment facilities necessary to achieve compliance with this chapter and
national categorical pretreatment standards.
   (E)   Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable
national categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new industrial
user following introduction of wastewater into a city sewer, any industrial
user subject to pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the
city a report indicating the nature and concentration of all pollutants in the
discharge from the regulated process which are limited by pretreatment
standards and the average and maximum daily flow for these process lines. The
report shall state whether the applicable pretreatment standards are being met
on a consistent basis, and if not, what additional operation and maintenance
and/or pretreatment is necessary to bring the industrial user into compliance
with the applicable pretreatment standards. This statement shall be signed by
an authorized representative and certified to by a professional engineer
licensed in the state of New Hampshire.
(Ord. passed 1-17-95)
Penalty, see § 52.999
§ 52.062 NOTIFICATION OF HAZARDOUS WASTES DISCHARGES.
   (A)   Any user who commences the discharge of hazardous waste shall notify
the Public Works Director, the EPA Regional Waste Management Division Director,
and State hazardous waste authorities, in writing, of any discharge into the
POTW of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste
under 40 CFR Part 261. Such notification must include the name of the hazardous
waste as set forth in 40 CFR Part 261, the EPA hazardous waste number, and the
type of discharge (continuous batch, or other). If the user discharges more
than 100 kilograms of such waste per calendar month to the POTW, the
notification also shall contain the following information to the extent such
information is known and readily available to the user:
      (1)   An identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the
wastes.
      (2)   An estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents in
the wastestream discharged during the calendar month.
      (3)   An estimation of the mass of constituents in the wastestream
expected to be discharged during the following 12 months.
   (B)   All notification must take place no later than 180 days after the
discharge commences. Any notification under this division need be submitted
only once for each hazardous waste discharged. However, notifications of
changed conditions must be submitted under
§ 52.058 of this chapter. The notification requirement in this section does not
apply to pollutants already reported by users subject to categorical
pretreatment standards under the self-monitoring requirements of
§§ 52.054 and
52.061.
   (C)   Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of division (A), above,
during a calendar month in which they discharge no more than 15 kilograms of
hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute hazardous wastes as specified in
40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e). Discharge of more than 15 kilograms of nonacute
hazardous wastes in a calendar month, or of any quantity of acute hazardous
wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e), requires a one time
notification. Subsequent months during which the user discharges more than such
quantities of any hazardous waste do not require additional notification.
   (D)   In the case of any new regulations under Section 3001 of RCRA
identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any
additional substance as a hazardous waste, the user must notify the Public
Works Director, the EPA Regional Waste Management Division Director, and state
hazardous waste authorities of the discharge of such substance within 90 days
of the effective date of such regulations.
   (E)   In the case of any notification made under this section, the user
shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume of toxicity
of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has determined to be
economically practical.
   (F)   This provision does not create a right to discharge any substance not
otherwise permitted to be discharged by this chapter, a permit issued
hereunder, or any other applicable federal or state law.
(Ord. passed 1-17-95)
Penalty, see § 52.999
§ 52.063 SLUG DISCHARGES.
   Industrial users shall notify the Public Works Director or his
representative immediately of all discharges to the public sewer or drainage
systems that could cause problems to the POTW, including a slug loading as
defined
§ 52.002. The Public Works Director may, after notice to the industrial user,
immediately halt or prevent any industrial wastewater discharge to the sewer
system which appears to present a danger to the health and welfare of persons,
the environment, or which may threaten to interfere with operation of the
public sewer system and/or sewage treatment plant.
(Ord. passed 1-17-95)
Penalty, see § 52.999
§ 52.064 COMPLIANCE MONITORING.
   The Public Works Director shall, as necessary, sample and analyze wastewater
discharges of industrial users and conduct inspection activities to identify
occasional and continuing noncompliance with industrial pretreatment standards.
All industries discharging to public sewers and drains shall allow unrestricted
access to the Department, New Hampshire Water Supply, and Pollution Control
Division, and EPA personnel for the purpose of inspection, investigating and
sampling of facilities and discharges from the industries.
(Ord. passed 1-17-95)
§ 52.065 PUBLIC INFORMATION.
   Information and data submitted to the Public Works Director relating to
wastewater discharge characteristics shall be available to the public without
restriction. Other such information shall be available to the extent provided
by 40 CFR Part 2.302.
(Ord. passed 1-17-95)
§ 52.066 PUBLIC PARTICIPATION.
   The Public Works Director shall comply with the public participation
requirements of 40 CFR, Part 25 in the enforcement of industrial pretreatment
standards and requirements.
(Ord. passed 1-17-95)
Penalty, see § 52.999
§ 52.067 VIOLATIONS OF LIMITS; ACTIONS REQUIRED.
   If sampling performed by an industrial user indicates a violation, the user
shall notify the city within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation. The
user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the
repeat analysis to the city within 30 days after becoming aware of the
violations, except the industrial user is not required to resample if:
   (A)   The city performs sampling at the industrial user at a frequency of at
least once per month; or,
   (B)   The city performs sampling at the industrial user between the time
when the user performs its initial sampling and the time the user receives the
results of this sampling.
(Ord. passed 1-17-95)
SEPTAGE DISPOSAL
§ 52.080 STATE PERMIT.
   Any person, firm, corporation, municipal subdivision or institution who
removes, transports, or disposes, or intends to remove, transport or dispose of
any human excrement or other putrescible material by portable or mobile
container shall hold an unrevoked permit for that purpose from the New
Hampshire Department of Environmental Services, and shall be a condition
precedent to the issuance of a permit by the Public Works Director.
(Ord. passed 1-17-95; Am. Ord. passed 1-7-97)
§ 52.081 CITY PERMIT.
   (A)   Any person, firm, corporation, municipal subdivision, or institution
who intends to dispose of any human excrement or other putrescible material
within the limits of the city shall first obtain a permit therefor from the
Public Works Director. Such permittee may discharge such septage to the septage
receiving facility provided at the Manchester Wastewater Treatment Plant.
Service charges are as set forth in § 52.161. Disposal of septage in the city
will be in accordance with the rules and regulations of the Department and this
chapter.
   (B)   The Public Works Director shall issue to each applicant for a permit
an application form whereon the applicant shall identify the motor vehicle, the
capacity of the tank, and the state permit number and other details of
compliance with the regulations of the New Hampshire Department of
Environmental Services. The Public Works Director shall cause the said septage
truck to be inspected and if it complies with this subchapter and other
applicable laws, he shall issue to the owner a permit for each such truck upon
payment of a permit fee of $10.
   (C)   The following conditions shall constitute conditions precedent to the
issuance of each permit:
      (1)   Each septage truck shall have installed thereon a sight level by
which the quantity of the contents of each tank may be ascertained by sight. In
the event that the permittee has either a defective sight level or no sight
level attached to the septage truck the permittee shall be charged according to
the full tank capacity at the time of discharge or by other methods as
determined by the Public Works Director.
      (2)   Evidence of satisfactory insurance coverage must be provided at the
time of application for a permit and maintained throughout its duration.
      (3)   City permits are nontransferable.
   (D)   An identification decal shall be affixed to each vehicle. The owner
must continually display the decal on the truck.
(Ord. passed 1-17-95; Am. Ord. passed 12-2-14) Penalty, see §
52.999
§ 52.082 DISCHARGE PROHIBITED.
   No person, firm, corporation, municipal subdivision, or institution shall
discharge the contents of a portable or mobile container which contains human
excrement or other putrescible material at any place, or into any container
(not conforming to state law) or at any point of discharge within the city,
other than to the facility provided as described in § 52.081. No person, firm,
corporation, municipal subdivision, or institution shall discharge any toxic,
poisonous, or radioactive solids, liquids, or gases into the wastewater
treatment plant. No person, firm, corporation, municipal subdivision, or
institution shall discharge the contents of grease, oil, and/or sand
interceptors into any city facility without specific authorization of the
Public Works Director.
(Ord. passed 1-17-95; Am. Ord. passed 1-7-97; Am. Ord. passed 12-2-14) Penalty,
see §
52.999
§ 52.083 PERMIT REVOCABLE.
   Failure to comply with city ordinances and regulations regarding septage may
be cause for revocation of the permit as defined in § 52.081.
(Ord. passed 1-17-95; Am. Ord. passed 12-2-14)
§ 52.084 BILLING; FUNDS.
   (A)   The Public Works Director shall bill the permittee on a monthly basis
for charges sincurred. Such bills shall be due and payable no later than the
25th of that month. If payment is not made when due, the hauler will be “shut
off” until payment in full is made. Once payment is received, the hauler will
be reactivated by the end of the next business day. Late payment charges of 12%
shall be added to delinquent payments; the Public Works Director is authorized
to require payment in cash at the time of discharge of the septage or to
rescind the Septage Permit.
   (B)   The funds received from the collection of service charges for the
receipt and treatment of septage shall be kept as a separate and distinct fund
which shall be known as the sewer fund. Any surplus in such fund may, as
determined by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen, be used for the enlargement or
replacement of the wastewater treatment facilities and the cost and operation
of the city's public sewer system. Such service charges may be used to pay for
previous expansion or improvements of wastewater treatment facilities or for
any purpose provided in § 52.095.
   (C)   Charges for the receipt and treatment of septage at the wastewater
treatment facility will be in accordance with § 52.161.
(Ord. passed 1-17-95; Am. Ord. passed 12-2-14)
SEWER RENTAL CHARGES
§ 52.095 SEWER RENTAL CHARGE.
   Pursuant to R.S.A. 149-I:7, a system of sewer rental charges is hereby
established and assessed for paying the cost of construction, payment of
interest on debt incurred, management, maintenance, replacement, operation, and
repair of the city's wastewater treatment facilities, and the city's public
sewer system and other legal expenses of the Environmental Protection Division.
Said sewer rental charges shall consist of a service charge and a sewer user
charge. Sewer rental charge = service charge (S) + sewer usage charge.
(Ord. passed 1-17-95)
§ 52.096 PAYMENT.
   Sewer rental charges for residential premises, commercial establishments,
and industrial establishments shall be paid by the owner of any structure
containing one or more dwelling units, commercial establishments, or industrial
establishments from which structure sewage discharges into the city's public
sewer system.
(Ord. passed 1-17-95)
§ 52.097 SERVICE CHARGES. 
   Service charges for all connections to the sewage system shall be payable by
the owner of the real estate whether or not the premises are occupied. All
service charges shall be at the rates provided in § 52.160. In the case of
structure containing multiple dwelling units or any combination of dwelling
units, commercial establishments, or industrial establishments, a separate
service charge shall be payable for each dwelling unit, commercial, and
industrial establishment.
(Ord. passed 1-17-95; Am. Ord. passed 12-2-14)
§ 52.098 USAGE CHARGES.
   Usage charges for residential and commercial premises shall be based on the
consumption of water on premises connected with public sewers and drains. In
computing charges under the user charge formula for residential and commercial
users, biochemical oxygen demand, and suspended solids content are fixed at 250
mg/l. Industrial user charges are based on the volume and strength of
wastewater discharged by industrial users. Strength shall be determined from
the BOD and SS content of the wastewater as determined by periodic composite
sampling by the Environmental Protection Division of the Department. Said
periodic composite sampling shall be conducted by or under the supervision of
the Chief Engineer to an extent that will permit a reasonable determination of
BOD and SS. All usage charges shall be at the rate provided in § 52.160.
(Ord. passed 1-17-95; Am. Ord. passed 12-2-14)
§ 52.099 WATER METER REMOVAL.
   If a building or structure is demolished, or damaged by fire or Force
Majeure, service charges for the original number of dwelling units or
establishments shall continue to accrue until such time that the water meter
has been removed.
(Ord. passed 1-17-95; Am. Ord. passed 12-2-14)
§ 52.100 SEWER FUND.
   The funds received from the collection of sewer rental charges shall be kept
as a separate and distinct fund which shall be known as the sewer fund. Any
surplus in such fund may, as determined by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen, be
used for the enlargement or replacement of the wastewater treatment facilities
and the city's public sewer system. Such sewer rental charges may be used to
pay previous expansion or improvements of wastewater treatment facilities or
for any purpose provided in
§ 52.095.
(Ord. passed 1-17-95)
§ 52.101 BILLING PERIODS; DELINQUENT ACCOUNTS.
   (A)   Billing period for sewer rental charges shall correspond with billing
periods of the Manchester waterworks for the same customers. Bills shall be
itemized and shall specify a due date which shall be 30 days from bill date.
   (B)   Delinquent accounts are subject to such interest and late payment
charges as are provided by R.S.A. Chapter 149-I.
   (C)   The Board of Mayor and Aldermen may commit all sewer charges for sewer
only customer accounts under R.S.A. 149-I, or any delinquent portion thereof,
to the Collector of Taxes with a warrant under the hands and seal of the Mayor
and Aldermen requiring him to collect them; and he shall have the same rights
and remedies and be subject to the same liabilities in relation thereto as in
collections of taxes.
   (D)   Warrants for delinquent charges shall be committed to the Tax
Collector for delinquent accounts greater than 90 days from bill date.
(Ord. passed 1-17-95; Am. Ord. passed 12-2-14)
BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS
§ 52.115 BUILDING CONNECTION PERMITS REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person shall uncover, make any connection with or opening into,
use, alter, or disturb any public sewer, or appurtenances thereof, unless a
proper permit therefore shall have been duly issued by the Public Works
Director, as hereinafter provided. All building connection installation and
alteration work shall be performed by pipe layers certified by the Department,
or by licensed plumbers.
   (B)   There shall be two classes of building connection permits: Class A
permits, which shall authorize the connection of residential establishments
generating only sanitary sewage, as defined in
§ 52.002, to the public sewer; and Class B permits, which shall authorize the
connection of commercial or industrial establishments to the public sewer.
Building connection permit fees shall be assessed based on the number of
connections to the public or private sewer.
   (C)   Application for a building connection permit shall be made by a
certified pipe layer for the building to be connected and shall be made on an
application form provided by the Public Works Director. Each application shall
be supplemented with the plans and specifications for the building sewer
connection and such other information relating to the building and the wastes
to be discharged as may be considered pertinent by the Public Works Director.
At his discretion, the Public Works Director may also require that all plans,
specifications, and data so submitted shall bear the seal and signature of a
professional civil engineer registered in the state of New Hampshire. A permit
and inspection fee will be established by the Board of Highway Commissioners as
noted in § 52.162.
(Ord. passed 1-17-95)
Penalty, see § 52.999
§ 52.116 SEWER IMPROVEMENT AREA.
   (A)   (1)   Application for a building connection permit in the following
locations, identified as sewer improvement areas, within which new construction
is proposed, requires the following off-site sewer improvement cost recovery
fee:
      (2)   No areas at this time.
   (B)   The foregoing off-site sewer improvement cost recovery fees are based
on an equivalent dwelling unit basis where one dwelling unit is equal to a
design average daily sanitary flow of 250 gallons per day, as determined by the
Department. The off-site sewer improvement cost recovery fee will be paid to
the Department at the time of or prior to the issuance of the building sewer
permit.
   (C)   The Board of Mayor and Aldermen reserves the right to review the off-
site sewer improvement cost recovery fee at least once a year and to adjust
those fees as deemed necessary.
(Ord. passed 1-17-95; Am. Ord. passed 8-6-02; Am. Ord. passed 12-2-14)
§ 52.117 CERTIFIED PIPE LAYERS.
   All pipe layers shall be certified by the Department prior to performing any
work in the city. A valid plumbers license shall be prima facie evidence of
certification as a pipe layer as defined in § 52.002. All certifications shall
be issued for a one-year period, the renewal date being one year from date of
approval by the Public Works Director. In applying for a certification, the
prospective pipe layer shall provide all information required by the Department
including a statement that he will supervise and be responsible for all work
performed.
(Ord. passed 1-17-95; Am. Ord. passed 12-2-14) Penalty, see §
52.999
§ 52.118 PERMITS OUTSTANDING.
   (A)   No pipe layer shall have more than ten building connection permits
outstanding at any time without written permission from the Department. One
copy of the permit shall be available for inspection at the site of the work at
all times. Pipe layers shall install building connections only during the
normal working hours of the city.
   (B)   Emergency working hours shall be approved only in writing by the
Department.
(Ord. passed 1-17-95)
Penalty, see § 52.999
§ 52.119 NONTRANSFERABLE.
   No certified pipe layer shall allow his name to be used by any other person,
either for the purpose of obtaining permits or doing any work under his
certification.
(Ord. passed 1-17-95)
Penalty, see § 52.999
§ 52.120 SUSPENSION; REVOCATION.
   Should the Public Works Director find that any certified pipe layer has
failed to conform to the requirements of this chapter and to the conditions of
any permit or certification issued thereunder, the Public Works Director may
suspend, cancel, or revoke such permit or certification. Suspension,
cancellation, or termination of a permit or certification shall not entitle the
permittee or certificate holder to any compensation or reimbursement from the
city or its agents for any alleged loss or expense incurred thereby, and
permits and certifications shall be issued only on this condition.
(Ord. passed 1-17-95)
§ 52.121 INDEMNIFICATION.
   All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and connection of a
building connection shall be borne by the owner, and the issuance of a building
connection permit shall be contingent upon the owner indemnifying the city
against any loss or damage that may be caused directly or indirectly by the
installation of the building sewer.
(Ord. passed 1-17-95)
§ 52.122 SEPARATE CONNECTIONS.
   A separate and independent building connection shall be provided for every
building except that, when two or more buildings are so situated that a
separate and independent building connection for each building would involve
practical difficulties and impose unnecessary hardships, the Public Works
Director may authorize the connection of such buildings to the public sewer
through a single building connection, subject to such terms and conditions of
easement, design, and construction as he may require. In the case of multi-
family, condominium, or town house dwelling units, each building connection
will be subject to the issuance of a permit. In the case of detached accessory
dwelling units (ADUs), ADUs shall be connected to the existing sewer service
within the subject parcel, downstream from where the service exits the main
dwelling, and an application for a new sewer connection permit shall be filed.
(Ord. passed 1-17-95; Am. Ord. passed 1-7-25) Penalty, see §
52.999
§ 52.123 EXCAVATION.
   All excavation required for the installation of a building connection shall
be open trench work, unless otherwise approved by the Public Works Director.
The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building connection,
and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing,
testing and backfilling of the trench, shall all conform to the standard
specifications of the Department, the Department's street opening regulations
and this chapter.
(Ord. passed 1-17-95)
Penalty, see § 52.999
§ 52.124 PROTECTION.
   All excavation for building connection installations shall be adequately
guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard.
Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the course
of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city, and in
accordance with any other ordinance, rule, or regulation pertaining thereto.
(Ord. passed 1-17-95)
Penalty, see § 52.999
§ 52.125 SIZE AND SLOPE.
   The size and slope of the building connection shall be subject to the
approval of the Public Works Director, but in no event shall the diameter be
less than four inches; and the slope of the four inch pipe shall in no case be
less than one-fourth inch per foot. Six inch pipe may be laid at a slope of
one-eighth inch per foot. Pipe larger than the minimum size herein specified
shall be used when and as the size of structure, numbers and kinds of fixtures
to be drained or other conditions may make it necessary to provide for adequate
and proper flow. Building connections with diameters greater than or equal to
eight inches arc considered sewer mains and shall meet all applicable
requirements of the standard specifications of the Department and this chapter
and the requirements of the WSPCD, including, providing manholes at all bends
and changes in direction and at the point of connection with the public sewer.
(Ord. passed 1-17-95; Am. Ord. 1- 7-25) Penalty, see §
52.999
§ 52.126 BUILDING CONNECTION.
   Wherever possible, the building connection shall be brought to the building
at an elevation below the basement floor. In no instance shall the connection
enter the building through a footing. In all buildings in which any building
sewer is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary or
industrial sewage carried by such sewer shall be lifted by means approved by
the local Building Inspector and discharged to the building connection. The
requirements of the Planning and Community Development Department shall be
observed with respect to fixtures inside of the exterior face of any building
or structure and with respect to an exterior pump chamber from the point of
discharge.
(Ord. passed 1-17-95; Am. Ord. passed 2-7-09)
Penalty, see § 52.999
§ 52.127 COVER AND ALIGNMENT.
   The cover over the crown of the building connection shall be at least four
feet to afford protection from frost action. Any deviation from the minimum
cover required shall be done only with the written permission of the Public
Works Director. The building connection shall be laid at a uniform grade and in
straight alignment. Changes in direction shall be made only at clean outs or
manholes as required by the Public Works Director. Clean outs shall be provided
at maximum spacing of 75 feet on straight runs.
(Ord. passed 1-17-95)
Penalty, see § 52.999
§ 52.128 MATERIAL SPECIFICATIONS.
   The building connection outside the exterior face of any building or similar
structure shall conform to the requirements of this chapter and the Department
Regulations as to permits, materials, and workmanship. Building connections,
for gravity applications, shall be constructed of extra-strength vitrified clay
pipe conforming to ATSM Specification C-700; extra heavy cast-iron soil pipe
conforming to ASTM Specification A-74; ductile iron pipe conforming to ANSI/
AWWA A021.5V C-151, Class 52 or polyvinyl chloride pipe conforming to ASTM D-
3034, SDR 35. For building connections larger than 10 inch diameter, reinforced
concrete pipe conforming to ASTM Specification C-76, Class IV, Wall B shall be
used. Building sewer force mains shall be constructed of ductile iron pipe
conforming to ANSI/AWWA A-21.51/C-151, Class 53 or polyvinyl chloride pipe
conforming to ASTM D-2241, SDR 26. Building sewer force mains shall be laid as
to maintain a continuous positive slope from the building to the point of
discharge unless vacuum relief valves and clean outs are installed at high and
low points, respectively. Asbestos cement pipe and no-hub cast iron pipe will
not be allowed for the installation of or repair of any building connection.
(Ord. passed 1-17-95)
Penalty, see § 52.999
§ 52.129 CONNECTION TO CITY.
   The construction of the building connection into the public sewer shall be
made at the curb fitting of the “Y” branch, if such branch is provided and
available at a suitable location. On direction of the Public Works Director,
where no “Y” branch is available, a neat hole may be cut, by machine, into the
public sewer to receive the building connection, with entry in the downstream
direction at an angle of 45°, with an approved saddle or clamp-type fitting. A
neat hole may also be cored in a manhole where connection to a manhole is
appropriate and approved in advance by the Public Works Director. Such
connections shall be made completely watertight at the location specified by
the Public Works Director and under the supervision and in the presence of the
Inspector, and as directed by and to the satisfaction of the Inspector.
(Ord. passed 1-17-95)
Penalty, see § 52.999
§ 52.130 INSPECTION AND RECORDS.
   (A)   The pipe layer shall notify the Public Works Director when the
building connection is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer.
The Public Works Director shall be notified not less than 48 hours in advance
of the time any connection is to be made to any public sewer or drain of the
city, and such connection shall be made only in the presence of the Inspector
and according to his instructions. The Public Works Director shall be afforded
all reasonable opportunity to oversee the construction of all parts of any
building sewer or drain connected directly, or indirectly, or intended to be so
connected, to any public sewer or drain of the city, and to obtain and record
the location and other pertinent facts with respect to such building sewer or
drain. This requirement also shall apply to repairs or alterations to building
connections, drains, or pipes discharging thereto.
   (B)   No building connection or drain or connection to a public sewer or
drains shall be covered until it has been inspected by the Public Works
Director and found to conform to the requirements and established standards of
the Department in all respects and be satisfactory as to the quality of the
workmanship and materials.
   (C)   The Public Works Director shall keep a record of all connections made
to public sewers and drains under this chapter and all repairs and alterations
made to building connections or drains connected to or discharging into public
sewers and drains of the city or intended to so discharge. All persons
concerned shall assist the Public Works Director securing data needed for such
records.
(Ord. passed 1-17-95)
Penalty, see § 52.999
§ 52.131 ABANDONED CONNECTIONS.
   When any building or other structure previously served by a connection to
any public sewer or drain is demolished, destroyed, abandoned, or altered so
that any building sewer or portion of an abandoned plumbing system which is
directly or indirectly connected to any public sewer or drain is no longer used
and is no longer connected to the drainage system of the building or structure,
the open end of such building connection or drain which discharges, directly or
indirectly, into a public sewer or drain shall be promptly closed and sealed to
the satisfaction of the Public Works Director. The Public Works Director shall
be notified of such abandonment or discontinuance, and of the closing and
sealing of such building drain, and shall be afforded an opportunity to see
such work performed. All said work shall be the responsibility of the person or
party who demolishes the building or structure of who alters the drainage of
the premises so as to make such closing and sealing necessary and shall be in
accordance with this chapter. In the event of failure of such person to do so,
said work shall be the responsibility of the owner, lessee, or tenant of the
premises to the satisfaction of the Public Works Director, all without expense
to the city.
(Ord. passed 1-17-95)
Penalty, see § 52.999
§ 52.132 NEW BUILDING CONNECTIONS REQUIRED.
   Building connections installed prior to 1973 shall not be used for servicing
new, reconstructed, or remodeled buildings. Building connections installed
since 1973 may be used for servicing new, reconstructed, or remodeled buildings
only when, in the opinion of the Public Works Director, they are found, on
examination or test by the Public Works Director, to meet all the requirements
of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 1-17-95)
Penalty, see § 52.999
§ 52.133 STORMWATER PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall make a connection of roof downspouts, exterior or
interior foundation drains, areaway drains, cooling-water drains, storm water
drains, or any other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building
sewer or building connection which in turn is connected, or intended to be
connected, directly or indirectly, to a public sewer.
   (B)   Where the public sewer is presently a combined sewer, and the
discharge of surface runoff or groundwater cannot be managed on site and is
creating a public safety issue or nuisance, the property owner can request to
connect to the combined sewer. No connections or discharge shall he made until
approved by the Public Works Director. Approval will be based on specific site
conditions and with the understanding that the combined sewer will be separated
in the future. All approved connections must be to an existing catch basin or
new drop inlet before discharging to the combined sewer.
(Ord. passed 1-17-95; Am. Ord. passed 1-7-25) Penalty, see §
52.999
§ 52.134 SEPARATE SYSTEMS REQUIRED.
   In all new construction, and in all reconstruction and remodeling involving
building sanitary facilities, as directed by the Public Works Director,
separate piping systems shall be provided for wastewater and for storm water
and shall be extended from the building as separate systems to the public sewer
and each, in turn, connected to the appropriate sanitary sewer or storm drain.
Where the public sewer is presently a combined sewer, the requirements for
separate wastewater and storm water system shall also apply, even though the
separate systems will connect to the same combined sewer.
(Ord. passed 1-17-95)
Penalty, see § 52.999
§ 52.135 APPROVAL TO DISCHARGE.
   (A)   Any person proposing a new discharge into the sewer system or a
substantial change in the volume or character of pollutants that are being
discharged into the system shall notify the Public Works Director at least 60
calendar days prior to the proposed change or connection. No connections or
change in discharge shall be made until formally approved by the Public Works
Director.
   (B)   Proposed new discharges from residential or commercial sources
involving loadings exceeding 50 population equivalents or any increases in
industrial discharge must also be approved by the WSPCD.
(Ord. passed 1-17-95)
Penalty, see § 52.999
CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR
§ 52.145 SEWER AND DRAINS.
   To insure compliance with this chapter and to facilitate the supervision of
the construction, operation, and repair of public sewers and drains and the
keeping of records thereof, no person other than those described in this
subchapter, shall construct, repair, alter, or remove any building connection
or drain connected to or with, or discharging directly or indirectly to or
into, any public sewer or drain of the city of intended to discharge thus, at
some future time, regardless of whether said work is located in a public street
or in public or private land.
(Ord. passed 1-17-95)
Penalty, see § 52.999
§ 52.146 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person, other than those working for and under the direction of the
Department, shall make any excavation for or construct, install, lay, repair,
alter, or remove any sewer, drain, sewer connection, or appurtenance thereof,
within the city, which is in any way connected to or discharges directly or
indirectly to or into any public sewer or drain of the city, or is intended at
some future time to be so connected or to so discharge, until said person shall
have applied for and secured from the Public Works Director a permit for doing
such work. Such permits may be issued only to those qualified to perform such
work as provided in
§ 52.147.
(Ord. passed 1-17-95)
Penalty, see § 52.999
§ 52.147 AUTHORIZED PERSONS.
   The following may, as indicated, construct, repair, alter, or remove public
sewers and drains, including building connections, subject to supervision and
approval by the Public Works Director.
   (A)   Regular forces of a contractor employed by the city operating under
orders of the Public Works Director and in the performance of work for the
city.
   (B)   Regular forces of the waterworks or the New Hampshire Department of
Transportation operating under and subject to a permit for the particular job
to be issued by the Public Works Director and while engaged in the regular
operations of the waterworks or the Department of Transportation.
   (C)   Regular forces of any public utility corporation authorized by state
law to construct, maintain and operate pipes or ducts within public highways
within the city, while engaged in work incidental to the regular structures of
said utility company and operating under and subject to the conditions of the
permit for the particular job issued by the Public Works Director.
   (D)   Any contractor or person who shall have been duly authorized by the
Department to perform work of the type in question during the period provided
in such authorization and when operating under and subject to the conditions of
a permit for the particular job issued therefore by the Public Works Director.
   (E)   Regular forces of the Department operating under orders of the Public
Works Director and in the performance of work for the city.
(Ord. passed 1-17-95)
Penalty, see § 52.999
§ 52.148 PLUMBERS.
   The limitations as to the person who may construct, alter, or repair public
sewers and drains, as provided in
§ 52.147 shall not restrict the usual work of plumbers or others when operating
in accordance with the plumbing and building codes of the city; provided no
plumber or other person shall make any connection to a public sewer or drain of
the city without a permit therefore, even if said public sewer or drain is
located under or immediately adjacent to any building or similar structure; and
provided all drains and fixtures within said building or structure and all use
made of them shall conform to the requirements of this chapter as to what may
or may not be permitted to be discharged into public sewers and drains.
(Ord. passed 1-17-95)
Penalty, see § 52.999
§ 52.149 CONTRACTOR RESPONSIBILITY.
   Each contractor or person shall be responsible for the faithful performance
of all work performed under the certificate or permits issued and for the
conduct of all work and all materials furnished on work by his employees or
agents. No work shall be sublet by a contractor or person under any permit
issued under such certificate in any manner to divest said contractor or person
of full control and responsibility for all parts of said work. Only competent
personnel shall be employed on work performed under such certificate and only
suitable materials conforming to the Standard Specifications of the Department
shall be furnished or used on such work.
(Ord. passed 1-17-95)
Penalty, see § 52.999
   RATES AND CHARGES
§ 52.160 SEWER RENTAL CHARGES.
   (A)   The following sewer rental charges shall be in effect unless amended
by further action of the Board of Mayor and Aldermen:
      (1)   Service charges are payable at the following rates per quarter:
         (a)   Structures containing single-dwelling unit:
RATE            EFFECTIVE BILLING DATE
$33.68                4/01/25
$40.08                4/01/26
$47.69                4/01/27
$56.75                4/01/28
$65.26                4/01/29
         (b)   Condo/condex structures, per dwelling unit:
RATE            EFFECTIVE BILLING DATE
$33.68                4/01/25
$40.08                4/01/26
$47.69                4/01/27
$56.75                4/01/28
$65.26                4/01/29
         (c)    Multi-family/apartment structures, per dwelling unit:
RATE            EFFECTIVE BILLING DATE
$21.43                4/01/25
$25.50                4/01/26
$30.35                4/01/27
$36.12                4/01/28
$41.53                4/01/29
         (d)   Commercial establishments, per establishment:
RATE            EFFECTIVE BILLING DATE
$45.93                4/01/25
$54.66                4/01/26
$65.05                4/01/27
$77.41                4/01/28
$89.02                4/01/29
         (e)   Industrial establishments, per establishment:
RATE            EFFECTIVE BILLING DATE
$94.91                4/01/25
$112.95                4/01/26
$134.41                4/01/27
$159.95                4/01/28
$183.94                4/01/29
      (2)   User charges for industrial establishments shall be computed under
the usage charge formula based on the unit costs provided herein. User charges
for residential and commercial premises are computed based on the number of
cubic feet of water consumed on the premises as metered by the waterworks at
the rates per 100 cubic feet and effective billing dates as follows:
RATE            EFFECTIVE BILLING DATE
$5.51/100 CF             4/01/25
$6.56/100 CF             4/01/26
$7.80/100 CF             4/01/27
$9.28/100 CF             4/01/28
$10.68/100 CF             4/01/29
   (B)   In the case of nonmetered premises, the average consumption for
comparable structures as determined by the Chief Engineer shall be used as a
basis for billing. Such owners may have metering facilities installed at their
own expense. Such installations must be requested in writing and conform to EPD
policy for such installations.
   (C)   Unit costs under the user charge formula are established at the rates
and at the effecting billing dates as follows:
 
Vu                  Bu               Su               Effective Date
$5.13/1,000 gallons $53.76/100 lbs.  $53.76/100 lbs.  4/01/2025
$6.10/1,000 gallons $63.98/100 lbs.  $63.98/100 lbs.  4/01/2026
$7.27/1,000 gallons $76.14/100 lbs.  $76.14/100 lbs.  4/01/2027
$8.64/1,000 gallons $90.60/100 lbs.  $90.60/100 lbs.  4/01/2028
$9.94/1,000 gallons $104.19/100 lbs. $104.19/100 lbs. 4/01/2029
 
   (D)   User charge credits for residential customers for extraneous water use
are available by making application to the EPD for the installation of a
"deduct" meter. Extraneous water use is that portion of the waterworks metered
water, not returning to the sewer system.
      (1)   To participate, the residential user must install a deduct meter in
accordance with conditions established by the Environmental Protection Division
of the Highway Department. Such application shall be on forms provided by EPD.
Usage charges for residential customers installing a deduct meter will be
computed based on the number of cubic feet of water consumed on the premises as
metered by the waterworks minus the number of cubic feet of water as measured
by the deduct meter at the effective rates of division (C) of this section.
      (2)   Failure to comply with all conditions or any attempt to defraud the
billing system as determined by EPD, will result in revocation of the right to
use the deduct meter and in such case billing calculations will revert to the
terms described in division (C). In such case, penalties will be sought in
accordance with all applicable ordinances.
   (E)   User charge credits for non-residential customers are available by
making application to the Highway Department, Environmental Protection Division
(EPD) for a deduct meter as stipulated in (D)(1) and (2) above and in
accordance with conditions established by the Highway Department. Credits for
non-residential users will be given for water used for irrigation purposes
only. All other provisions of §
52.160 will apply.
   (F)   User charge credits for elderly residential accounts will be given to
those sewer accounts that are granted an elderly property tax exemption by the
Tax Assessor's Office. Property owners qualifying for the tax exemption will be
billed at the rate of 50% of the current sewer usage charge and 50% of the
current sewer service charge. This credit will not apply to condominium
associations or homeowners associations. The sewer usage and sewer service
charges will revert back to standard rates outlined in §
52.160 once the qualifying owner no longer resides at the property or upon
notification from the Tax Assessor's Office that the property has been removed
from the Tax Assessor's Tax Exemption Program. All other provisions of §
52.160 will apply.
(Ord. passed 1-17-95; Am. Ord. passed 5-16-95; Am. Ord. passed 10-7-97; Am.
Ord. passed 1-2-01; Am. Ord. passed 9-4-01; Am. Ord. passed 5-3-05; Am. Ord.
passed 2- 6-07; Am. Ord. passed 3-15-11; Am. Ord. passed 12-2-14; Am. Ord.
passed 2-4-20; Am. Ord. passed 3-21-2023; Am. Ord. passed 4-1- 2025)
§ 52.161 SEPTAGE SERVICE CHARGE.
   There is hereby established the following service charge for the receipt of
septage into the Manchester Wastewater Treatment Facility for the treatment of
said septage prior to discharge thereof into the Merrimack River to be
effective at the rates and billing dates as follows:
   (A)   For any discharge of one thousand gallons or less - $80.00/1000
gallons.
   (B)   For any discharge in excess thereof, a charge of $8.00 per multiple of
100 gallons or any part of such multiple effective beginning 7/01/05.
   (C)   For any discharge as measured by the weight scale at the septage
receiving facility: $.08 per gallon (using conversion of 8.34 lb/gal),
effective 1-1-93; or, $.00959 per pound, effective 7/01/05.
(Ord. passed 1-17-95; Am. Ord. passed 4-21-98; Am. Ord. passed 5-3-05)
§ 52.162 OTHER FEES.
   Building connection permits, inspections and administrative fees shall be
established by the Public Works Director through Department regulations and/or
ordinances. Such fees shall remain in effect unless amended by further action
of the Public Works Director. Such fees shall be paid to the Department at the
time the application for a building connection permit is filed.
(Ord. passed 1-17-95; Am. Ord. passed 12-2-14)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 52.175 ACCESS TO FACILITIES.
   The Public Works Director, and other duly authorized employees of the
Department bearing proper credentials and identification, shall have
unrestricted access to all properties discharging to public sewers and drains
for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, inspection,
and copying of records, and testing pertinent to discharge to public sewers and
drains in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 1-17-95)
§ 52.176 INFORMATION ACCESS.
   The Public Works Director, and other duly authorized employees of the
Department bearing proper credentials and identification, are authorized to
obtain information concerning industrial processes which have a bearing on the
kind and source of discharge to public sewers and drains. The industry may
declare information to be confidential, however, in such instances the industry
must establish that the revelation to the public of the information in question
might result in an advantage to competitors.
(Ord. passed 1-17-95)
§ 52.177 EASEMENTS.
   The Public Works Director, and other duly authorized employees of the
Department bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to
enter all private properties through which the city holds a duly negotiated
easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation,
measurement, sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portion of the sewage
works lying within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on
said easement shall be done in full accordance with the duly negotiated
easement pertaining to the private property involved.
(Ord. passed 1-17-95)
Penalty, see § 52.999
§ 52.178 SAFETY.
   While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in
§ 52.175, the Public Works Director or duly authorized employees of the city
shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the
commercial or industrial establishment.
(Ord. passed 1-17-95)
Penalty, see § 52.999
§ 52.179 NOTIFICATION OF VIOLATIONS.
   Whenever the Public Works Director finds that any person, firm, corporation,
municipal subdivision, institution, or industrial user has violated or is
violating this chapter, or a wastewater permit or order issued hereunder, the
Public Works Director or his agent may serve upon said offender written notice
of the violation. Within a time period specified in the violation notice, an
explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and
prevention thereof, to include specific required actions, shall be submitted to
the Public Works Director. The offender shall permanently cease all violations
and take such action as is recommended or necessary to insure that there will
be no recurrence of such violation. All such work in connection therewith shall
be performed by the offender without delay and without expense to the city.
Compliance with this section in no way relieves the offender of liability for
any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation.
(Ord. passed 1-17-95)
Penalty, see § 52.999
§ 52.180 SHOW CAUSE HEARING.
   The Public Works Director may order any person or industrial user which
causes or contributes to violation of this chapter or wastewater permit or
order issued hereunder, to show cause why a proposed enforcement action should
not be taken. Notice shall be served on the offender specifying the time and
place for the meeting, the proposed enforcement action and the reasons for such
action, and a request that the offender show cause why this proposed
enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the meeting shall be
served personally or by certified mail (return receipt requested) at least ten
days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served on any person, principle
executive, general partner, or corporate officer. Whether or not a duly
notified offender appears as noticed, immediate enforcement action may be
pursued.
(Ord. passed 1-17-95)
§ 52.181 ANNUAL PUBLICATION OF SIGNIFICANT VIOLATORS.
   The Public Works Director shall publish, at least annually, in the largest
daily newspaper circulated in the service area, a description of those
industrial users which are found to be in significant noncompliance, as defined
in the Code of Federal Regulations 40 CFR, Part 403, with any provisions of
this chapter or any permit or order issued hereunder during the period since
the previous publication.
(Ord. passed 1-17-95)
§ 52.182 CONSENT ORDERS.
   The Public Works Director is hereby empowered to enter into consent orders,
assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents establishing an
agreement with the person or industrial user responsible for the noncompliance.
Such order will include specific action to be taken by the person or industrial
user to correct the noncompliance within a time period also specified by the
order. Orders may also contain such other requirements as might be reasonably
necessary and appropriate to address the noncompliance, including the
installation of pretreatment technology, additional self-monitoring and
management practices.
(Ord. passed 1-17-95)
§ 52.183 TERMINATION OF PERMIT.
   Any industrial user who violates the following conditions of this chapter or
a wastewater discharge permit or order, or any applicable state or federal law,
is subject to permit termination:
   (A)   Violation of permit conditions.
   (B)   Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and
characteristics of its discharge.
   (C)   Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater
constituents and characteristics.
   (D)   Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of
inspection, monitoring, or sampling.
(Ord. passed 1-17-95)
§ 52.184 TERMINATION OF SERVICE.
   The city may, after notice to the person discharging wastewater to the
public sewer or drain, immediately halt or prevent any such discharge
reasonably appearing to present an imminent endangerment to the health and
welfare of person, or any discharge presenting, or which may present, an
endangerment to the environment, or which threatens to interfere with the
operation of the public sewer or drains, or sewage treatment plant.
(Ord. passed 1-17-95)
§ 52.185 RECOVERY OF EXPENSES.
   Any person or industrial user violating any of the provisions of this
chapter shall become liable to the city for any expense, loss, or damage
occasioned the city by reason of such violation. If the Public Works Director
shall have caused the disconnection of a drain from the public sewerage system,
the city may collect the cost of making such disconnection from any person
responsible for or willfully concerned in or who profited by such violation of
the requirements of this chapter and may, thereafter, refuse to permit the
restoration of the former connection or of any new connection to the property
concerned in the violation of this chapter until the claim of the city for the
cost of making such disconnection shall have been paid in full plus interest
and the reasonable cost of any legal expenses incurred by the city in
connection therewith.
(Ord. passed 1-17-95)
§ 52.186 HARM TO CITY PROPERTY.
   No person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage,
destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or
equipment which is part of the public sewerage system. Any person violating
this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest pursuant to the local
ordinances and state and federal statutes.
(Ord. passed 1-17-95)
§ 52.187 INJUNCTIVE RELIEF; OTHER ACTIONS.
   (A)   Whenever a person or industrial user has violated or continues to
violate the provisions of this chapter or permit or order issued hereunder, the
city, through counsel, may petition the court for the issuance of a preliminary
or permanent injunction or both (as may be appropriate) which restrains or
compels the activities on the part of the person or user.
   (B)   Actions which may be taken by the city for violations of this chapter
include ex parte temporary judicial injunctive relief, entry on private
property to halt discharges, blockage of a public sewer or drain to halt
discharges, or demand on specific action by the person in violation.
(Ord. passed 1-17-95)
§ 52.188 APPEALS.  
   Any party aggrieved by any decision, regulation, or provision under this
chapter, as amended, from time to time, shall have the right of appeal within
30 calendar days of said decision to the Manchester Highway Commission, who
shall issue a decision within 30 calendar days. If said appeal is denied by the
Manchester Highway Commission, then said aggrieved party shall have the right
to appeal to the Hillsborough County Superior Court for equitable relief,
provided that said appeal is entered within 30 calendar days from the issues of
the decision of the Manchester Highway Commission.
(Ord. passed 1-17-95)
§ 52.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person or industrial user who has violated or continues to violate
this chapter or any order or permit issued hereunder, shall be liable to the
city for a civil penalty of not more than $10,000 plus actual damages incurred
by the POTW per violation per day for as long as the violation continues. In
addition to the above described penalty and damages, the Public Works Director
may recover reasonable attorney's fees, court costs, and other expenses
associated with the enforcement activities, including sampling and monitoring
expenses.
   (B)   The Public Works Director shall petition the Court to impose, assess,
and recover such sums. In determining the amount of liability, consideration
shall be given to all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to,
the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration, any
economic benefit gained through the industrial user's violation, corrective
actions by the industrial user, the compliance history of the user, and any
other factors as justice requires.
   (C)   Any person or industrial user who willfully or negligently violates
any provision of this chapter or any orders or permits issued hereunder shall,
upon conviction, be guilty of a violation, punishable by a fine not to exceed
$1,000 for each violation. Every separate provision violated shall constitute a
separate violation. Every day that a violation occurs shall be deemed a
separate violation.
(Ord. passed 1-17-95; Am. Ord. passed 10-1-96)
Statutory reference:
   R.S.A. 47:17 (suppl) and R.S.A. 31:39 (suppl)
CHAPTER 53: ON-SITE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS
Section
   
53.01   Purpose
   
53.02   Definitions
   
53.03   Review of proposed plans
   
53.04   Permit; inspection; fees
   
53.05   Design requirements
   
53.06   Variance from provisions
   
53.07   Correction of failed on-site sewage disposal systems
§ 53.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health and well being,
and to insure that on-site sewage disposal systems are designed and constructed
in a manner which will not create a nuisance or harm the environment through
premature failure of the system.
('71 Code, § 21-70) (Ord. passed 6-6-78; Am. Ord. passed 9-4-01)
§ 53.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   HEALTH AUTHORITY. The Health Officer of the City of Manchester, or his
designated representatives.
   PLANNING BOARD. The Planning Board of the City of Manchester.
   SEWAGE. A combination of liquid wastes which may include chemicals,
household wastes, human excreta, animal or vegetable matter, or other solids in
suspension or solution, and which is discharged from a dwelling, building, or
other establishment.
   SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM. An on-site installation comprised of a septic tank
or other sewage-containing receptacle and a subsurface effluent distribution
system.
   SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM EFFLUENT. Any liquid material which is discharged
from a septic tank or other sewage-containing receptacle.
   SUBDIVISION PLAN. A plot plan which shows the proposed lots on a defined
piece of property, but need not include design plans and specifications for
each individual sewage disposal system.
('71 Code, § 21-71) (Ord. passed 6-6-78; Am. Ord. passed 9-4-01)
§ 53.03 REVIEW OF PROPOSED PLANS.
   (A)   Any person proposing to subdivide land shall submit a copy of the
proposed subdivision plan to the Health Authority for its review and
determination as to whether the site is suitable for development with sewage
disposal systems. The applicant is advised to contact the Health Authority
prior to digging test pits and performing percolation tests on the tract of
land to be subdivided. All such test pits and percolation tests shall be
subject to verification by on-site inspection by the Health Authority, prior to
its review of the subdivision plan.
   (B)   The Health Authority in its review will consider soil data, lot sizes,
percolation test results, depth to seasonal high water table, location of
existing or proposed private water sources and the general requirements for
design and construction of sewage disposal systems. The Health Authority may
require submission of additional engineering geological or soil information
and/or a study of the economic feasibility of the proposed sewage disposal
systems prior to making its determination. The Health Authority may specify in
its determination the minimum lot sizes or other conditions on which its
determination is based in accordance with soil types, environmental conditions,
and such guidelines as may be established by the Health Authority. No
subdivision plan shall receive final approval by the Planning Board until the
Health Authority has reviewed the plan and has determined that the site in
question is suitable for development with sewage disposal systems.
   (C)   Nothing in this section is to be construed as relieving the applicant
of the permit requirements relative to individual sewage disposal systems on
each proposed lot. Plans shall not be submitted to the New Hampshire Department
of Environmental Services for its review and determination without
certification by the Health Authority that applicable local requirements have
been met. All plans and specifications submitted to the Health Authority shall
also be consistent with the requirements of the New Hampshire Department of
Environmental Services, Subdivision and Individual Sewage Disposal System
Design Rules, Chapter Env Wq-1000 for submission of plans.
('71 Code, § 21-72) (Ord. passed 6-6-78; Am. Ord. passed 9-4-01; Am. Ord.
passed 7-5-11)
§ 53.04 PERMIT; INSPECTION; FEES.
   (A)   Design plans. Any person proposing to design a sewage disposal system
shall contact the Health Authority prior to digging test pits and performing
percolation tests on the proposed system site. All such test pits and
percolation tests shall be subject to verification by on-site inspection by the
Health Authority prior to its review of the system design plan.
   (B)   Review of design plan. Any person proposing to construct, repair, or
rebuild a sewage disposal system shall submit a properly prepared plan to the
Health Authority for review of soil data, lot size, and the proposed sewage
disposal system. The Health Authority may require the system designer or
property owner to submit additional engineering, geological or soil
information, and/or an analysis of the economic feasibility of the proposed
sewage disposal system, prior to making its judgment on the approval or
disapproval of the system plan. Plans shall not be submitted to the New
Hampshire Department of Environmental Services for its review and determination
without certification by the Health Authority that applicable local
requirements have been met. All plans and specifications submitted to the
Health Authority shall also be consistent with the requirements of the New
Hampshire Department of Environmental Services, Subdivision and Individual
Sewage Disposal System Design Rules, Chapter Env Wq-1000 for submission of
plans.
   (C)   Plan review fee. There is no fee for the initial review of a design
plan for a proposed on-site sewage disposal system. Subsequent reviews when a
plan is revised shall require that a plan review fee of $15 for a residential
single household plan and $25 for a subdivision, commercial, or other sewage
disposal system plan be paid prior to said review.
   (D)   Test pit inspection fee. For each test pit inspected and recorded by
the Health Authority, a fee of $25 shall be paid to the Manchester Health
Department.
   (E)   Permit required; fee. Prior to commencing construction, any person who
wishes to install, alter, or repair an individual sewage disposal system in
Manchester, shall obtain a permit from the Health Authority. The permit fee
shall be $100 for a single household sewage disposal system and $150 for a
commercial or other sewage disposal system.
   (F)   Reinspection fee. In the event that a newly constructed septic system
is not approved for operation following two inspections, a reinspection fee of
$25 shall be paid to the Health Department for each additional required
inspection.
('71 Code, § 21-73) (Ord. passed 6-6-78; Am. Ord. passed 3-1-83; Am. Ord.
passed 6-2-87; Am. Ord. passed 9-4-01; Am. Ord. passed 7-5-11)
§ 53.05 DESIGN REQUIREMENTS.
   Sewage disposal systems shall be designed and constructed in accordance with
the requirements of the New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services and
the following:
   (A)   Any soil with a seasonal high water table at or within two feet of the
natural ground surface shall not be used for the disposal of sewage disposal
system effluent.
   (B)   Any land having a natural slope of 15% or greater shall not be altered
or used for the disposal of sewage disposal system effluent.
   (C)   Sewage disposal systems shall not be constructed in any soil with a
percolation rate slower than 30 minutes per inch.
   (D)   Sewage disposal systems shall not be constructed in flood-prone areas
as designated on the official flood-plain map of the city, and shall be located
at least 500 feet from the surface water of Lake Massabesic and 100 feet from
any other surface water or private water supply.
   (E)   Minimum lot sizes shall be determined by slope and soil type and shall
be in accordance with guidelines established by the Health Authority.
   (F)   The bottom of the proposed leaching bed shall be a minimum of four
feet above any seasonal high water table.
   (G)   For each proposed lot a test pit shall be dug and a percolation test
shall be conducted on the proposed site for the leaching bed.
   (H)   Building permits shall not be issued for any lot until the sewage
disposal system design and location has been approved by the Health Authority.
   (I)   Sewage disposal systems shall not be installed wherever soil or
environmental conditions are such that, in the judgment of the Health
Authority, a public health nuisance will be created.
   (J)   Sewage disposal systems shall not be covered or placed in operation
without final inspection and approval by the Health Authority.
('71 Code, § 21-74) (Ord. passed 6-6-78; Am. Ord. passed 9-4-01)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 53.06 VARIANCE FROM PROVISIONS.
   Upon finding that strict enforcement of this chapter would cause undue
hardship to the applicant and a further finding that a variance would not be
injurious to the public health, the Health Authority may authorize the issuance
of a variance. The burden of proof is upon the applicant to show that the
variance will not injure adjacent properties, will not conflict with the
purpose of this chapter, and will not adversely affect the health of any
person.
('71 Code, § 21-75) (Ord. passed 6-6-78)
§ 53.07 CORRECTION OF FAILED ON-SITE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS.
   Whenever the Health Authority deems an on-site sewage disposal system to be
in a state of failure, they may issue a written notice to the property owner or
agent citing such condition, the corrective action to be taken and the time
period within which such action is to be taken. It shall be unlawful for any
person to fail to comply with the provisions of this chapter when so ordered by
the Health Authority.
(Ord. passed 9-4-01) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
CHAPTER 54: STORM WATER
Section
   
54.01   Purpose
   
54.02   Definitions
   
54.03   Administration
   
54.04   Prohibited discharges
   
54.05   Permit procedures and requirements
   
54.06   General permit provisions
   
54.07   Waivers
   
54.08   Industrial activity discharges
   
54.09   Access and inspection of properties and facilities
   
54.10   Notification of accidental discharges and spills
   
54.11   Violations and enforcement
   
54.12   Eligibility
 
   
54.99   Penalty
§ 54.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to:
   (A)   Protect, maintain, and enhance the environment of the city and the
public health, safety and the general welfare of the citizens of the city, by
controlling discharges of pollutants to the city's storm water system and to
maintain and improve the quality of the receiving waters into which the storm
water outfalls flow, including, without limitation, lakes, rivers, streams,
ponds, wetlands, and groundwater of the city.
   (B)   Enable the city to comply with the National Pollution Discharge
Elimination System permit (NPDES) and applicable regulations, 40 CFR 122.26 for
storm water discharges.
   (C)   Allow the city to exercise the powers granted by the state through
applicable statute to:
      (1)   Exercise general regulation over the planning, location,
construction, and operation and maintenance of storm water facilities in the
city, whether or not owned and operated by the city;
      (2)   Adopt any regulations deemed necessary to accomplish the purposes
of this chapter, including the adoption of a system of fees for services and
permits;
      (3)   Establish standards to regulate the quantity of storm water
discharged and to regulate storm water contaminants as may be necessary to
protect water quality;
      (4)   Review and approve plans for storm water management in proposed
subdivisions or commercial developments;
      (5)   Issue permits for storm water discharges, or for the construction,
alteration, extension, or repair of storm water facilities;
      (6)   Suspend or revoke permits when it is determined that the permittee
has violated any applicable ordinance, or condition of the permit;
      (7)   Regulate and prohibit discharges into storm water facilities of
sanitary, industrial, or commercial sewage or waters that have otherwise been
contaminated; and
      (8)   Expend funds to remediate or mitigate the detrimental effects of
contaminated land or other sources of storm water contamination, whether public
or private.
(Ord. passed 8-1-06)
§ 54.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES. Physical, structural, and/or managerial practices
that, when used singly or in combination, prevent or reduce pollution of water,
that have been approved by the city, and that have been incorporated by
reference into the Storm Water Regulations as if fully set out therein. (See
Section 6A of the Storm Water Regulations for recommended Best Management
Practices manuals.)
   COMBINED SEWER DRAINAGE SYSTEM. A single pipe conveyance system intended to
receive both sewage and storm or surface water.
   CONTAMINANT. Any physical, chemical, biological, or radiological substance
or matter in water.
   DEPARTMENT OF HIGHWAYS. The Highway Division of the city.
   DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS. The Chief Administrator of the Department of
Highways who is authorized to assign highway staff to oversee the
implementation and enforcement of the Storm Water Regulations and this chapter.
   DISCHARGE. Dispose, deposit, spill, pour, inject, seep, dump, leak or place
by any means, or that which is disposed, deposited, spilled, poured, injected,
seeped, dumped, leaked or placed by any means including any direct or indirect
entry of any solid or liquid matter into the municipal separate storm sewer
system.
   ILLICIT CONNECTIONS. Illegal and/or unauthorized connections to the
municipal separate storm water system whether or not such connections result in
discharges into that system. ILLEGAL CONNECTION means either of the following:
      (1)   Any pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance, whether on the surface
or subsurface, which allows an illicit discharge to enter the storm drain
system including but not limited to any conveyances which allow any non-storm
water discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter
the storm drain system, regardless of whether such pipe, open channel, drain or
conveyance has been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by an authorized
enforcement agency; or
      (2)   Any pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance connected to the
municipal separate storm sewer system which has not been documented in plans,
maps, or equivalent records and approved by an authorized enforcement agency.
   ILLICIT DISCHARGE. Any discharge to the municipal separate storm sewer
system that is not composed entirely of storm water and not specifically
exempted under Section 2(J) of the Storm Water Regulations.
   LAND DISTURBING ACTIVITY. Any activity on property that results in a change
in the existing soil cover (both vegetative and non-vegetative) and/or the
existing soil topography. Land-disturbing activities include, but are not
limited to, development, re-development, demolition, construction,
reconstruction, clearing, grading, filling and excavation.
   MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEMS (MS4). The conveyances owned or
operated by the municipality for the collection and transportation of storm
water, including the roads and streets and their drainage systems, catch
basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, and storm drains.
   NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM PERMIT. A permit issued
pursuant to 33 USC Section 1342(b) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants
to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an
individual, group, or general area-wide basis.
   PERSON. Any and all persons, including any individual, firm or association
and any city or private corporation organized or existing under the laws of
this or any other state or country.
   POLLUTANT. Anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may
include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; petroleum
hydrocarbons; automotive fluids; cooking grease; detergents (biodegradable or
otherwise); degreasers; cleaning chemicals; non-hazardous liquid and solid
wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or
abandoned objects and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to
pollution; sediment; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers;
liquid and solid wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and
particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from
constructing a building or structure; concrete and cement; and noxious or
offensive matter of any kind.
   POLLUTION. The contamination or other alteration of any water's physical,
chemical or biological properties by the addition of any constituent and
includes but is not limited to, a change in temperature, taste, color,
turbidity, or odor of such waters, or the discharge of any liquid, gaseous,
solid, radioactive, or other substance into any such waters as will or is
likely to create a nuisance or render such waters harmful, detrimental or
injurious to the public health, safety, welfare, or environment, or to
domestic, commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational, or other
legitimate beneficial uses, or to livestock, wild animals, birds, fish or other
aquatic life.
   PREMISES. Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether
improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.
   STATE WATERS. Any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes,
reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of
surface and subsurface water,  natural or artificial, lying within or forming a
part of the boundaries of the state which are not entirely confined and
retained completely upon the property of a single person.
   STORM WATER. Storm water runoff, snow melt runoff, surface runoff, street
wash waters related to street cleaning or maintenance, infiltration and
drainage.
   STORM WATER APPEALS COMMITTEE. A three-member committee consisting of a
Highway Commissioner, an engineer from a private engineering firm and an
engineer from the Department of Highways.
   STORM WATER MANAGEMENT. The programs to maintain quality and quantity of
storm water runoff to pre-development levels.
   STORM WATER MANAGEMENT FACILITIES. The drainage structures, conduits,
ditches, combined sewers, sewers, and all device appurtenances by means of
which storm water is collected, transported, pumped, treated or disposed of.
   STORM WATER MANAGEMENT PLAN. The set of drawings and other documents that
comprise all the information and specifications for the programs, drainage
systems, structures, Best Management Practices, concepts and techniques
intended to maintain or restore quality and quantity of storm water runoff to
pre-development levels.
   STORM WATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (SWPPP). A plan that clearly describes
appropriate control measures that include a description of all pollution
control measures (i.e., Best Management Practices) that will be implemented as
part of the construction activity to control pollutants in storm water
discharges and describes the interim and permanent stabilization practices for
the site.
   STORM WATER REGULATIONS. A supplement to this chapter that includes
additional conditions and requirements. Copies are available at the Department
of Highways and the Office of the City Clerk.
   STORM WATER RUNOFF. Flow on the surface of the ground, resulting from
precipitation and drainage consisting entirely of water from any form of
natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation.
   STORM WATER UTILITY. The Department of Highways and its duly authorized
agents created by ordinance of the city to administer this chapter, and other
storm water regulations adopted by the city.
   STRUCTURAL BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES. Devices that are constructed to
provide control of storm water runoff.
   STRUCTURAL STORM WATER CONTROL. A structural storm water management facility
or device that controls storm water runoff and changes the characteristics of
that runoff including, but not limited to, the quantity and quality, the period
of release or the velocity of flow.
(Ord. passed 8-1-06)
§ 54.03 ADMINISTRATION.
   The Director of the Department of Highways or his or her designee shall
administer the provisions of this chapter and is hereby authorized to
promulgate and amend such regulations as may be necessary and convenient to
effectuate the purposes and enforce the requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 8-1-06)
§ 54.04 PROHIBITED DISCHARGES.
   The specific prohibited discharges outlined in the Storm Water Regulations
are not inclusive of all discharges prohibited by this chapter and the Storm
Water Regulations.
(Ord. passed 8-1-06)
§ 54.05 PERMIT PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Permit required. No land owner or land operator shall begin any site
work on any building(s), grading or other land development or any land
disturbance activities (as outlined in §
54.06) without first submitting a Notice of Intent (NOI) to EPA Washington.
Owner must also have received acknowledgment, have a Department of Highways
approved Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan and meet the requirements of
this chapter.
   (B)   General waiver requirement. Every applicant shall provide for storm
water management as required by this chapter and the Department of Highways
Storm Water Regulations unless a written request is filed to waive this
requirement. Requests to waive the Storm Water Management Program requirements
shall be submitted to the Department of Highways for approval.
   (C)   Application requirements. Unless specifically excluded by this
chapter, any landowner or operator desiring a permit for a land disturbance
activity (as described in Section 4 of the Storm Water Regulations) shall
secure required approvals through the city's Planning Board and shall submit to
the Department of Highways proof of NOI submission and a copy of the Storm
Water Pollution Prevention Plan, as approved by the Department of Highways, for
related project before beginning any site clearing or construction.
(Ord. passed 8-1-06)
Penalty, see § 54.99
§ 54.06 GENERAL PERMIT PROVISIONS.
   Land disturbance permits when required. Every owner/operator will be
required to obtain an EPA General Permit from the EPA through a Notice of
Intent in the following cases:
   (A)   Land disturbing activity disturbs one or more acres of land;
   (B)   Land disturbing activity of less than one acre of land if such
activity is part of a larger common plan of development that affects one or
more acres of land;
   (C)   Land disturbing activity of less than one acre of land, if in the
discretion of the city such activity poses a unique threat to water, or public
health or safety;
   (D)   The creation and use of borrow pits (the excavation of soils from one
area to be used in another area that would meet any of the criteria of
subsections (A), (B), or (C) above).
(Ord. passed 8-1-06)
Penalty, see § 54.99
§ 54.07 WAIVERS.
   Every applicant shall provide for Storm Water Management as required by the
Storm Water Regulations, unless a written request is filed to waive this
requirement. Requests to waive the Storm Water Management Program requirements
shall be submitted to the Director of Public Works for approval and must meet
the requirements of 40 CFR § 122.26(g).
(Ord. passed 8-1-06)
Penalty, see § 54.99
§ 54.08 INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY DISCHARGES.
   All operators of landfills, hazardous waste treatment, disposal, and
recovery facilities and industrial facilities are subject to Section 313 of
Title III of the Superfund Amendments and Reauthorization Act of 1986 (SARA)
42, USC § 11023, and industrial facilities that the city determines are
contributing a pollutant load to the Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System,
which are sources of storm water discharges associated with industrial activity
shall comply with the requirements outlined in the city's Storm Water
Regulations.
(Ord. passed 8-1-06)
§ 54.09 ACCESS AND INSPECTION OF PROPERTIES AND FACILITIES.
   (A)   The representative of the Department of Highways shall be permitted to
enter and inspect properties and facilities at reasonable times as often as may
be necessary to determine compliance with this chapter.
   (B)   If a property or facility has security measures in force, which
require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the
owner or operator shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access to
representatives of the Department of Highways.
   (C)   The owner or operator shall allow the representative of the Department
of Highways ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of
inspection, sampling, photography, videotaping, examination and copying of any
records that are required under the conditions of a National Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System Permit to discharge storm water.
   (D)   The Department of Highways shall have the right to set up on any
property or facility such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the
Department of Highways to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of flow
discharges.
   (E)   The Department of Highways may require the owner or operator to
install monitoring equipment and perform monitoring as necessary, and make the
monitoring data available to the Department of Highways. This sampling and
monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper
operating condition by the owner or operator at his or her own expense. All
devices used to measure flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their
accuracy.
   (F)   Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the
property or facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed
by the owner or operator at the written or oral request of the Department of
Highways and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be
borne by the owner or operator.
   (G)   Unreasonable delays in allowing the Department of Highways access to a
facility shall be a violation of this chapter.
   (H)   If the Department of Highways has been refused access to any part of
the premises from which storm water is discharged, and the Department of
Highways is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a
violation of this chapter, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as
part of a routine inspection and sampling program designated to verify
compliance with this chapter or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the
overall public health, safety, environment and welfare of the community, then
the Department of Highways may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court
of competent jurisdiction.
(Ord. passed 8-1-06)
Penalty, see § 54.99
§ 54.10 NOTIFICATION OF ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGES AND SPILLS.
   Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible
for a facility, activity or operation, or responsible for emergency response
for a facility, activity or operation has information of any known or suspected
release of pollutants or non-storm water discharges from that facility or
operation which are resulting or may result in illicit discharges or pollutants
discharging into storm water, the city's separate storm sewer system, state
waters, or waters of the U.S., said person shall immediately notify the
Department of Highways and take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery,
containment, and cleanup of such release so as to minimize the effects of the
discharge.
(Ord. passed 8-1-06)
Penalty, see § 54.99
§ 54.11 VIOLATIONS AND ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or
fail to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter or the Storm Water
Regulations. Any person who has violated or continues to violate these
provisions may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section
or may be restrained by injunction or otherwise abated in a manner provided by
law.
      (2)   In the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to
public health or public safety, the Department of Highways is authorized to
enter upon the subject private property, without giving prior notice, to take
any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the
property. The Department of Highways is authorized to seek costs of the
abatement as outlined in subsection (F) of this section.
   (B)   Whenever the Department of Highways finds that a violation of this
chapter or the Regulations has occurred, the Public Works Director or designee
may order compliance by written Notice of Violation. The Notice of Violation
shall contain:
      (1)   The name and address of the alleged violator;
      (2)   The address when available or a description of the building,
structure or land upon which the violation is occurring, or has occurred;
      (3)   A statement specifying the nature of the violation;
      (4)   A description of the remedial measures necessary to restore
compliance with this chapter and a time schedule for the completion of such
remedial action;
      (5)   A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed
against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and,
      (6)   A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to
the Department of Highways Storm Water Appeals Committee by filing a written
notice of appeal within five days of service of notice of violation.
   (C)   Such notice may require without limitation:
      (1)   The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;
      (2)   The elimination of illicit discharges and illegal connections;
      (3)   That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and
desist;
      (4)   The abatement or remediation of storm water pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property;
      (5)   Payment of costs to cover administrative and abatement costs; and,
      (6)   The implementation of pollution prevention practices.
   (D)   Appeal of Notice of Violation. Any person receiving a Notice of
Violation may appeal the determination of the Department of Highways. The
appeal must be received within five days from the date of the Notice of
Violation. Filing of an appeal does not relieve the owner from full compliance
with the remedial actions outlined in the Notice of Violation. Hearing on the
appeal before the Department of Highways, Storm Water Appeals Committee shall
take place within 30 days from the date of receipt of the appeal. The decision
of the Storm Water Appeals Committee shall be final.
   (E)   Enforcement measures after appeal. If the violation has not been
corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the Notice of Violation,
then representatives of the Department of Highways may enter upon the subject
private property and are authorized to take any and all measures necessary to
abate the violation and/or restore the property. It shall be unlawful for any
person, owner, agent or person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow
the government agency or designated contractor to enter upon the premises for
the purposes set forth above.
   (F)   Costs of abatement of the violation. Within ten days after abatement
of the violation, the owner of the property will be notified of the cost of
abatement, including administrative costs. The property owner may file a
written protest objecting to the assessment or to the amount of the assessment
within 15 days of such notice. If the amount due is not paid within 30 days
after receipt of the notice, or if an appeal is taken, within five days after a
decision on said appeal, the charges shall become a special assessment against
the property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the
assessment. Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall
become liable to the city by reason of such violation.
   (G)   Violations deemed a public nuisance. In addition to the enforcement
process and penalties provided in this chapter any threat to public health,
safety, welfare and environment and is declared and deemed a nuisance, may be
abated by injunctive or other equitable relief as provided by law.
   (H)   Remedies not exclusive. The remedies listed in this chapter and the
Regulations are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any
applicable federal, state or local law and the city may seek cumulative
remedies.
   (I)   The city may recover attorney's fees, court costs, and other expenses
associated with enforcement of this chapter, including sampling and monitoring
expenses.
(Ord. passed 8-1-06)
Penalty, see § 54.99
§ 54.12 ELIGIBILITY.
   (A)   Permit eligibility. Permit eligibility is limited to discharges from
"large" and "small" construction activity or as otherwise designated by the
EPA. This general permit contains eligibility restrictions, as well as permit
conditions and requirements. Permittee may have to take certain actions to be
eligible for coverage under this permit. In such cases, permittee must continue
to satisfy those eligibility provisions to maintain permit authorization. If
permittee does not meet the requirements that are pre-condition to eligibility,
then the resulting discharges constitute unpermitted discharges. By contrast,
if permittee does not comply with the requirements of the general permit,
permittee may be in violation of the general permit for their otherwise
eligible discharges.
   (B)   (1)   Combined sewer drainage systems discharges from "large" and
"small" construction activity or as otherwise designated by the EPA that flow
into a combined sewer system are not covered by the EPA's Phase II Storm Water
Program. A Notice of Intent does not need to be submitted to the EPA nor does
the owner/operator have to receive acknowledgment from the EPA prior to the
start of construction activity.
      (2)   The city is requiring in these instances that all other conditions
as outlined in this chapter or the Regulations shall apply to all construction
activity as defined in §
54.06 with the exception of submitting the Notice of Intent to EPA Washington.
The requirements for determination of no impact status as outlined in the
Endangered Species Act and Historic Preservation Act along with the completion
of a Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan as outlined in the Notice of Intent
submission is still a mandatory submission to the city and must follow the
conditions as outlined in the EPA's Notice of Intent.
(Ord. passed 8-1-06)
§ 54.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Civil penalties. In the event the alleged violator fails to take the
remedial measures set forth in the Notice of Violation or otherwise fails to
cure the violations described therein within two days, or such greater period
as the Department of Highways shall deem appropriate, after the Director of
Public Works or designee has taken one or more of the actions described above,
the Public Works Director may impose a penalty not to exceed $1,000 (depending
on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied
after receipt of the Notice of Violation.
   (B)   Criminal penalties. For violations of this chapter or the Regulations,
the Director of Public Works may issue a citation to the alleged violator
requiring such person to appear in court to answer charges for such violation.
Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000
for each day the violation has occurred, or imprisonment for up to 60 days or
both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur
shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. passed 8-1-06)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
            Chapter
               
70.     MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
               
71.     SNOW EMERGENCY REGULATIONS
               
72.     BICYCLES
               
73.     PARKING SCHEDULES
               
74.     [RESERVED]
               
75.   MOTORIZED SCOOTERS
CHAPTER 70: MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
Section
In General
   
70.01   Committee on Traffic and Public Safety established; purpose
   
70.02   Membership; terms of office
   
70.03   Authority
   
70.04   Publication and effective date
   
70.05   Availability of rules and regulations
   
70.06   Definitions
   
70.07   Departmental authority and responsibility
   
70.08   Alcohol prohibited in vehicle
   
70.09   Waiver of registration fee
   
70.10   Emergency vehicle exemption
   
70.11   Signs required
   
70.12   Soliciting rides
Vehicle Operation
   
70.15   Through streets
   
70.16   One-way streets
   
70.17   Authorized processions
   
70.18   Limitations on turning around
   
70.19   Emerging from alley or private driveway
   
70.20   Driving prohibited on sidewalks and in safety zones
   
70.21   Failure to stop for crossing guard prohibited
   
70.22   Boarding or alighting from vehicles
   
70.23   Unlawful riding
   
70.24   Roller skates and similar devices
   
70.25   Persons propelling push carts or riding bicycles or animals to obey
traffic regulations
   
70.26   Unattended motor vehicles
   
70.27   Discharging fireworks
   
70.28   Commercial motor vehicular and truck traffic prohibited during certain
hours
   
70.29   Crossing fire hose
   
70.30   Traffic congested Elm Street
   
70.31   Speed in service alley
   
70.32    [Reserved]
Stopping, Standing and Parking
   
70.36   Stopping, standing, or parking prohibited
   
70.37   Manner of stopping, standing or parking
   
70.38   Bus stops and taxicab stands
   
70.39   Parking for sale or to display advertising
   
70.40   Towing
Parking Operations
   
70.44   Division established
   
70.45   Duties of parking management and operations
   
70.46   Administration
   
70.47   Authorizing installation of parking meters and maintenance thereof
   
70.48   Denomination of coin to be deposited and time allotted therefor
   
70.49   Depositing of additional coins to extend maximum parking time
prohibited
   
70.50   Signal display required
   
70.51   Tampering, etc. prohibited
   
70.52   Required coin deposit levied as inspection fee
   
70.53   Loading zone limitation
   
70.54   Permit parking in lieu of coin deposit and parking districts
   
70.55   Residential permit parking
   
70.56   Police to attach notice of violation on vehicle
   
70.57   Parking rates
Snow Removal
   
70.61   [Reserved]
   
70.62   [Reserved]
   
70.63   [Reserved]
   
70.64   [Reserved]
   
70.65   [Reserved]
Vehicle Impoundment
   
70.70   Impoundment of vehicles
   
70.71   Removal, impounding and return of vehicle
Responsibility, Notice and Penalties
   
70.76   Prima facie responsibility
   
70.77   Violation notice
   
70.78   Basic penalty
   
70.79   Increased penalties
   
70.80   Penalty imposed for commercial vehicle and trucking violations
   
70.81   Penalty for other violations
   
70.82   Immobilization of motor vehicles for non-payment of parking fines
Cross-reference:
   Traffic rules in parks, see
§ 96.07
   Peddling from a motor vehicle; application of traffic regulations, see
§ 115.43
Statutory reference:
   Authority of city to regulate use of motor vehicles, R.S.A. 47:17(VIII)
   Motor vehicles, see R.S.A. Chs. 259—269
IN GENERAL
§ 70.01 COMMITTEE ON TRAFFIC AND PUBLIC SAFETY ESTABLISHED; PURPOSE.
   For the purpose of making all necessary rules and regulations for the
regulation and control of traffic upon the streets of the City of Manchester,
the Committee on Traffic and Public Safety, authorized by Chapter 335 of the
Laws of 1951 and created by Chapter 63 of the Manchester Revised Ordinances of
1953, is hereby continued in full force and effect.
(Ord. passed 8-6-02)
§ 70.02 MEMBERSHIP; TERMS OF OFFICE.
   The Committee on Traffic and Public Safety shall consist of five Aldermen
and, as non-voting members, the heads of the Police, Fire, Traffic, and Highway
Departments. Aldermanic members shall be appointed by the Mayor for a two-year
term. Present members shall continue to serve for the remainder of their
current terms as Aldermen. Department heads shall serve for as long as they
hold that office. A department head may, in writing, designate a departmental
employee to regularly represent that department at meetings of the Committee on
Traffic and Public Safety.
(Ord. passed 8-6-02)
§ 70.03 AUTHORITY.
   (A)   Authority to make regulations. The Committee on Traffic and Public
Safety shall, subject to the provisions of Chapter 335 of the Laws of 1951 and
division (B) of this section, have the authority now vested in the Board of
Mayor and Aldermen under the provisions of R.S.A. 41:11 and R.S.A. 47:17 (VII)
and (VIII) to perform and carry out the following duties:
      (1)   Establish traffic lanes and such zones for the loading and
unloading of passengers, goods or materials as are necessary.
      (2)   Identify and designate those intersections requiring travel and/or
turning restrictions.
      (3)   Establish such crosswalks and safety zones as are necessary for the
protection of pedestrians.
      (4)   Establish parking locations and districts and areas where parking
is restricted or prohibited.
      (5)   Provide for the installation, regulation, control, operation, use
and maintenance of parking meters.
      (6)   Determine the location for and determine the character, type and
placement of all traffic control devices necessary for the safe and orderly
flow of traffic; provided, however, that all such devices shall, to the extent
practicable, be uniform as to type and location and be consistent with the
latest edition of the "Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets
and Highways" (MUTCD), published by the United States Department of
Transportation, Federal Highway Administration.
      (7)   Otherwise provide for the safe and orderly flow of traffic and
pedestrians and effectuate the purposes and requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   Approval of regulations.
      (1)   All traffic rules and regulations made and adopted by the Committee
on Traffic and Public Safety shall be subject to the approval of the Board of
Mayor and Aldermen.
      (2)   Exception. Temporary rules and regulations made and adopted by the
Committee on Traffic and Public Safety to be put in effect for a period not to
exceed seven days shall not require approval of the Board of Mayor and
Aldermen.
   (C)   Subject to other provisions of law and to the direction of the Board
of Mayor and Aldermen, the Committee on Traffic and Public Safety shall oversee
parking operations for the City of Manchester as necessary to:
      (1)   Provide for the daily management and operations of all public
parking garages;
      (2)   Provide for the leasing of parking spaces in city owned lots to
public or private entities in the millyard area or other areas deemed in the
city's best interest;
      (3)   Make policy relative to the management and operation of the city
parking system. The city parking system shall include facilities and activities
related to on-street metered parking, metered parking lots owned and/or
operated by the city, parking lots leased out but maintained by the tenant,
easements, condominium type and leased parking spaces and parking garages.
(Ord. passed 8-6-02)
§ 70.04 PUBLICATION AND EFFECTIVE DATE.
   Rules and regulations adopted by the Committee on Traffic and Public Safety
and approved by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen shall not take effect until the
title and a brief summary of each rule or regulation has been posted in at
least one public place and published in at least one newspaper of general
circulation in the city at least one week prior to the effective date thereof.
(Ord. passed 8-6-02)
§ 70.05 AVAILABILITY OF RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The City Clerk shall maintain a copy of each rule and regulation in a form
readily available for public examination during the regular hours of that
office.
(Ord. passed 8-6-02)
§ 70.06 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words and/or phrases shall, for the purposes of this chapter,
have the meanings described to them herein unless the context of a section
clearly requires otherwise.
   ACCESS AISLE. A designated space for maneuvering a wheelchair or other
mobility device when entering or exiting a vehicle, and that is immediately
adjacent to a properly designated parking space for persons with a walking
disability, whether on public or private property. Access aisles shall be
marked so as to discourage parking in them.
   ALLEY. A service way providing a secondary means of public access to
abutting properties, and not intended for general traffic circulation.
   BACK STREET. (see ALLEY ).
   CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT. For the purposes of this chapter, the area of the
central business district shall be as that established by resolution of the
Board of Mayor and Aldermen authorized by R.S.A. 31:120 through 31:125 and
consistent with Chapter 37 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Manchester.
   CITY.  City of Manchester, NH.
   COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLE. A vehicle designed or used to transport
passengers, property or displaying advertising if:
      (1)   The vehicle has a gross vehicle weight rating or gross combination
weight rating of 26,001 or more pounds; or
      (2)   The vehicle is designed to transport more than 15 passengers
including the driver; or
      (3)   The vehicle is of any size and is used in the transportation of
materials found to be hazardous pursuant to R.S.A. 259:12-3(c); or
      (4)   The vehicle falls under the definition of trailer; see §
70.06.
      (5)   Exclusion. COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLE shall not include a city
vehicle, or emergency vehicles engaged in the provision of emergency medical,
Police or Fire services.
   COMMITTEE ON TRAFFIC AND PUBLIC SAFETY. A committee of the Board of Mayor
and Aldermen empowered to regulate and control traffic upon the highways of the
city.
   CROSSING GUARD. A civilian having completed an approved traffic direction
and control course, authorized by the Chief of Police or his designee, to
direct traffic to safeguard pedestrians and school children.
   CROSSWALK. That portion of a roadway ordinarily included within the
prolongation or connection of curb and property lines at intersections, or any
other portion of a roadway clearly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines
or other markings on the surface.
   EMERGENCY VEHICLE. Fire and Police Department vehicles or transportation
devices, ambulances and such vehicles of other municipal departments and public
utilities as are used to respond to emergencies and such other vehicle or
transportation device designated by the Chief of Police.
   FIRE LANE. A space adjacent to a curb or building reserved for the exclusive
use of emergency vehicles.
   HANDICAPPED PARKING. Specifically designed spaces for parking by persons
qualified under R.S.A. 265:74.
   HANDICAPPED PARKING ACCESS AISLE.  A designated space for maneuvering a
wheelchair or other mobility device when entering or exiting a vehicle, and
that is immediately adjacent to a properly designated parking space for persons
with a walking disability, whether on public or private property.
   INTERSECTION. The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the
lateral curb lines, or, if none, then of the lateral boundary lines of two or
more streets or highways which join one another at an angle, whether or not one
such street or highway crosses the other.
   LOADING ZONE. A space, adjacent to a curb, reserved for the exclusive use of
vehicles during the loading or unloading of materials or passengers.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is
or may be transported or drawn upon a street or highway which is self-
propelled, except devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
   MUTCD. "Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways,"
as published by the United States Department of Transportation.
   OFFICIAL TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES . All signs, markings, signals, and devices
placed or erected by authority of a public body or official having
jurisdiction, for the purpose of guiding, directing, warning or regulating
traffic.
   OVERTIME PARKING. The parking of a vehicle for longer than the posted limit
as prescribed by city ordinance during the hours of enforcement per calendar
day.
   PARKING. The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, upon a roadway,
otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in
loading or unloading, or in obedience to traffic regulations or traffic signs
or signals.
   PARKING GARAGE. A city owned building, or portion thereof, used primarily
for parking and storage of vehicles and available to the general public.
   PARKING METER BANK. A central location in a given parking facility where
parking meters are located. Each individual parking meter shall be clearly
marked so as to associate itself with a corresponding parking space.
   PASSENGER ZONE. A space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of
passengers when loading or unloading from a motor vehicle.
   PAY & DISPLAY METER. A single unit that replaces multiple meters. The
motorist pays for parking at the pay station and receives a receipt to be
placed face-up on the dashboard of their vehicle. This receipt indicates the
start and end of the time purchased.
   PEDESTRIAN. Any person afoot.
   POLICE OFFICER. Any officer of the Police Department or any officer
authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for violations of
traffic regulations.
   PRIVATE ROAD OR DRIVEWAY. Every road or driveway not open to the use of the
public for purposes of vehicular travel.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. The privilege of the immediate use of the street or highway.
   ROADWAY. That portion of a street or highway between the regularly
established curbing or edge of the pavement.
   SAFETY ZONE. Refuge island or other area or space officially set apart
within a roadway for the exclusive use of pedestrians, and which is protected
or is so marked or indicated by adequate signs as to be plainly visible at all
times while set apart as a safety zone.
   SIDEWALK. That portion of a paved or unpaved street or public right-of-way
between the curb lines, and if no curb from the traveled portion of the street,
and the edge of the public right-of-way intended for pedestrian travel.
   STANDING. Any stopping of a vehicle whether occupied or not.
   STREET OR HIGHWAY. Every way or place of whatever nature open to the use of
the public, as a matter of right, for the purposes of vehicular travel.
   THROUGH STREET. A designated route or street in which motor vehicles have
the right of way over intersecting roadways.
   TRAFFIC. Pedestrians, vehicles and other conveyances using any street for
purposes of travel.
   TRAILER. Any device designed to be attached to and towed by a motor vehicle
for the purpose of transporting property of any type or any vehicle or
structure designed and constructed in such a manner as will permit occupancy
thereof as sleeping quarters for one or more persons, or the conduct of any
business or profession, occupation, or trade, or used as a selling or
advertising device, and so designed that it may be mounted on wheels and used
as a conveyance on streets, whether propelled or drawn by its own or other
motive power.
   TRUCK. Any commercial motor vehicle or any vehicle with manufacturer load
capacity of over one ton, which is not an emergency vehicle engaged in the
provision of emergency medical, Police or Fire services.
   VEHICLE. Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may
be transported or drawn upon a street or highway, except devices used
exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
(Ord. passed 8-6-02; Am. Ord. passed 4-6-04; Am. Ord. passed 12-5-06; Am. Ord.
passed 6-2-09; Am. Ord. passed 10-5-10; Am. Ord. passed 2-19-13; Am. Ord.
passed 10-6-15)
§ 70.07 DEPARTMENTAL AUTHORITY AND RESPONSIBILITY.
   (A)   Police.
      (1)   It shall be the duty of the Police Department or such officers as
are assigned by the Chief of Police to enforce the provisions of this traffic
chapter or any rules and regulations promulgated hereunder and all of the state
vehicle laws applicable to street traffic in the city.
      (2)   Officers of the Police Department or such officers as are assigned
by the Chief of Police are hereby authorized to direct all traffic by voice,
hand, or signal in conformance with the provisions of this traffic code;
provided, however, in the event of a fire or other emergency or to expedite
traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the Police Department may
direct as conditions may require notwithstanding the provisions herein.
      (3)   Officers of the Police Department are hereby authorized to display
portable signs within certain intersections forbidding vehicle drivers to
perform specified maneuvers. Said portable signs shall only be displayed at a
specified intersection during times of traffic congestion when, in the opinion
of the Chief of Police, such restrictions are necessary to expedite the
movement of traffic through the intersection.
      (4)   The Chief of Police or his designee may restrict or prohibit
parking or travel on any public street whenever the ordinary use of the street
would become hazardous due to an emergency, special event, or unusual activity.
With the exception of an emergency situation, such special restricted parking,
prohibited travel shall not exceed 72 hours without authority from the
Committee on Traffic and Public Safety of the City of Manchester. The Chief of
Police or his designee should inform the Alderman/Aldermen of the appropriate
ward(s) of his decision.
      (5)   It shall be the duty of the Police Department or crossing guards as
are assigned and supervised by the Chief of Police or his designee to direct
elementary school children in crossing streets at designated crossings and
designated times deemed necessary by the Chief of Police to assist the safe
traveling of children to and from school; to cooperate with school officials in
enforcing school rules and regulations relating to the crossing of streets; and
instructing school children in the elements of traffic safety.
      (6)   Officers of the Police Department or crossing guards as are
assigned and supervised by the Chief of Police or his designee are hereby
authorized to stop traffic to ensure the safe crossing of children.
   (B)   Fire. Officers of the Fire Department, when at the scene of a fire or
other emergency, may direct or assist the Police in directing traffic in the
immediate vicinity.
   (C)   Traffic.
      (1)   It shall be the duty of the Traffic Department to make
recommendations to the Committee on Traffic and Public Safety relative to
formulation of ordinances and regulations governing traffic.
      (2)   It shall be the duty of the Traffic Department to construct,
repair, and to provide maintenance for the traffic control devices as
prescribed by law and/or by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen.
      (3)   The Traffic Department shall oversee the management, operation,
maintenance and other tasks pursuant to policy established by the Committee on
Traffic and Public Safety.
      (4)   The Traffic Department may grant a temporary permit for a special
circumstance, to include funerals, weddings, elections, moving of furnishings
and construction, that requires disruption of parking or movement of vehicles.
Such permit shall be valid for no more than 24 hours. Requests for permits for
a longer period shall be directed to the Committee on Traffic and Public
Safety.
   (D)   Highway.
      (1)   The Public Works Director is empowered to make regulations and the
Chief of Police is empowered to enforce the regulations necessary to cover
emergencies or special conditions.
      (2)   It shall be the responsibility of the Highway Department to
establish emergency or special regulations governing snow removal.
   (E)   Any person working for the city in the performance of their duties may
direct traffic as conditions may require.
(Ord. passed 8-6-02; Am. Ord. passed 12-19-05)
§ 70.08 ALCOHOL PROHIBITED IN VEHICLE.
   No person shall consume any liquor or beverage as defined by R.S.A. 175:1 or
possess any opened container thereof while in any vehicle upon a way defined by
R.S.A. 259:125.
(Ord. passed 8-6-02)
§ 70.09 WAIVER OF REGISTRATION FEE.
   To the extent provided in R.S.A. 261:175-A, former prisoners of war are
hereby exempt from payment of the fee to be charged for a permit to register
one motor vehicle.
(Ord. passed 8-6-02)
§ 70.10 EMERGENCY VEHICLE EXEMPTION.
   The provisions of this chapter regulating the movement, parking and standing
of vehicles shall not apply to an emergency vehicle. This exemption shall not,
however, protect the operator of any such vehicle from the consequences of a
reckless disregard for the safety of others.
(Ord. passed 8-6-02)
§ 70.11 SIGNS REQUIRED.
   (A)   No provision of this chapter for which signs are required shall be
enforced against an alleged violator if, at the time and place of the alleged
violation, the required sign is not in proper position and sufficiently legible
to be seen by an ordinarily observant person.
   (B)   Whenever a particular section of this chapter does not require signs,
such section shall be effective without signs having been erected. No signs
shall be required for overnight winter parking pursuant to
§ 71.13 or for snow emergencies.
(Ord. passed 8-6-02; Am. Ord. passed 12-19-05)
Cross-reference:
   Snow Emergency Regulations, see
Ch. 71
§ 70.12 SOLICITING RIDES.
   (A)   No person shall stand on the roadway for the purpose of soliciting a
ride, employment, business or contributions from the occupant of any vehicle.
   (B)   No person shall stand on, or in proximity to, the roadway for the
purpose of soliciting the watching or guarding of any vehicle while parked or
about to be parked on a street or way.
   (C)   Any person may hitchhike or solicit a ride from the occupant of any
vehicle provided that the person is not, when so doing, standing on the
roadway.
(Ord. passed 8-6-02)
   VEHICLE OPERATION
§ 70.15 THROUGH STREETS.
   (A)   Subject to the direction of any traffic control sign or signal or
unless otherwise directed, the driver of any vehicle traveling on any street
intersecting a street which has been established by rule or regulation as a
through street shall stop such vehicle at the intersection before proceeding
across or into the through street.
   (B)   The driver of any vehicle who has stopped or yielded at an
intersection shall yield to other vehicles within the intersection or
approaching so closely on the intersecting street as to constitute an immediate
hazard.
(Ord. passed 8-6-02)
§ 70.16 ONE-WAY STREETS.
   A sign indicating the proper direction of travel shall be erected and
maintained on any street established by rule or regulation for one-way travel.
(Ord. passed 8-6-02)
§ 70.17 AUTHORIZED PROCESSIONS.
   (A)   Unless otherwise directed by a Police Officer or other authorized
official, no vehicle shall be driven between the vehicles comprising a funeral
or other authorized procession while such procession is in motion, provided
that each vehicle in the procession is conspicuously part of the procession and
has its headlights illuminated.
   (B)   Any funeral director licensed by the State of New Hampshire is
authorized to conduct, organize or lead a funeral procession as long as such
procession meets the requirements of this section.
   (C)   All other processions, including but not limited to, parades, road
races, motorcades, and walk-a-thons must be authorized by the Chief of Police
or his designee, must meet the requirements of this section, and must have a
sign-off from the departments of Highway, Fire, and the City Clerk. The Chief
of Police may place restrictions on the permit. The Chief of Police or his
designee should inform members of the Board of Mayor and Aldermen of his
decision.
   (D)   If any person or organization is denied a permit under (C) above, such
person or organization may appeal the denial to the Committee on Traffic and
Public Safety. Such appeal must be submitted in writing to the Office of the
City Clerk within 48 hours of receipt of denial. The Committee on Traffic and
Public Safety shall reach a decision within 30 days of receiving said request
to appeal.
(Ord. passed 8-6-02)
§ 70.18 LIMITATIONS ON TURNING AROUND.
   No driver shall turn any vehicle so as to proceed in the opposite direction
unless such movement can be made in safety and without backing up or otherwise
interfering with the flow of traffic, nor shall any driver turn any vehicle so
as to proceed in the opposite direction in violation of any rule or regulation
promulgated pursuant to this chapter prohibiting such action.
(Ord. passed 8-6-02)
§ 70.19 EMERGING FROM ALLEY OR PRIVATE DRIVEWAY.
   The driver of any vehicle emerging from an alley, driveway or building shall
stop such vehicle immediately before driving onto a sidewalk, street or alley.
No vehicle shall proceed onto a street or alley unless that movement can be
made safely.
(Ord. passed 8-6-02)
§ 70.20 DRIVING PROHIBITED ON SIDEWALKS AND IN SAFETY ZONES.
   (A)   No vehicle shall be driven upon any sidewalk or sidewalk area except
where necessary to enter a street, alley, driveway, or similar place.
   (B)   Other than emergency vehicles, no vehicle shall be operated within a
safety zone.
(Ord. passed 8-6-02)
§ 70.21 FAILURE TO STOP FOR CROSSING GUARD PROHIBITED.
   No vehicle shall proceed to be driven upon any street when requested to stop
by a crossing guard.
(Ord. passed 8-6-02)
§ 70.22 BOARDING OR ALIGHTING FROM VEHICLES.
   No person shall board or alight from any vehicle while that vehicle is in
motion.
(Ord. passed 8-6-02)
§ 70.23 UNLAWFUL RIDING.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to ride on any portion or part thereof
of any vehicle, which is not designed or intended for the use of passengers
when the vehicle is in motion. This provision shall not apply to an employee,
private or public, engaged in the necessary discharge of a duty for his/her
employer, or to persons riding within closed truck bodies in space intended for
merchandise.
(Ord. passed 8-6-02)
§ 70.24 ROLLER SKATES AND SIMILAR DEVICES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person upon roller skates, skateboards,
or riding in or by means of any coaster, toy vehicle or a similar device, which
is motorized or non-motorized to go up on any roadway except while crossing a
street on a crosswalk.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to use a skateboard or similar
device whether motorized or non-motorized in zones restricted by regulation of
the Committee on Traffic and Public Safety.
   (C)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to an electric personal
assistive mobility device as defined by R.S.A. 269:1 et seq.
(Ord. passed 8-6-02)
§ 70.25 PERSONS PROPELLING PUSH CARTS OR RIDING BICYCLES OR ANIMALS TO OBEY
TRAFFIC REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Every person propelling any push cart or riding a bicycle or an animal
upon a roadway, shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter applicable
to the operation of any vehicle.
   (B)   Clinging to moving vehicles. It shall be unlawful for any person
traveling upon any bicycle, motorcycle, coaster, sled, roller skates or any toy
vehicle to cling to or attach himself or his vehicle to any other moving
vehicle upon any roadway.
   (C)   Riding on handle bars prohibited. It shall be unlawful for the
operator of any bicycle or motorcycle, when upon the street, to carry any other
person upon the handle bar, frame or tank of any such vehicle, or for any
person to so ride upon any such vehicle.
(Ord. passed 8-6-02)
§ 70.26 UNATTENDED MOTOR VEHICLES.
   No person having charge or control of a motor vehicle shall allow that
vehicle to stand or park on any street unattended without first having set the
brakes and stopping the motor of the vehicle. When such standing or parking is
on a perceptible grade, the wheels of the vehicle shall be turned to the curb
or side of the roadway.
(Ord. passed 8-6-02)
§ 70.27 DISCHARGING FIREWORKS.
   No person shall throw or discharge from, toward, at or under any motor
vehicle any firecracker, torpedo or other firework.
(Ord. passed 8-6-02)
§ 70.28 COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICULAR AND TRUCK TRAFFIC PROHIBITED DURING CERTAIN
HOURS.
   (A)   No person, persons, firm or corporation shall operate or cause to be
operated any commercial motor vehicle, or truck in any district prohibited by
regulation of the Committee on Traffic and Public Safety.
   (B)   No person, persons, firm or corporation shall operate or cause to be
operated any commercial motor vehicle, or truck between the hours of 9:30 p.m.
and 7:00 a.m. on any street or portion of a street designated by regulation of
the Committee on Traffic and Public Safety.
   (C)   This section shall not apply to any commercial vehicle or truck making
an emergency delivery or service call on any street or portion thereof
designated as no trucks allowed.
(Ord. passed 8-6-02)
§ 70.29 CROSSING FIRE HOSE.
   No vehicle shall be driven over any hose of the Fire Department when laid
down on any street or private driveway to be used at any fire or alarm of fire,
without the consent of the Fire Chief or Fire Department Official.
(Ord. passed 8-6-02)
§ 70.30 TRAFFIC CONGESTED ELM STREET.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to prohibit the repeated
driving of a motor vehicle along any portion of Elm Street when it has been
determined to be congested with traffic by the Committee on Traffic and Public
Safety.
   (B)   Acts prohibited. No vehicle shall travel along Elm Street where marked
as such by signs as described in § 70.30 (D).
   (C)   Traffic congested defined.  TRAFFIC CONGESTED STREET is any portion of
Elm Street when it is affected by traffic congestion caused in whole or part by
the repeated driving of the same motor vehicle along or across any portion of
the street. The Committee on Traffic and Public Safety shall determine those
times during which Elm Street shall be designated as traffic congested.
   (D)   Posting of signs. The Committee on Traffic and Public Safety shall
cause signs to be posted giving drivers notice that the passage of the same
motor vehicle upon Elm Street more than two times during the prohibited hours
is a violation of § 70.30 (B).
   (E)   Notice of towing for subsequent violations. Upon issuing a summons or
a written or oral warning for a violation of § 70.30(B), the Police Officer
shall give the individual to whom the summons, written or oral warning is
issued a written notice which shall state as follows:
   Notice
You have been cited for a violation of § 70.30(B) of the City of Manchester,
New Hampshire Code of Ordinances for repeated passage of a motor vehicle on Elm
Street when it has been designated as traffic congested. If the vehicle you are
operating is again driven along Elm Street during such time as it has been
designated as traffic congested within the next eight hours the vehicle may be
impounded and towed at your expense or the expense of the owner or other person
entitled to possession of the vehicle.
___________      ________      _______________
Date         Time         Officer
   (F)   Exemptions. Section 70.30(B) shall not apply to:
      (1)   Any motor vehicle owned by the federal government or any agency
thereof, by any state or a political subdivision thereof.
      (2)   Any motor vehicle being operated by any employee of the federal
government, any state government or any political subdivision thereof, while on
public business.
      (3)   Any motor vehicle licensed for public transportation.
      (4)   Any motor vehicle granted a prior exemption by the Chief of Police
because passage of the motor vehicle upon or across a traffic congested street
is necessary for commercial or public safety reasons. The Chief of Police shall
keep a list of all motor vehicles granted an exemption.
      (5)   Any marked emergency services motor vehicle.
   (G)   Penalty. A violation of § 70.30(B) shall carry a penalty of $25 for
the first offense within one calendar year, $50 for the second offense within
one calendar year and $100 for the third and each subsequent offense within one
calendar year.
(Ord. passed 8-6-02)
§ 70.31 SPEED IN SERVICE ALLEY.
   Unless otherwise posted, the speed limit shall be ten miles per hour in any
service alley in the city as designated by ordinance or regulation of the
Committee on Traffic and Public Safety and approved by the Board of Mayor and
Aldermen.
(Ord. passed 11-5-03)
§ 70.32 [RESERVED].
   (Previous section repealed on 5-15-18)
STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING
§ 70.36 STOPPING, STANDING, OR PARKING PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Except when necessary to comply with the directions of a Police
Officer or traffic control device, no vehicle shall be allowed to stop, stand,
or park:
      (1)   At any place where stopping, standing or parking is prohibited by
any traffic control device.
      (2)   Within an intersection.
      (3)   Within a crosswalk.
      (4)   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within 30 feet of
points of the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone unless a
different length is indicated by a traffic control device.
      (5)   Within 20 feet from the intersection of the curbing or edge of the
pavement or, if none, then within 15 feet of the intersection of property lines
at an intersection, except at alleys.
      (6)   Within 30 feet upon the approach to any traffic control device
located at the side of the roadway.
      (7)   Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station.
      (8)   Within 5 feet of a fire hydrant.
      (9)   Within 5 feet of a private driveway.
      (10)   On a sidewalk, except that food vendors holding a peddler's
license from the Office of the City Clerk may be authorized to encumber no more
than one half the width of any sidewalk within the Central Business Service
District, as measured from the curbing, provided such encumbrance is approved
by the Department of Highways. Said vendors are restricted to that space
bordered by the curbing.
      (11)   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction in a
manner that would obstruct traffic.
      (12)   On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped, stood or parked at the
side of the roadway.
      (13)   Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing.
      (14)   So as to leave available for the free movement of traffic less
than 12 feet of the width of any roadway, except for brief stops while actually
loading or unloading passengers.
      (15)   (a)   In any parking place, whether on public or private property,
speciallydesignated for a person with a walking disability by means of a sign
required by R.S.A. 265:73-a stating that the space is reserved for a person
with a walking disability or displaying the international accessibility symbol,
unless that person has a special plate or placard issued or recognized pursuant
to R.S.A. 261:86 or 261:88, and the person who qualifies for the plate or
placard is being transported to or from the parking place. Any person who
violates the provisions of this subsection shall be fined as outlined in §
70.78.
         (b)   In or overlapping into any access aisle. Any person who violates
the provisions of this subsection shall be fined as outlined in §
70.78.
      (16)   On any bridge or any designated restricted area including, but not
limited to, the front of any church, hospital, funeral parlor, theater or hotel
entrance.
   (B)   Except when necessary to comply with the directions of a Police
Officer or traffic control device, no vehicle shall be allowed to park:
      (1)   On any back street, lane or alley.
      (2)   In violation of any restriction contained in any law or ordinance.
      (3)   In violation of any rule or regulation properly established by the
Committee on Traffic and Public Safety.
      (4)   On any street during the period from and including November 15th of
each year to May 15th in violation of the provisions of
§§ 70.70 or
70.71 of this chapter.
   (C)   Parking of motor vehicles designated as commercial vehicles shall be
prohibited from parking on any city street between the hours of midnight and 5:
00 a.m. subject to violation or towing. For the purpose of this section a
commercial vehicle shall include, in addition to a commercial vehicle as
defined by §
70.06, a vehicle which has permanently or temporarily affixed to it,
advertisement for a profit or nonprofit, commercial or noncommercial
organization or company excluding bumper stickers on the bumper of a vehicle.
   (D)   Fraudulent use of walking disability placards/plates.
      (1)   Any person using a walking disability placard/plate not issued to
them and the person with a walking disability to whom the placard/plate is
issued is not being transported to and from the parking space shall be guilty
of fraudulent use of walking disability placards/plates.
         (a)   If a vehicle is parked in a space which is not designated for
walking disability parking, it will be prima facie evidence of fraudulent use
of walking disability placards/ plates if the parking meter is expired and/or
no pay and display receipt is showing and the walking disability placard/plate
is clearly visible.
         (b)   If the vehicle is parked in a legal walking disability space.
      (2)   Altered or fabricated (facsimile) walking disability placards.
         (a)   Any person who displays/uses an altered walking disability
placard shall be guilty of a violation of this section.
         (b)   Any person who displays/uses a facsimile of an official looking
walking disability placard shall be guilty of a violation of this section.
         (c)   For this section, walking disability and handicapped shall have
the same meaning.
      (3)   Penalty. The minimum fine for this violation is $500.
   (E)   The driver of a vehicle shall not park such vehicle for longer than
the designated time limit, as prescribed by ordinance during the hours of
enforcement, per calendar day.
      (1)   Enforcement: Any vehicle parked on one side of a block between two
intersections for longer than the designated time limit shall be in violation.
   (F)   Any violation under this section shall be considered a "No Parking
Zone" and the fine will be as prescribed in §
70.78 unless otherwise prescribed by ordinance.
   (G)   Parking regulations - compact part of the City of Manchester.
      (1)   Exemptions to the above regulations are allowed in the compact part
of the city if the parking spaces are clearly signed and the pavement is marked
appropriately.
(Ord. passed 8-6-02; Am. Ord. passed 4-6-04; Am. Ord. passed 5-19-09; Am. Ord.
passed 6-2-09; Am. Ord. passed 5-4-10; Am. Ord. passed 7-6-10; Am. Ord. 10-5-
10; Am. Ord. passed 2-19-13)
§ 70.37 MANNER OF STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING.
   Unless otherwise directed by a traffic control device, all vehicles shall be
stopped, stood or parked parallel with the edge of the roadway, headed in the
proper direction of travel, and with the curbside wheels of the vehicle within
12 inches of the edge of the roadway. Where angle parking has been established,
all vehicles shall be parked at the angle to the curb indicated by traffic
control devices, and where stall parking has been established, no vehicle shall
occupy more than one stall unless the length of that vehicle requires an
additional stall or stalls.
(Ord. passed 8-6-02)
§ 70.38 BUS STOPS AND TAXICAB STANDS.
   (A)   No vehicle other than a bus shall be allowed to stop, stand or park in
an officially designated bus stop, and no vehicle other than a taxicab shall be
allowed to stop, stand or park in an officially designated taxicab stand.
   (B)   No bus shall be allowed to stop, stand or park upon any street in the
central business district at any place other than a bus stop, and no taxicab
shall be allowed to stop, stand or park upon any street in the central business
district at any place other than a taxicab stand except that both buses and
taxicabs may be temporarily stopped for brief periods of time at any place
where such stops are otherwise allowed for the purpose of, and while actually
engaged in, loading or unloading passengers.
(Ord. passed 8-6-02)
§ 70.39 PARKING FOR SALE OR TO DISPLAY ADVERTISING.
   Unless a permit for that purpose has been obtained from the City Clerk, no
vehicle shall be operated or parked on any street for the primary purpose of
displaying advertising or using a sound amplification device. No vehicle
displayed for sale shall be parked upon any street.
(Ord. passed 8-6-02)
§ 70.40 TOWING.
   (A)   (1)   Any company or person which tows a motor vehicle without the
consent or authorization of the owner or operator of the motor vehicle shall
not charge a towing fee in excess of $175.
      (2)   Any company or person which tows a motor vehicle without the
consent or authorization of the owner or operator of the motor vehicle shall
not charge a fee in excess of $50 per day for storing the towed motor vehicle.
There shall be no storage fee for the first 24 hours after a motor vehicle is
towed.
   (B)   No company or person shall charge any fee other than a towing fee or
storage fee, as provided for in §
70.40(A), for a motor vehicle which has been towed without the consent or
authorization of the owner or operator; except a company or person may charge a
service fee of up to $50 to release a motor vehicle from a storage lot to its
owner or operator at a time other than regular business hours. In the event a
service fee is charged, the company or person shall have the owner or operator
sign an acknowledgment upon the release of the motor vehicle. The
acknowledgment shall specify the date and time the vehicle was released, the
location of the storage lot, and the amount of the service fee charged. No
"hoisting", "let-down", "standby" or "gate" fee shall be charged.
   (C)   Any company or person which has towed a motor vehicle without the
consent of the owner or operator shall release to theowner or operator any and
all property contained within or on such vehicle, but not attached to the
vehicle, upon request by the owner or operator of the vehicle without requiring
the payment of any fee therefor, including the towing fee and the storage fee
provided for in §
70.40(A).
(Ord. passed 11-19-96; Am. Ord. passed 4-6-99; Am. Ord. passed 9-4-02; Am. Ord.
passed 10-4-05; Am. Ord. passed 7-2-13; Am Ord. passed 10-4-22)
PARKING OPERATIONS
§ 70.44 DIVISION ESTABLISHED.
   Parking Management and Operations is hereby established as a division within
the Economic Development Office.
(Ord. passed 6-12-06)
§ 70.45 DUTIES OF PARKING MANAGEMENT AND OPERATIONS.
   The division of Parking Management and operations shall:
   (A)   Manage, maintain, operate and account for revenue from all municipal
parking meters within the city.
   (B)   Issue, manage and account for revenue from all municipal parking
leases within the city.
   (C)   Manage, operate, maintain and account for the revenue from all
municipal parking garages with the city with the exception of those garages
located on school premises.
   (D)   Manage, operate, maintain and account for the revenue from all
municipal surface parking lots within the city with the exception of surface
parking lots located on school premises.
   (E)   Manage and operate all metered parking spaces and all other types of
parking restrictions adjacent to where meters are located within the city.
   (F)   Perform all such other duties or tasks as may be assigned by the Board
of Mayor and Alderman or as may be incidental to the duties and tasks set forth
above.
(Ord. passed 6-12-06; Am. Ord. passed 5-20-08)
§ 70.46 ADMINISTRATION.
   Pursuant to
§ 70.07, the Traffic Department shall be responsible to the Committee on
Traffic and Public Safety for the daily administration of the city's parking
operations.
(Ord. passed 8-6-02)
§ 70.47 AUTHORIZING INSTALLATION OF PARKING METERS AND MAINTENANCE THEREOF.
   The Traffic Director is hereby authorized, subject to the approval of the
Committee on Traffic and Public Safety, to provide for the installation,
regulation of fees, maintenance, control, operation and use of parking meters
on any street, part of a street, or municipal parking area.
(Ord. passed 8-6-02)
§ 70.48 DENOMINATION OF COIN TO BE DEPOSITED AND TIME ALLOTTED THEREFOR.
   (A)   Whenever any vehicle shall be parked next to a parking meter on any
day, when parking regulations as provided for under the provisions of this
chapter are in effect, the owner or operator of said vehicle shall park within
the area designated by the curb and street marking lines as indicated for
parallel, or diagonal parking on public highways or in municipal parking lots
within the lines indicated for the parking meter selected by the operation of
the motor vehicle, and upon entering said parking space shall immediately
deposit in said parking meter any lawful coin or coins of the United States in
the proper amount depending upon the location and the length of time such
vehicle can be legally parked as prescribed for that zone by this chapter and
shall put the meter in operation; provided, however, that such owner or
operator may use the unexpired time remaining on the meter from the previous
use without depositing a coin therein, and provided further that no vehicle
shall be parked for longer than the period prescribed for that zone by this
chapter. When a vehicle is too large to be confined in a single space, only the
meter nearest the hood of the front end of said vehicle need be operated. If a
vehicle shall remain parked in any parking space for longer than the time
prescribed by this chapter or for such length of time that the parking meter
shall display a signal indicating illegal parking, then in that event such
vehicle shall be considered as parked overtime.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to deposit or cause to be deposited in any
parking meter anything other than a coin or coins of the United States.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful to park in any space without a meter beyond the
prescribed time.
   (D)   Pay & display meter.
      (1)   Procedure for using pay & display meters.
         (a)   Area for pay & display meter parking will be marked with signs,
indicating the time zone and where the pay & display meter is located.
         (b)   The motorist may park their vehicle and proceed to the pay
station.
         (c)   The motorist has the choice to pay with credit card or U.S.
coins (dollars, quarters, dimes, or nickels).
         (d)   The motorist will receive a pay & display receipt (P&DR) which
must be placed face up on the dashboard of their vehicle.
         (e)   The receipt must be visible from both sides of the vehicle.
         (f)   The receipt is valid at any meter in the parking district in
which the receipt was purchased or a parking district with a lower rate as long
as it is not expired or the vehicle has not been parked for longer than the
allowed time limit in that particular space.
         (g)   The receipt is only valid on the date issued and expires at the
time indicated.
         (h)   Only one receipt is allowed on the vehicle dashboard.
         (i)   Event receipts are only valid in the parking district in which
the receipt was purchased.
      (2)   Pay & display receipts will at minimum have the following printed
information:
         (a)   Issued date and time;
         (b)   Expiration date and time;
         (c)   Machine ID number;
         (d)   Receipt number;
         (e)   Payment amount;
         (f)   City's name; and
         (g)   Words "PLACE ON DASH- BOARD FACE UP".
         (h)   Words or color indicating parking districts in which receipt is
purchased.
      (3)   Procedure for enforcement.
         (a)   A vehicle with no obvious signs of a purchased pay & display
receipt (from the current day) placed face up on the dashboard of the vehicle
will be issued a parking citation for "Failure to Display Pay & Display
Receipt" pursuant to §
70.78.
         (b)   A vehicle displaying an expired pay & display receipt (current
date) will be subject to a parking citation for "Expired Meter" pursuant to §
70.78.
         (c)   A vehicle not parked wholly within the lines identifying the
parking space will be subject to a parking citation for "No Parking Zone"
pursuant to §
70.78.
         (d)   Vehicles are also subject to any time restriction as posted.
         (e)   A vehicle displaying a pay & display receipt for an event or a
parking district carrying a rate equal to or lower than that in which the
vehicle is parked will be issued a parking citation for “Failure to Display Pay
& Display Receipt” pursuant to §
70.78.
      (4)   Out-of-order pay & display meters. If a pay & display meter is out-
of-order or otherwise inoperable, the motorist will be directed to the nearest
alternative pay & display meter to obtain a valid receipt.
   (E)   In vehicle parking meter. The other provisions of this section
notwithstanding, in vehicle parking meters may be used in lieu of payment made
directly to the parking meter. In vehicle parking meters will be valid at any
space in the city that requires payment of a parking meter. In vehicle parking
meters will only be valid when properly activated in accordance with the rate
structure and time limit for the space in which the vehicle is parked and
displayed on the curb side dashboard so that both the meter and the readout on
its screen is clearly visible from the exterior of the vehicle.
(Ord. passed 8-6-02; Am. Ord. passed 7-11-06; Am. Ord. passed 12-5-06; Am. Ord.
passed 10-2-07; Am. Ord. passed 11-7-07; Am. Ord. passed 2-5-08; Am. Ord.
passed 8-5-08)
§ 70.49 DEPOSITING OF ADDITIONAL COINS TO EXTEND MAXIMUM PARKING TIME
PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or cause to be deposited in
any parking meter any coin for the purpose of obtaining an extension of
indicated parking time beyond the maximum limit prescribed by this chapter for
parking of vehicle along side of said meter.
(Ord. passed 8-6-02)
§ 70.50 SIGNAL DISPLAY REQUIRED.
   (A)   No vehicle shall be permitted to remain parked at any parking meter
unless the signal showing lawful parking is displayed. Regardless of the reason
therefore, the absence of such display or the display of the signal showing
that the lawful parking period has expired shall be prima facie evidence that
the vehicle has been parked for longer than the permitted period.
   (B)   The preceding section shall not apply to vehicles parked at parking
meters within authorized lots, displaying valid parking permits issued pursuant
to any other section of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 8-6-02)
§ 70.51 TAMPERING, ETC. PROHIBITED.
   No one shall deface, damage, destroy or otherwise tamper with any parking
meter. No one other than a duly designated municipal employee shall remove any
meter from the place where it has been installed, or open or remove the coin(s)
from any parking meter.
(Ord. passed 8-6-02)
§ 70.52 REQUIRED COIN DEPOSIT LEVIED AS INSPECTION FEE.
   The coins required to be deposited in said parking meters are hereby levied
as a Committee on Traffic and Public Safety regulation and inspection fee to
cover the cost of providing parking spaces, parking meters, traffic signals,
signs, or other traffic control devices, and installation and maintenance
thereof; the cost of regulation, inspection, operation, control and use of the
parking meter spaces and zones created herein; for the regulation and control
of traffic moving in and out of, and parking in, said parking spaces and zones
so created, and for the cost of any resultant traffic administration expense.
(Ord. passed 8-6-02)
§ 70.53 LOADING ZONE LIMITATION.
   No vehicle shall be parked in a loading zone in excess of 15 minutes.
(Ord. passed 8-6-02)
§ 70.54 PERMIT PARKING IN LIEU OF COIN DEPOSIT AND PARKING DISTRICTS.
   (A)   The other provisions of
§§ 70.76 through
70.82 of this chapter notwithstanding, vehicles may be lawfully parked in
compliance with the requirements of this section, provided that the permit
issued pursuant to this section is displayed by being hung from the rear view
mirror or fully visible on the passenger side of the dashboard of said vehicle.
   (B)   In accordance with policies and procedures as are approved by the
Committee on Traffic and Public Safety, the Parking Manager or his/her designee
is hereby authorized to issue parking permits at monthly fees, as prescribed
herein. Such permits shall allow parking in lieu of the deposit of the required
coin in any metered parking space unless otherwise posted or in any parking
space designated by posting "permit parking only" located in any of the
following districts during the times prescribed.
   (C)   Permits issued under the rates prescribed for post-secondary schools
shall only be issued to students and faculty of state-accredited post-secondary
schools located within the area bounded by Brook Street, Pine Street, Queen
City Avenue and the Merrimack River. Proof of attendance or employment in a
form reasonably satisfactory to the Parking Division must be presented at the
time application is made.
Parking District Monthly Permit Rate Established
Parking District                                             Monthly Permit
                                                             Rate Established
8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. Monday through Friday
Downtown On-Street -                                         $55.00
Area: Includes 10 hour metered spaces east of Canal Street, excluding Elm
Street, from Penacook Street to Auburn Street.
8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. Monday through Friday
Other Parking Lots                                           $60.00
Post-Secondary School Student or Faculty                     $40.00
Hartnett Lot
Middle Street Lot
Pearl Street Lot
Pine Street Lot
Canal Street Lot
Lake Avenue Lot
   10 spaces for employees/customers of 33 Central Street
8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. Monday through Friday
1155 Elm Street Garage                                       $75.00
24 hours, 7 days per week
Rines Center                                                 Rines Center
(1528 Elm Street)                                            Parking only
Area: Rines Center parking lot and garage. Parking
restricted to Rines Center employees and visitors only.
24 hours, Monday through Sunday
Transit Station Parking Lot                                  30 minute parking
2 spaces for transit employee parking only.                  for Transit
                                                             Station only
Library operating hours and days 
                                                             2 hour parking on
Library Parking Lot Main Branch                              library business
                                                             only
8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. Monday through Friday
City Hall Parking Lot                                        1 hour on city
Area to include lot off Stark Street and 3 spaces off        business only
Hampshire Lane.
8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. Monday through Friday 
Green Zone                                                   $55.00
Area: Commercial Street both sides, bounded on the north by Canal Street and
on the south by Arms Street. Dow Street both sides easterly from Commercial
Street to the railroad tracks. Bedford Street east side from Kidder Street to
a point 272 feet southerly.
Yellow Zone                                                  $55.00
Post-Secondary School Student or Faculty                     $40.00
Area: Bedford Street both sides, bounded on the north by a point 272 feet
south of Kidder Street and on the south by a point 855 north of Pleasant
Street; Spring Street both sides bounded on the east by Bedford Street and on
the west by Commercial Street; Commercial Street both sides bounded on the
north by Arms Street and on the south by Waumbec Street; Arms Street, both
sides bounded by Commercial Street on the east and Stark Street on the south;
Stark Street both sides, bounded by Commercial Street to the east, and
Mungalls Street to the west; Arms Lot, Arms extension Lot, Arms Outer Lot and
Bedford Lot.
Blue Zone                                                    $55.00
Area: Bedford Street both sides bounded by a point 855 feet north of Pleasant
Street and Granite Street to the south; Commercial Street, both sides bounded
by Waumbec Street to the north and Granite Street to the south; Phillippe Cote
Street both sides bounded by Commercial Street at each end; Textile Court
south side from Commercial Street to the dead end; Pleasant Street, both sides
bounded by Bedford Street to the east, Commercial Street to the west; North
State Street, Mulsey Street and Payson Street.
Red Zone                                                     $55.00
Area: South Bedford Street west side bounded on the north by Depot Street and
on the south to the dead-end; South Commercial Street both sides bounded on
the north by Granite Street and on the south by South Bedford Street.
Myrna Parking Lot                                            $55.00
 Per-Hour Rate
 0-1      $.75
 1-2      $1.50
 2-3      $2.25
 3-4      $5.25
 4-5      $8.25
 5-6      $11.25
 6-7      $14.25
 7-8      $17.00 Daily Maximum
Parking District Permit Rate Established
Parking District                                       Permit Rate Established
On street meters ($0.75 per Hour Zone)
8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. Monday through Friday:
Elm Street from West Auburn Street to Bridge Street; Kosciuszko Street; Lowell
Street from Elm Street to Chestnut Street; Concord Street from Elm Street to
Chestnut Street; AmherstStreet from Elm Street to Chestnut Street; Hanover
Street from Elm Street to Chestnut Street; Manchester Street from Elm Street
to Chestnut Street; Merrimack Street from Elm Street to Chestnut Street;
Central Street from Elm Street to Chestnut Street; West Auburn Street from
Canal Street to Elm Street; Depot Street from Canal Street to Elm Street; Old
Granite Street from Canal Street to Elm Street; West Central Street; Pleasant
Street from Canal Street to Elm Street; West Merrimack Street from Canal
Street to Elm Street; Franklin Street from Pleasant Street to Market Street;
Middle Street from Canal Street to Franklin Street; Market Street from Canal
Street to Franklin Street; Lake Ave. from Chestnut Street to Elm Street; Elm
Street east side from Bridge Street to Orange Street; Elm Street west side
from Bridge Street to Hollis Street; Commercial Street; South Commercial
Street; South Bedford Street; Bedford Street from Granite Street to Kidder
Street; Pleasant Street from Bedford Street to Commercial Street; Textile
Court; Stark Street from Canal Street to Mungalls Street: Elm Street west side
from Langdon Street to Hollis Street; Elm Street east side from Harrison
Street to Orange Street; Dow Street from Elm Street to Canal Street; Myrtle
Street from Chestnut to Elm Street; Fir Street from Elm Street to North
Hampshire Lane; Orange Street from Chestnut Street to Elm Street; Bridge
Street from Union Street to Elm Street; Chestnut Street from Myrtle Street to
Auburn Street; East High Street from Union Street to Pine Street; Pine Street
from Bridge Street to Lake Avenue; Lowell Street from Union Street to Chestnut
Street; Concord Street from Union Street to Chestnut Street; Amherst Street
from Union Street to Chestnut Street; Hanover Street from Union Street to
Chestnut Street; Central Street from Pine Street to Chestnut Street; Lake
Avenue from Union Street to Chestnut Street; Spruce Street from Pine Street to
Chestnut Street; Cedar Street from Pine Street to Chestnut Street; Auburn
Street from Pine Street to Elm Street; Willow Street from Cedar Street to
Valley Street; Elm Street from Auburn Street to Valley Street; Stark Street
from Canal Street to Elm Street; Mechanic Street from Canal Street to Elm
Street; Spring Street from Canal Street to Elm Street; Pleasant Street from
Canal Street to Elm Street; Plaza Drive from Spring Street to Mechanic Street.
10:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. Saturday ($0.75 per Hour Zone)
Elm Street from Granite Street to Bridge Street.
 
(Ord. passed 8-6-02; Am. Ord. passed 6-3-03; Am. Ord. passed 6-8-04; Am. Ord.
passed 5-1-07; Am. Ord. passed 7-10-07; Am. Ord. passed 8-5-08; Am. Ord. passed
4-21-09; Am. Ord. passed 7-7-09; Am. Ord. passed 8-18-09; Am. Ord. passed 5-4-
10; Am. Ord. passed 7-6-10; Am. Ord. passed 12-7-10; Am. Ord. passed 4-5-11;
Am. Ord. passed 4-5-11; Am. Ord. passed 4-5-11; Am. Ord. passed 5-20-14)
§ 70.55 RESIDENTIAL PERMIT PARKING.
   (A)   Findings and purposes. The Board of Mayor and Aldermen hereby finds
and declares that the provisions of this section are enacted for the following
reasons:
      (1)   To reduce hazardous traffic conditions resulting from the use of
streets within residential districts for vehicles parked by persons not
residing within the residential districts;
      (2)   To protect these residential districts from polluted air, excess
noise, and refuse caused by the entry of such vehicles;
      (3)   To protect the residents of these residential districts from
unreasonable burdens in gaining access to their residences;
      (4)   To preserve the character of those districts as residential
districts;
      (5)   To encourage the use of public transportation;
      (6)   To promote efficiency in the maintenance of streets in these
residential districts in a clean and safe condition;
      (7)   To preserve the value of the property in these residential
districts;
      (8)   To promote traffic safety and safety of children and other
pedestrians in these residential districts;
      (9)   To forestall dangers arising from the blocking of fire lanes,
hydrants and other facilities required by emergency vehicles, both in reaching
victims and in transporting them to hospitals;
      (10)   To facilitate the movement of traffic in the event of accidents
and other disasters; and
      (11)   To promote the peace, comfort, convenience, and welfare of all
inhabitants of the city.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following terms,
phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein
unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context. When not
inconsistent with the context, words in the present tense include the future,
words used in the plural number include the singular number, and words used in
the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always
mandatory and not merely directory.
   COMMITTEE ON TRAFFIC AND PUBLIC SAFETY. The standing Committee of the Board
of Mayor and Aldermen called the Committee on Traffic and Public Safety,
consisting of five of the Board of Mayor and Aldermen.
   MOTOR VEHICLES. Any automobile or truck or other motor driven form of
transportation registered with the State of New Hampshire for use on the
highways in the state.
   RESIDENT MOTOR VEHICLE. A City of Manchester registered motor vehicle owned
or leased by a resident of the residential permit parking area and bearing a
valid parking permit issued pursuant to this section.
   RESIDENTIAL AREA.  A contiguous or nearly contiguous area containing public
streets and highways or parts thereof where residents dwell.
   RESIDENTIAL PERMIT PARKING ZONE. A residential area designated as such by
order of the Board of Mayor and Aldermen, where curbside parking on public
highways is subject either to time limits, parking meter requirements or
designated as residential parking only by ordinance or regulation of the
Committee on Traffic and Public Safety and approval of the Board of Mayor and
Aldermen.
   (C)   Designation of Residential Parking Permit Zone. A residential area
shall be deemed eligible for residential parking if the Committee on Traffic
and Public Safety, with the approval of the Board of Mayor and Aldermen,
determines that parking therein is impacted by commuter vehicles. In
determining whether an area identified as eligible for residential permit
parking shall be designed as a residential permit parking zone, the Committee
on Traffic and Public Safety shall take into consideration the following
factors:
      (1)   The extent of the desire and need of the residents for residential
permit parking;
      (2)   Proximity of the neighborhood to major "parking attractors"
including, but not limited to, employment centers, retail stores, restaurants,
and tourist attractions;
      (3)   Proximity of the neighborhood to transit service;
      (4)   Scarcity of convenient off-street parking for residents;
      (5)   The extent to which motor vehicles registered to persons residing
in the residential area cannot be accommodated by the number of available off-
street parking spaces;
      (6)   Substantial use of neighborhood curb space by commuters and other
nonresidents for parking;
      (7)   Traffic, noise and safety problems caused by vehicles cruising for
parking.
   (D)   Residential Parking Permit Zones. The following areas are hereby
designated as the Residential Parking Permit Zones:
      (1)   Residential Parking Permit Zone #1.
         (a)   Area consisting entirely of the Amoskeag Corporation Housing
Historic District (as defined in the Manchester Zoning Ordinance) which is an
area bounded generally by Mechanic Street on the north, Pleasant Street on the
south, Franklin Street on the east, and Canal Street on the west, but not to
include Franklin Street and Canal Street except for 287, 633, 635, 641, 643,
647, 649, 657, and 659 Canal Street. The north side of Mechanic Street and the
south side of Pleasant Street shall not be included in the program.
         (b)   Kidder, Hollis and Dow Streets.
         (c)   Bedford Street from Kidder Street southerly to Pleasant Street.
         (d)   West side of Elm Street from 1382 Elm Street to 1480 Elm Street.
      (2)   Residential Parking Permit Zone #2.
         (a)   Area bounded by Merrimack Street on the north, Auburn Street on
the south, Union Street on the east, and on the west by Chestnut Street, Lake
Avenue, and Pine Street in the manner they form the western boundary of the R-
4 Zoning District pursuant to the Zoning Map of the City of Manchester, NH.
Union Street shall not be included in the program.
         (b)   Area bounded by Amherst Street on the south, Blodget Street
(from Elm Street to Union Street) on the north, Union Street on the east,
Chestnut Street to Orange Street, then westerly on Orange Street to Elm Street
and then continuing northerly on Elm Street to Blodget Street on the west.
Union Street and Elm Street shall not be included in the program. Residents
within permit zone #2 on Amherst Street must park on Concord Street or
northerly in the zone.
         (c)   Area bounded by Elm Street on the east, Canal Street on the
west, Granite Street on the north and West Auburn Street on the south. Parking
on Elm Street shall not be included in the program.
      (3)   Residential Parking Permit Zone #3. Area bounded by Harvell Street
on the north, the Town of Bedford property line on the south, the Everett
Turnpike on the east and Second Street on the west but not to include Second
Street and the Everett Turnpike. Both sides of Harvell Street shall be included
in the program.
      (4)   Residential Parking Permit Zone #4. Areas described as follows:
Pine Street, east side, from Valley to Auburn Streets; Cedar Street, both
sides, from Pine to Union Streets; Auburn Street, south side, from Pine to
Union Streets; Spruce Street, both sides, from Pine to Union Streets; Central
Street, north side, from Union to Pine Streets; and Laurel Street, both sides,
from Union to Pine Streets; and further described as Auburn Street both sides
from Union Street to Maple Street; Beech Street west side, from Auburn Street
to Valley Street; Bell Street, both sides, from Union Street to Beech Street;
Grove Street, both sides, from Union Street to Beech Street; and Green Street,
both sides, from Union Street to Beech Street.
      (5)   Residential Parking Permit Zone #5. Area described as follows: Bay
Street, east side, from Webster to North Street.
      (6)   Residential Parking Permit Zone #6. Area bounded on the west by the
west side of Elm Street, on the north by the south side of Bridge Street, on
the east by the east side of Chestnut Street and on the south by the north side
of Merrimack Street. Residents within this district shall not be issued a
residential parking permit to park within the District. Residents within the
district to the north of the north side of Amherst Street shall be issued a
permit to park in Residential Parking Permit Zone (2)(b). Residents within the
district to the south of the south side of Amherst Street shall be issued a
permit to park in Residential Parking Permit Zone (1).
      (7)   Residential Parking Permit Zone #7. Area bounded by: Bedford
Street, Pleasant Street to Granite Street, North State Street, Mulsey Street,
and Payson Street.
      (8)   Residential Parking Permit Zone #8 (Central High School Area). Area
bounded by: Walnut Street between Pearl Street and Amherst Street, Beech Street
between Pearl Street and Hanover Street, Ash Street between Pearl Street and
Lowell Street, Ash Street between Concord Street and Amherst Street, Maple
Street between Pearl Street and Amherst Street, Jane Street, South Street,
Malvern Street between Bridge Street and Concord Street, Nashua Street between
Lowell Street and Bridge Street, Dutton Street, Concord Street between Union
Street and Dutton Street, Lowell Street between Union Street and Ashland
Street, East High Street between Maple Street and Ashland Street, Bridge Street
between Union Street and Nashua Street, Amherst Street between Union Street and
Ashland Street, Hanover Street between Union Street and Lincoln Street, Pearl
Street between Union Street and Maple Street, Union Street between Pearl Street
and Hanover Street; Lincoln Street between Hanover Street and Concord Street,
Ashland Street between East High Street and Hanover Street, Derry Street,
Chester Street, Haines Court.
   (E)   Issuance of residential parking permits.
      (1)   A permit shall be issued for a designated residential permit
parking zone upon submission of a completed and validated residential parking
permit application by a person eligible for such a permit. A person is eligible
to apply for a residential parking permit if he owns or operates a motor
vehicle and resides on property within or immediately adjacent to a street,
avenue or other location to which the residential parking provisions of this
section are applicable. Proof of residence in the residential parking zone in a
form reasonably satisfactory to the Manchester Police Department must be
presented at the time application is made.
      (2)   The application for the permit shall contain the name of the owner
or operator of the motor vehicle; residential address; the make, model,
registration, and plate numbers of the motor vehicle; and the number of
driver's license of the applicant. The motor vehicle registration and driver's
license of the applicant must be present at the time of making such application
in order to verify the contents thereof. The owner or operator of any motor
vehicle applying for a residential parking permit shall have a valid State of
New Hampshire driver's license.
         (a)   Notwithstanding those portions of division (1) or (2) to the
contrary a full time student whose driver’s license does not show an address
within a Residential Parking Permit Zone may meet the driver’s license
requirement of division (2) by presenting his or her driver’s license together
with a letter from the registrar of a state accredited post secondary school
located within the city.
         (b)   The letter shall state that the applicant is a full time student
at said school and if the applicant resides in school provided housing the
letter shall state the address of the student’s school provided housing. If the
applicant does not reside in school provided housing the applicant shall also
provide a letter from his or her landlord stating his or her residence address.
      (3)   The applicant shall receive one residential parking permit for the
vehicle described in the application. If the applicant moves from said
residence within the time period that the permit is issued for or the applicant
no longer owns a registered vehicle, the applicant must return the residential
parking permit to the Police Department.
      (4)   The expiration date of the permit shall be one year following the
date, or the most recent anniversary date, whichever is later, when the Board
of Mayor and Aldermen designated the residential permit parking zone.
      (5)   No permits shall be issued for any vehicle which has one or more
notices of violation of any parking regulation or regulations made pursuant to
city ordinances for which there has been neither payment of waiver fees nor
issuance of court process, until such time as all waiver fees have been paid or
court process issued with respect to said notices of violation.
      (6)   Renewal of any permit or issuance of a new permit is to be treated
as if an original issuance.
      (7)   Permit stickers issued may contain such information as the
Manchester Police Department may determine to be necessary from time to time,
including the expiration date, the license plate number, and the zone number if
more than one residential parking zone has been established pursuant to this
section.
      (8)   Replacement stickers shall be issued only on proof of disposition
or return of the old sticker. The expiration date to be displayed on the new
residential parking permit shall be one yearfollowing the expiration date of
the existing residential parking permit.
   (F)   Transfer of residential parking permits.
      (1)   Upon the holder's submission of a completed and validated
residential parking permit application, fulfillment of all applicable
provisions of this chapter controlling issuance, renewal or transfer of
residential parking permits, and surrender of the existing residential parking
permit, the holder shall receive a new residential parking permit to be
transferred to another qualifying vehicle.
      (2)   The transfer of the residential parking permit to another
qualifying vehicle shall not affect its expiration date.
   (G)   Use of residential parking permits.
      (1)   A residential parking permit shall not authorize the holder thereof
to stand or park a motor vehicle in such places or during such times as
stopping, standing, or parking of motor vehicles is prohibited or set aside for
specified types of vehicles, nor exempt the holder from the observance of any
traffic regulations other than a parking time limitation within a residential
permit parking zone. A residential parking permit shall not authorize the
holder to park in any time zone of one hour or less.
      (2)   A parking permit shall be valid only in the residential parking
permit area for which it is issued.
      (3)   No person shall furnish any false information to the city in
connection with the obtaining of any permit authorized hereunder. Any permit
issued upon such false information or attached to a different vehicle shall be
null and void.
      (4)   A residential parking permit shall be used only for on-street
parking, and is not authorized for use in city parking lots.
      (5)   The following special restrictions are enacted for Zone #8 (Central
High School area):
         (a)   All time limits in the zone must be observed as posted, with or
without a residential parking permit.
         (b)   A residential parking permit allows vehicle to park in
designated residential parking places during school hours.
         (c)   A vehicle which has been issued a residential parking permit can
park in any legal parking space; it is not required to park exclusively in
designated residential spaces, however it must adhere to item (a) of this
section.
         (d)   A residential parking permit is required only during school
hours.
   (H)   Regulations. The Committee on Traffic and Public Safety may authorize
the establishment of residential parking permit programs applicable to
specifically designated residential permit parking zones, with regulations as
to the number of permits to be issued, the manner of issuance of the permits,
the temporary or permanent nature of the program in the designated parking zone
and such other conditions which are not in conflict with the section.
   (I)   Severability. If any provision of this subchapter or its application
to any person or circumstance is held to be invalid, the remainder of the
subchapter and the application of such provision to other persons or
circumstances shall not be affected thereby.
(Ord. passed 8-6-02; Am. Ord. passed 4-6-04; Am. Ord. passed 7-20-04; Am. Ord.
passed 2-15-05; Am. Ord. passed 10-4-05; Am. Ord. 10-18-05; Am. Ord. passed 4-
18-06; Am. Ord. passed 7-10-07; Am. Ord. passed 5-20-08; Am. Ord. passed 5-4-
10; Am. Ord. passed 9-21-10; Am. Ord. passed 5-7-13; Am. Ord. passed 5-20-14)
§ 70.56 POLICE TO ATTACH NOTICE OF VIOLATION ON VEHICLE.
   When a parking meter indicates a violation of the parking provisions of this
chapter, it shall be the duty of the Police Officer or Parking Control Officer
who notices said violation to attach to each vehicle violating the provisions
of this chapter a notice to the owner or operator thereof that such vehicle has
been parked in violation of a provision of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 8-6-02)
§ 70.57 PARKING RATES.
   Except as otherwise ordered by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen, rates shall
be charged for parking in city-owned facilities and on-street as follows:
   (A)   Parking garage rates:
      (1)   Hourly rate $1.00 per hour 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. Monday through
Friday excluding holidays: Victory Garage.
      (2)   Monthly rate $75.00 - 24 hours per day Monday through Saturday
excluding holidays.
      (3)   Prepay rate after 6:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday excluding
holidays: Victory Garage - $3.00 per vehicle.
      (4)   Validation Program 6:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m., three hour limit:
Victory Garage. (Validating tickets available to retailers at a cost of $0.25
per ticket. Each ticket good for one hour free parking.)
      (5)   Lost chip fee - $6.00 for the daily maximum rate and $10.00 for
replacement of the lost chip. Total fee of $16.00.
      (6)   Daily maximum rate - $6.00.
   (B)   Parking lot rates:
      (1)   Hourly rates - as established by the Committee on Traffic and
Public Safety subject to approval of the Board of Mayor and Aldermen as
outlined herein.
      (2)   By permit as established pursuant to §
70.54.
      (3)   Event Parking Fees:
         (a)   To be posted Event Parking:
         Canal Street Lot      $5.00 - 10.00 prepay
         Lake Avenue Lot      $10.00 - 15.00 prepay
         Pine Street Lot       $10.00 prepay
      (4)   Parking lots: 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. Monday through Friday: $1.00/
hour.
         (a)   2-hour limit:
            Middle Lot
            Pearl Lot
         (b)   10-hour limit:
            Pearl Lot
            Hartnett Lot
            Arms Lot
            Bedford Lot
            Arms Extension
            Arms Outer Lot
            Canal Lot
            Lake Ave. Lot
         (c)   Myrna Lot: 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. Monday through Friday: $1.00/
hour
         (d)   Myrna Lot - Rate Reduction Program, 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m.
allowing business customers to pay $1.00 per hour for up to 12 hours. Tickets
issued only to businesses with customers using the Myrna Lot, and are free of
charge.
   (C)   On-street parking rates:
      (1)   By permit rate as established pursuant to §
70.54.
      (2)   Hourly rates - metered $1.00 per hour all meters pursuant to
regulations established by the Committee on Traffic and Public Safety with the
approval of the Board of Mayor and Aldermen; unless otherwise designated.
      (3)   Saturday Parking; Elm Street, between Bridge Street and Granite
Street; 10:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. Hourly rate - metered $1.00 per hour.
         (a)   Two hour parking zone between 10:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m.
      (4)   Monday through Friday, two hour time limit lifted after 5:00 p.m.
(Ord. passed 8-6-02; Am. Ord. passed 1-21-03; Am. Ord. passed 6-3-03; Am. Ord.
passed 6-1-04; Am. Ord. passed 1-4-05; Am. Ord. passed 7-10-07; Am. Ord. passed
12-18-07; Am. Ord. passed 8-5-08; Am. Ord. passed 7-7-09; Am. Ord. passed 8-18-
09; Am. Ord. passed 12-1-09; Am. Ord. passed 7-6-10; Am. Ord. passed 9-21-10;
Am. Ord. passed 5-20-14; Am. Ord. passed 9-2-14; Am. Ord. passed 6-4-24)
SNOW REMOVAL
§ 70.61 [RESERVED].
   (Previous section repealed on 12-19-05)
§ 70.62 [RESERVED].
   (Previous section repealed on 12-19-05)
§ 70.63 [RESERVED].
   (Previous section repealed on 12-19-05)
§ 70.64 [RESERVED].
   (Previous section repealed on 12-19-05)
§ 70.65 [RESERVED].
   (Previous section repealed on 12-19-05)
VEHICLE IMPOUNDMENT
§ 70.70 IMPOUNDMENT OF VEHICLES.
   Members of the Police Department are hereby authorized to remove a vehicle
from a street or highway to the nearest garage or other place of safety, under
the circumstances hereinafter enumerated:
   (A)   When any vehicle is left unattended upon any bridge where such vehicle
constitutes an obstruction to traffic.
   (B)   When a vehicle upon a highway is so disabled as to constitute an
obstruction to traffic and the person in charge of the vehicle is by reason of
physical injury incapacitated to such an extent as to be unable to provide for
its custody or removal.
   (C)   When any vehicle is left unattended upon a street and is parked
illegally as to constitute a definite hazard or obstruction to the normal
movement of traffic.
   (D)   When any vehicle is left unattended in violation of §§ 70.36 through
70.39 of this chapter.
   (E)   When any vehicle is left unattended in such a manner as to obstruct
the ingress or egress into or from a driveway, or entryway to a public or
private building, parking lot or garage, or when such vehicle is parked in a
"no parking zone" which is clearly indicated by a legally posted sign
indicating that parking is prohibited within said area. Any vehicle so left
unattended or so parked is hereby declared to be an obstruction to traffic and
a public nuisance.
(Ord. passed 8-6-02)
§ 70.71 REMOVAL, IMPOUNDING AND RETURN OF VEHICLE.
   (A)   Any vehicle parked in violation of the terms of this subchapter may be
subject to removal and impoundment. Removal, impounding and return of the
vehicle shall be handled in the same manner as set forth in § 70.70.
   (B)   The owner of a vehicle impounded hereunder, for a snow emergency,
shall be responsible for towing, storage charges and operating expenses for
which the cost shall be $110 payable in cash.
(Ord. passed 8-6-02; Am. Ord. passed 11-16-04)
   RESPONSIBILITY, NOTICE AND PENALTIES
§ 70.76 PRIMA FACIE RESPONSIBILITY.
   If any vehicle is observed or found upon any street or highway in violation
of any provision of any ordinance regulating motor vehicles and/or traffic and
the identity of the operator cannot be determined, the owner of the vehicle, or
the person in whose name that vehicle is registered, shall be prima facie
responsible for that violation.
(Ord. passed 8-6-02)
§ 70.77 VIOLATION NOTICE.
   A notice of violation of any provision of any ordinance, rule or regulation
governing snow emergencies, stopping, standing or parking shall be affixed to
the vehicle involved by the authorized individual observing the violation. Such
notice shall contain the following information:
   (A)   A clear and concise description of the violation.
   (B)   The date, time and location of the violation.
   (C)   A description of the vehicle involved in the violation.
   (D)   The basic penalty for the violation and the increased penalties for
failure to pay any penalty during the prescribed time period.
   (E)   The name and address of the office to which payment of any penalty or
increased penalty can be made.
   (F)   Notification that failure to satisfy any notice of violation by paying
a penalty or increased penalty will result in court action.
   (G)   The identification number of the authorized individual issuing the
notice.
(Ord. passed 8-6-02; Am. Ord. passed 5-3-16)
§ 70.78 BASIC PENALTY.
   (A)   Each owner or operator of a vehicle found in violation of any
provision of Chapter 70 may pay in person or by mail to the Ordinance
Violations Bureau the penalty for each violation pursuant to the following
table:
                        INCREASED PENALTY       INCREASED PENALTY
VIOLATION BASIC PENALTY (After 30 days from the (After 60 days from the notice
                        notice of violation)    of violation)
                                     INCREASED PENALTY   INCREASED PENALTY
VIOLATION              BASIC PENALTY (After 30 days from (After 60 days from
                                     the notice of       the notice of
                                     violation)          violation)
Expired parking meter  $15           $30                 $36
Overtime parking meter $15           $30                 $36
Permit parking only    $15           $30                 $36
Occupying more than    $15           $30                 $36
one parking stall
Overtime parking - no  $30           $60                 $72
meter
No parking zone        $50           $75                 $90
No parking tow zone    $50           $75                 $90
Fire lane              $50           $75                 $90
Parking within 5 feet  $75           $100                $90
of fire hydrant
Parking within 5 feet  $50           $75                 $90
of private driveway
Handicapped parking    $100          $200                $240
space - access aisle
Handicapped zone       $250          $300                $360
Failure to display pay $15           $30                 $36
& display receipt
Commercial vehicle
prohibited overnight   $50           $100                $120
parking
 
   (B)   Any violation of Chapter 70 not identified elsewhere in the code shall
be issued pursuant to §
38.06(B) of this code.
(Ord. passed 8-6-02; Am. Ord. passed 4-6-04; Am. Ord. passed 7-11-06; Am. Ord.
passed 12-5-06; Am. Ord. passed 12-18-07; Am. Ord. passed 4-15-08; Am. Ord.
passed 5-19-09; Am. Ord. passed 12-1-09; Am. Ord. passed 5-4-10; Am. Ord.
passed 7-6-10; Am. Ord. passed 6-4-24)
§ 70.79 [RESERVED].
   (Previous section repealed on 7-11-06)
§ 70.80 PENALTY IMPOSED FOR COMMERCIAL VEHICLE AND TRUCKING VIOLATIONS.
   Any person, persons, firm or corporation who violates any provision of
§§ 70.70 et seq. of this chapter shall be guilty of a violation and shall pay a
penalty of $300 for the first offense, $500 for the second offense, and $1,000
for the third offense or any subsequent offense thereon.
(Ord. passed 8-6-02)
§ 70.81 PENALTY FOR OTHER VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Any person responsible for any violation of any ordinance, rule or
regulation pertaining to motor vehicles or traffic for which a penalty is not
specifically provided shall be guilty of a violation and shall, upon
conviction, be punished by a fine as prescribed by
§ 130.99 of this Code. Each such violation shall constitute a separate offense.
   (B)   A person shall be deemed to have committed a separate offense for the
violation of any provision of this chapter for each 120-minute period that he
permits or causes a vehicle to remain parked in violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter, except when parked in violation of the provisions
of §§
70.36(B)(4).
   (C)   A person may request a judicial review (Manchester District Court) by
posting cash bond with the Ordinance Violations Bureau in an amount sufficient
to make full payment of all parking charges due arising out of violations,
subject to the provisions of this chapter, in order to allow judicial
determination regarding the matter in question.
(Ord. passed 8-6-02; Am. Ord. passed 5-19-09)
§ 70.82 IMMOBILIZATION OF MOTOR VEHICLES FOR NON-PAYMENT OF PARKING FINES.
   (A)   Any person to whom is sent or issued notification of violations of
preceding sections of this subchapter and who does not pay the charges
prescribed above, or any vehicle that hasaccumulated a total of at least $30 in
unpaid parking fees at any parking garage or garages, may be subject to towing
and storage or immobilization by the Parking Division provided notice of intent
to tow and store or immobilize said vehicle has been placed on the vehicle or
sent to the last known address listed with the State Motor Vehicle Department
in which the vehicle is registered. The penalty of violation of this subchapter
in such case shall be no less than the fine indicated in the applicable payment
schedule, no portion of which may be suspended, and/or
   (B)   Any vehicle found parked on any public street, parking lot or any
other place for which three or more outstanding parking violation "final
notices" for violations of the preceding section have been sent equaling at
least $100 may be subject to towing and storage or immobilization by the
Parking Division or Manchester Police Department provided notice of intent to
tow and store or immobilize said vehicle has been placed on the vehicle or sent
to the last known address listed with the State Motor Vehicle Department of the
state in which the vehicle is registered. Said notice shall contain the
following information:
      (1)   The date, time and location of the violations leading to the
issuance of the notice;
      (2)   That the subject vehicle will be towed, stored or immobilized after
a specific date of not less than five days after the date of the notice unless
all the outstanding violations and late fees are paid;
   (C)   Any vehicle towed and stored or immobilized in accordance with the
preceding may be released as follows:
      (1)   By payment of all charges due.
      (2)   By posting cash bond with the Police Department/Parking Division in
an amount sufficient to make full payment of all parking charges due arising
out of violations subject to the provisions of this chapter in order to allow
judicial determination regarding the matter in question.
      (3)   By judicial determination.
   (D)   In the event that any motor vehicle has been towed and stored or
immobilized pursuant to this chapter, a further precondition to the release of
said vehicle shall be the payment by the party seeking the release of said
vehicle of all fees and charges incurred by the city for the towing and storage
and immobilization of said vehicle. Further the vehicle shall not be released
until the person requesting it presents satisfactory evidence of his/her right
to possession and signs a receipt upon receiving the vehicle. The fee for
immobilization shall be $100. The fee for towing and storage of a vehicle shall
be that set out in the then current towing contracts between the Police
Department and the various towing companies.
   (E)   When a motor vehicle has been immobilized pursuant to the provisions
of this chapter, the Parking Division/Manchester Police Department shall affix
a warning notice on the windshield of the vehicle advising the driver not to
attempt to operate the vehicle or remove the immobilization device, and
advising the operator or owner of the procedure to have the immobilization
device removed.
   (F)   It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with or attempt to
destroy or remove any Parking Division/Manchester Police Department
immobilization device from a vehicle without authorization by the Manchester
Police Department or Parking Division, and the penalty for such action upon
conviction shall be a violation and a fine of $100, no portion of which may be
suspended.
(Ord. passed 8-6-02; Am. Ord. passed 12-3-02; Am. Ord. passed 6-9-03; Am. Ord.
passed 5-20-08)
CHAPTER 71: SNOW EMERGENCY REGULATIONS
Section
   
71.01   Short title
   
71.02   Definitions
   
71.03   [Reserved]
   
71.04   Parking on city streets
   
71.05   Declarations of the Director
   
71.06   Termination of parking prohibition by Director
   
71.07   Provisions temporarily effective to take precedence
   
71.08   Signs to mark snow removal and temporary parking prohibition
   
71.09   Removal, impounding, and return of vehicles
   
71.10   Reserved
   
71.11   Reserved
   
71.12   Evidence with respect to vehicles in violation
   
71.13   Overnight winter parking
   
71.14   Impoundment
 
   
71.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Snow removal, see
§ 70.61 et seq.
§ 71.01 SHORT TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Snow Emergency
Ordinance” of the city.
('71 Code, § 15-40) (Ord. passed 12-19-72; Am. Ord. passed 12-19-05)
§ 71.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DIRECTOR. The Public Works Director, or in his absence, his duly designated
and acting representative.
   STREET or HIGHWAY. The entire width between the boundary lines of every way
publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for
purposes of vehicular travel.
('71 Code, § 15-42) (Ord. passed 12-19-72; Am. Ord. 12-19-05)
§ 71.03 [RESERVED].
   (Previous section repealed on 12-19-05)
§ 71.04 PARKING ON CITY STREETS.
   (A)   Whenever the Director finds, on the basis of falling snow, sleet, or
freezing rain, or on the basis of a forecast by the U.S. Weather Bureau or
other weather service, of snow, sleet, or freezing rain, that weather
conditions will make it necessary that motor vehicle traffic be expedited and
that parking on city streets be prohibited or restricted for snow plowing and
other purposes, the Director shall declare a snow emergency. Such declaration
shall be effective to prohibit the parking of any vehicle on all or some city
streets, parking facilities and schoolyards as described in the declaration, in
a manner prescribed by this chapter.
   (B)   Immediately after a snow emergency declaration has ended, the Director
may declare a snow maintenance emergency to facilitate expeditious snow removal
operations. The declaration of a snow maintenance emergency shall be effective
to prohibit the parking of any vehicle on all or some city streets, parking
facilities and schoolyards as described in the declaration, in a manner
prescribed by this chapter.
   (C)   Once in effect, a prohibition under this section shall remain in
effect until terminated by announcement of the Director in accordance with this
chapter. While the prohibition is in effect, no person shall park or allow to
remain parked any vehicle on any portion of a city street to which it applies.
However, nothing in this section shall be construed to permit parking at any
time or place where it is forbidden by any other provision of law.
('71 Code, § 15-43) (Ord. passed 12-19-72; Am. Ord. passed 12-19- 05; Am. Ord.
passed 10-3-23) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.05 DECLARATIONS OF THE DIRECTOR.
   (A)   The Director shall cause each declaration made by him pursuant to this
chapter to be publicly announced by means of broadcasts or telecasts from a
station or stations with a normal operating range covering the city, and he may
cause such declaration to be further announced in newspapers of general
circulation when feasible. Each announcement shall describe the action taken by
the Director, including the time it became or will become effective, and shall
specify the streets or areas affected.
   (B)   The Director shall make or cause to be made a record of each time and
date when any declaration is announced to the public in accordance with this
section.
('71 Code, § 15-44) (Ord. passed 12-19-72; Am. Ord. 12-19-05)
§ 71.06 TERMINATION OF PARKING PROHIBITION BY DIRECTOR.
   Whenever the Director shall find that some or all of the conditions which
give rise to a parking prohibition in effect pursuant to this chapter no longer
exist, he may declare the prohibition terminated, in whole or in part, in a
manner prescribed by this chapter, effective immediately upon announcement.
('71 Code, § 15-45) (Ord. passed 12-19-72; Am. Ord. 12-19-05)
§ 71.07 PROVISIONS TEMPORARILY EFFECTIVE TO TAKE PRECEDENCE.
   Any provision of this chapter which becomes effective by declaration of the
Director shall, while temporarily in effect, take precedence over other
conflicting provisions of law normally in effect, except that it shall not take
precedence over provisions of law relating to traffic accidents, emergency
travel of authorized emergency vehicles, or emergency traffic directions by a
police officer.
('71 Code, § 15-46) (Ord. passed 12-19-72; Am. Ord. 12-19-05)
§ 71.08 SIGNS TO MARK SNOW REMOVAL AND TEMPORARY PARKING PROHIBITION.
   (A)   If no declaration is in effect but the Director determines that any
street or portion thereof requires sanding, salting, or snow removal, he or she
may establish a temporary parking prohibition for that purpose. Any such
prohibition shall be advertised by temporary signs placed on the street(s)
involved.
   (B)   If, as a result of one or more storms, the Director determines that
snow has accumulated to a point that creates a hazard, he or she may establish
a special prohibition limiting parking to one side of a street or prohibiting
it entirely.
   (C)   A special parking prohibition may be established on a city-wide basis
for any district or area of the city, or for any street or portion thereof. Any
such prohibition shall be advertised as required for an emergency declaration.
Additionally, on any street located within the central business district that
is affected by the prohibition, temporary signs prohibiting parking shall be
erected. Special prohibitions shall be terminated when the unsafe condition has
abated and, in no event, shall extend beyond May 15th following its Manchester,
NH Code of Ordinances establishment.
('71 Code, § 15-47) (Ord. passed 12-19-72; Am. Ord. passed 12-19-05; Am. Ord.
passed 2-2-10)
§ 71.09 REMOVAL, IMPOUNDING, AND RETURN OF VEHICLES.
   Removal, impounding, and return of vehicles shall be handled in the same
manner as set forth in §§
70.70 and
70.71, which is incorporated herein by reference.
('71 Code, § 15-48) (Ord. passed 12-19-72; Am. Ord. passed 12-19-05)
§ 71.10 RESERVED.
§ 71.11 RESERVED.
§ 71.12 EVIDENCE WITH RESPECT TO VEHICLES IN VIOLATION.
   In any prosecution with regard to a vehicle parked or left in a place or in
a condition in violation of any provision of this chapter, proof that the
particular vehicle described in the complaint was parked or left in violation
of a provision of this chapter, together with proof that the defendant named in
the complaint was at the time the registered owner of such vehicle, shall
constitute prima facie evidence that the defendant was the person who parked or
left the vehicle in violation of this chapter.
('71 Code, § 15-51) (Ord. passed 12-19-72; Am. Ord. passed 12-19- 05)
§ 71.13 OVERNIGHT WINTER PARKING.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person having custody or control of any
vehicle to park or cause to be parked said vehicle on any public street or
highway between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. during the period of
December 1 and April 15 except as noted in divisions (B), (C) and (D) of this
section.
   (B)   No person shall park or leave a vehicle parked on streets between the
hours of 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. of any day except that persons may park or
leave vehicles parked on even house numbered sides of such streets on even-
numbered days of each calendar month, and on odd-numbered sides of such streets
on odd-numbered days of each calendar month.
   (C)   On streets where one side only of an entire block is so posted against
parking that the effect is to prohibit parking during the hours of 1:00 a.m.
and 6:00 a.m. every day; the provisions of division (B) shall not apply to the
side of the street directly opposite the side where parking is so prohibited,
and parking shall be permitted on such opposite sides of the street unless such
parking is otherwise specifically prohibited.
   (D)   Whenever any motor vehicle without a driver is found parked or left in
violation of any provision of this chapter, and is not removed and impounded as
provided for in this chapter, the officer finding such vehicle shall take its
registration number and any other information displayed on the vehicle which
may identify its user, and shall conspicuously affix to such vehicle a traffic
ticket, on a form provided by the Police Department.
   (E)   No signage shall be required for overnight winter parking.
   (F)   The area bounded on the south side by and including Pleasant Street;
on the north by and including Mechanic Street; on the west by and including
Canal Street; and on the east by and including Franklin Street is hereby
exempted from the provisions of odd and even parking as provided in subsections
(A), (B), and (C) above.
('71 Code, § 15-54) (Ord. passed 11-6-91; Am. Ord. passed 12-19- 05; Am. Ord.
passed 2-2-10; Am. Ord. passed 4-5-11; Am. Ord. passed 10-3-23) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.14 IMPOUNDMENT.
   (A)   Any vehicle parked in violation of the terms of this chapter may be
subject to removal and impoundment. Removal, impounding and return of the
vehicle shall be handled in the same manner as set forth in §§
70.70 and
70.71, which is incorporated herein by reference.
   (B)   A precondition to the release of a towed vehicle shall be the payment
by the party seeking the release of said vehicle of all fees and charges
incurred by the city and/or the towing company in the towing and storage of
said vehicle. The vehicle shall not be released until the person requesting it
presents satisfactory evidence of his/her right to possession and signs a
receipt upon receiving the vehicle.
('71 Code, § 15-55) (Ord. passed 11-6-91; Am. Ord. 12-2-97; Am. Ord. passed 12-
19-05)
Penalty, see § 71.99
§ 71.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Each such owner or operator of a vehicle who violates any provision of
this chapter or Chapter 73, Parking Schedules, may, within seven days of the
time when such notice was attached to such vehicle pay to the Parking
Violations Bureau the penalty for each violation pursuant to the following
table:
 
                                  INCREASED PENALTY   INCREASED PENALTY
VIOLATION           BASIC PENALTY (After 30 days from (After 60 days from the
                                  the notice of       notice of violation)
                                  violation)
Odd/even            $25           $50                 $60
Parking prohibition $25           $50                 $60
Snow emergency      $75           $150                $180
 
   (B)   Failure to make such payment within 60 days following a violation of §
71.04 may subject the owner or operator of the motor vehicle to an appearance
in district court and a fine of not more than $1,000 upon conviction thereof.
('71 Code, § 15-53) (Ord. passed 12-19-78; Am. Ord. passed 4-16-85; Am. Ord.
passed 5-3-05; Am. Ord. passed 12-19-05; Am. Ord. passed 5-19-09)
CHAPTER 72: BICYCLES
Section
General Provisions
   
72.01   Definition
   
72.02   Obedience to traffic ordinances; effect of conflict
   
72.03   Obedience to traffic-control devices; exceptions
   
72.04   Speed; direction
   
72.05   Seating; carrying passengers
   
72.06   Carrying packages
   
72.07   Riding two abreast
   
72.08   Clinging to vehicles prohibited
   
72.09   Yielding right-of-way
   
72.10   Riding on sidewalks prohibited; erection of signs
   
72.11   Parking
   
72.12   Rental
Licenses
   
72.20   Licenses required
   
72.21   Application
   
72.22   Issuance
   
72.23   Fee; duration
   
72.24   Grounds for denial
   
72.25   Issuance of plate
   
72.26   Removal of plate
   
72.27   Purchase of forms and the like; deposit of fees
   
72.28   Records
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 72.01 DEFINITION.
   Every pedalled vehicle propeled solely by human power upon which any person
may ride, except child's tricycle and similar devices.
('71 Code, § 5-1)
Statutory reference:
   Bicycle defined, see R.S.A. 259:6
   Equipment required, see R.S.A. 266:85 through 266:89
§ 72.02 OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC ORDINANCES; EFFECT OF CONFLICT.
   Any person operating a bicycle upon any public highway or path within the
city shall operate the same in accordance with all the provisions contained in
the traffic ordinances of the city and with the provisions of R.S.A. 265:143
through 265:153, except that when any provision contained in such ordinances
conflicts with any provision in this chapter, the provisions of this chapter
shall predominate, or when by their nature they can have no application
thereto.
('71 Code, § 5-2) Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 72.03 OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES; EXCEPTIONS.
   All official traffic signals, signs, and other control devices within the
city used in regulating and directing traffic must be obeyed, unless otherwise
directed by a police officer; and on public highways where authorized signs are
erected, indicating that no left, right, or “U” turn is permitted, no person or
persons operating a bicycle in the city shall disobey the regulation contained
therein, except that when such person dismounts from the bicycle to make any
such turn, he shall obey all the traffic ordinance provisions applicable to
pedestrians.
('71 Code, § 5-3) Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 72.04 SPEED; DIRECTION.
   Bicycles shall not be operated within the city at a speed greater than is
reasonable and prudent under the conditions then existing, and shall be
operated as near the right-hand side of the highway as practicable, exercising
due care when passing a parked vehicle, or one proceeding in the same
direction.
('71 Code, § 5-4) Penalty, see § 70.99
Statutory reference:
   Maximum speed limit, see R.S.A. 250:12
§ 72.05 SEATING; CARRYING PASSENGERS.
   No person operating a bicycle within the city shall ride it other than upon
or astride the permanent and regular seat attached thereto, nor carry more
persons upon any bicycle at one time than the number for which it is designed
and equipped.
('71 Code, § 5-5) Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 72.06 CARRYING PACKAGES.
   No person operating a bicycle within the city shall carry upon said bicycle
any package, bundle, or article which prevents the operator from keeping both
hands upon the handlebars.
('71 Code, § 5-6) Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 72.07 RIDING TWO ABREAST.
   No persons operating bicycles upon a highway within the city shall ride more
than two abreast, except on paths, or parts of highways established for the
exclusive use of bicycle traffic, and wherever such provisions are made
adjacent to a highway, bicycles shall be prohibited the use of the highway.
('71 Code, § 5-7) Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 72.08 CLINGING TO VEHICLES PROHIBITED.
   No person operating a bicycle within the city shall attach it or himself to
any moving vehicle upon the highway.
('71 Code, § 5-8) Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 72.09 YIELDING RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   Bicycles emerging from an alley, driveway, or building within the city shall
upon approaching a sidewalk or the sidewalk area extending across any alleyway,
or driveway yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians approaching on the said
sidewalk or sidewalk area; and upon entering the highway shall yield the right-
of-way to all vehicles approaching on said highway.
('71 Code, § 5-9) Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 72.10 RIDING ON SIDEWALKS PROHIBITED; ERECTION OF SIGNS.
   No person shall operate a bicycle upon any sidewalk within the city, and the
Surveyor of Highways, upon request from the Chief of Police, is hereby
authorized to erect signs on any sidewalk or highway prohibiting the operating
of bicycles thereon.
('71 Code, § 5-10) Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 72.11 PARKING.
   No bicycle shall be parked upon a highway within the city other than against
the curb, or upon a sidewalk in a rack to support the bicycle, or against a
building; and bicycles shall be parked in such a manner as to afford the least
obstruction to pedestrian traffic.
('71 Code, § 5-11) Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 72.12 RENTAL.
   No person shall rent, or offer for rent, any bicycle within the city unless
it is properly licensed and equipped in accordance with the provision of this
chapter.
('71 Code, § 5-13) Penalty, see § 70.99
LICENSES
§ 72.20 LICENSES REQUIRED.
   No person shall ride or propel a bicycle on any public highway within the
city, or upon any other public path established for the exclusive use of
bicycles, unless such bicycle has been properly licensed as herein provided.
('71 Code, § 5-26) Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 72.21 APPLICATION.
   Any person requiring a bicycle license shall submit his application in
writing to the Chief of Police, or his authorized agents. Each application
shall be made on an approved form to be provided by the Police Department and
contain such information as the Chief of Police may deem necessary for the
proper enforcement of this chapter.
('71 Code, § 5-27)
§ 72.22 ISSUANCE.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police or his agents to act on
all bicycle license applications received and to issue the same when the
provisions of this chapter have been complied with by the applicant, including
the certification by the applicant that the bicycle is in good and safe
mechanical condition.
('71 Code, § 5-28) (Am. Ord. passed 3-6-79)
§ 72.23 FEE; DURATION.
   (A)   The fee for each bicycle license issued shall be $1. A bicycle shall
be considered registered for the entire life of the bicycle, unless the plate
provided by the Chief of Police has been mutilated, destroyed, altered, or the
ownership of the bicycle has been transferred to another person.
   (B)   Upon transfer of ownership of the bicycle the new owner shall re-
register the bicycle as provided in
§ 72.21.
('71 Code, § 5-29) (Am. Ord. passed 12-5-72; Am. Ord. passed 3-6-79)
§ 72.24 GROUNDS FOR DENIAL.
   The Chief of Police shall not issue a license for any bicycle when he knows,
or has reasonable grounds to believe, that the applicant is not the owner of,
or entitled to possession of such bicycle, or when the police inspection
reveals the bicycle to be in unsafe mechanical condition.
('71 Code, § 5-30)
§ 72.25 ISSUANCE OF PLATE.
   Upon the issuance of a bicycle license, the Chief of Police or his agent
shall also issue a license plate to the applicant, bearing the license number
assigned to the bicycle and the name of the city. The owner shall firmly attach
the said plate to the rear mud guard or frame of the bicycle for which it is
issued and in such position so as to be plainly visible from the rear. Should
the plate become mutilated, destroyed, or altered or should the ownership of
the bicycle be transferred, the Chief of Police may cause the owner to
reregister the bicycle at the owner's expense.
('71 Code, § 5-32) (Am. Ord. passed 3-6-79)
§ 72.26 REMOVAL OF PLATE.
   No person shall remove a license plate from a bicycle during the period for
which it was issued, provided that upon the transfer of ownership, the licensee
shall remove and destroy the plate assigned thereto.
('71 Code, § 5-33) (Am. Ord. passed 3-6-79) Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 72.27 PURCHASE OF FORMS AND THE
LIKE; DEPOSIT OF FEES.
   The Chief of Police shall have the authority to purchase, from the amount
budgeted for bicycle registration expense within the Police Department's
budget, all license forms, license plates, or any other materials or equipment
necessary to properly administer the provisions of this chapter. All fees
collected from the bicycle registration program shall be deposited to the
general fund.
('71 Code, § 5-34) (Am. Ord. passed 12-5-72)
§ 72.28 RECORDS.
   The Chief of Police or his agent shall keep a record of the license number
assigned by them to each bicycle, the date issued, the name of the person to
whom issued, the number of the frame of the bicycle for which issued, and a
record of all such fees collected.
('71 Code, § 5-35)
CHAPTER 73: PARKING SCHEDULES
Schedule
   
I.   Snow emergency routes
SCHEDULE I. SNOW EMERGENCY ROUTES.
   The following streets or portions of streets within the city are hereby
designated as snow emergency routes:
STREET FROM TO
STREET               FROM                         TO
Ahern Street         Trahan Street                O'Malley Street
Amory Street         McGregor Street              Kimball Street
Baker Street, West   Elm Street                   Brown Avenue
Beech Hill Avenue    Beech Hill Drive             Bradley Street
Beech Hill Drive     Bradley Street               South Beech Street
Beech Street         South Willow Street          Webster Street
Bradley Street       Beech Hill Avenue            Northerly to deadend
Bremer Street        Kimball Street               Eddy Road and McGregor
Bridge Street        Elm Street                   Mammoth Road
Bridge Street West   Elm Street                   McGregor Street
Canal Street         West Sagamore Street         Granite Street
Chestnut Street      Webster Street               Auburn Street
Coolidge Avenue      Kelley Street                Amory Street
Cypress Street       Spruce Street                Valley Street
Dunbarton Road       Front Street                 Buckland Street
Eddy Road            McGregor Street              Goffstown Road and Front
                                                  Street
Front Street         Eddy Road and Goffstown Road F.E. Everett Turnpike
                                                  southbound ramp
Granite Street       South Main Street            Elm Street
Hancock Street, West Second Street                South Main Street
Hanover Street       Elm Street                   Lake Avenue
Kelley Street        Kimball Street               Coolidge Avenue
Kimball Street       Bremer Street                Amory Street
Lake Avenue          Elm Street                   Hanover Street
Lakeshore Road       Manchester Water Treatment   Candia Road
                     Plant
Mammoth Road         Smyth Road                   Massabesic Street
Main Street          Montcalm Street              McGregor Street
Main Street          Putnam Street and McGregor   Granite Street
                     Street
Main Street, South   Granite Street               Woodbury Street
Maple Street         Webster Street               South Willow Street
Massabesic Street    Lake Avenue                  Mammoth Road
Mast Road            Varney Street                Goffstown Town Line
McGregor Street      Eddy Road and Bremer Street  Main Street
Milford Street       Sylvester Street             South Main Street
North Street         Elm Street                   Maple Street
O'Malley Street      Brown Avenue                 South Elm Street
Pine Street          Webster Street               Willow Street
River Road, North    West Webster Street          North Union Street
Rockland Avenue      Goffstown Town Line          Sylvester Street
Salmon Street        Elm Street                   Maple Street
Second Street        Granite Street               Blaine Street
Spruce Street        Chestnut Street              Cypress Street
Smyth Road           Mammoth Road                 Webster Street
Sylvester Street     Rockland Avenue              Milford Street
Tarrytown Road       Mammoth Road                 Massabesic Road
Trahan Street        West Baker Street            O'Malley Street
Union Street         Willow Street                Webster Street
Union Street, North  Webster Street               North River Road
Valley Street        Elm Street                   Massabesic Street
Varney Street        Mast Road                    South Main Street
Webster Street       Elm Street                   Smyth Road
Webster Street, West Elm Street                   River Road
Willow Street        Auburn Street                Shasta Street
 
('71 Code, § 15-52) (Ord. passed 12-19-72; Am. Ord. passed 2-15-77)
Penalty, see § 71.99
CHAPTER 74: [RESERVED]
(Previous chapter replaced by new
§ 70.30 on 8-6-02)
CHAPTER 75: MOTORIZED SCOOTERS
Section
General Provisions
   
75.01   General provision; definition
   
75.02   Obedience to traffic-control ordinances; effect of conflict
   
75.03   Obedience to traffic-control devices; exceptions
   
75.04   Age requirements
   
75.05   Equipment required
   
75.06   Speed; direction
   
75.07   Yielding right-of-way
   
75.08   Noise
   
75.09   Rental
Licenses
   
75.11   Licenses required
   
75.12   Application
   
75.13   Issuance
   
75.14   Fee; duration
 
   
75.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 75.01 GENERAL PROVISION; DEFINITION.
   (A)   This chapter shall govern the use of all motorized scooters, also
known as go-peds or motorized skateboards, on all public streets, alleys and
highways within the city and the property of any designation owned by the city.
   (B)   For the purpose of this chapter the term MOTORIZED SCOOTERS shall mean
any vehicle with a gas or electric engine and wheels joined, in tandem, to the
bottom of a narrow platform with a vertical handle fixed to the platform, frame
or wheels which is intended to be ridden in a standing position.
(Ord. passed 4-6-04)
§ 75.02 OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC-CONTROL ORDINANCES; EFFECT OF CONFLICT.
   Any person operating a motorized scooter upon any public highway or path
within the city shall operate the same in accordance with all the provisions
contained in the traffic ordinances of the city.
(Ord. passed 4-6-04)
Penalty, see § 75.99
§ 75.03 OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES; EXCEPTIONS.
   All official traffic signals, signs, and other control devices within the
city used in regulating and directing traffic must be obeyed, unless otherwise
directed by a police officer; and on public highways where authorized signs are
erected, indicating that no left, right, or “U” turn is permitted, no person or
persons operating a motorized scooter in the city shall disobey the regulation
contained therein, except that when such person dismounts from the motorized
scooter to make any such turn, he shall obey all the traffic ordinance
provisions applicable to pedestrians.
(Ord. passed 4-6-04)
Penalty, see § 75.99
§ 75.04 AGE REQUIREMENTS.
   The use of a motorized scooter is allowed by anyone 16 years of age or
older; anyone under this age is restricted from using them. A valid motor
vehicle driver's license is not required to operate a motorized scooter.
(Ord. passed 4-6-04)
Penalty, see § 75.99
§ 75.05 EQUIPMENT REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person shall operate a motorized scooter unless it is equipped with
a brake. Operators shall wear footwear consisting of a sturdy sole and which
completely covers the feet and toes.
   (B)   Any motorized scooters operated upon any way during the period from
one-half hour after sunset to one-half hour before sunrise, and whenever rain,
snow or fog shall interfere with the proper view of the road shall be equipped
with a lamp emitting a white light visible from a distance of 300 feet in front
of the motorized scooter and with a red reflector on the rear which shall be
visible from a distance of 300 feet to the rear when directly in front of the
headlamps of a motor vehicle.
(Ord. passed 4-6-04)
Penalty, see § 75.99
§ 75.06 SPEED; DIRECTION.
   Motorized scooters shall not be operated within the city at a speed greater
than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions then existing, and shall be
operated as near the right-hand side of the highway as practicable, exercising
due care when passing a parked vehicle, or one proceeding in the same
direction.
(Ord. passed 4-6-04)
Penalty, see § 75.99
§ 75.07 YIELDING RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   Motorized scooters emerging from an alley, driveway, or building within the
city shall upon approaching a sidewalk or the sidewalk area extending across
any alleyway, or driveway yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians approaching
on the said sidewalk or sidewalk area; and upon entering the highway shall
yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on said highway.
(Ord. passed 4-6-04)
Penalty, see § 75.99
§ 75.08 NOISE.
   No motorized scooter shall make any unreasonably loud, disturbing or
unnecessary noise.
(Ord. passed 4-6-04)
Penalty, see § 75.99
§ 75.09 RENTAL.
   No person shall rent, or offer for rent, any motorized scooter within the
city unless it is properly licensed and equipped in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 4-6-04)
Penalty, see § 75.99
   LICENSES
§ 75.11 LICENSES REQUIRED.
   No person shall ride or propel a motorized scooter on any public highway
within the city, or upon any other public path unless such motorized scooter
has been properly licensed as herein provided.
(Ord. passed 4-6-04)
Penalty, see § 75.99
§ 75.12 APPLICATION.
   Any person requiring a license for a motorized scooter shall submit his
application in writing to the Chief of Police, or his authorized agents. Each
application shall be made on an approved form to be provided by the Police
Department and contain such information as the Chief of Police may deem
necessary for the proper enforcement of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 4-6-04)
§ 75.13 ISSUANCE.
   It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police or his agents to act on all
motorized scooter license applications received and to issue the same when the
provisions of this chapter have been complied with by the applicant, including
the certification by the applicant that the motorized scooter is in good and
safe mechanical condition.
(Ord. passed 4-6-04)
§ 75.14 FEE; DURATION.
   (A)   The fee for each motorized scooter license issued shall be $5. A
motorized scooter shall be considered registered for the entire life of the
motorized scooter, unless the plate provided by the Chief of Police has been
mutilated, destroyed, altered, or the ownership of the motorized scooter has
been transferred to another person.
   (B)   Upon transfer of ownership of the motorized scooter the new owner
shall re-register the motorized scooter as provided in § 75.12.
(Ord. passed 4-6-04)
§ 75.99 PENALTY.
   Any person or persons violating any act or provision of this chapter shall
be fined not more $25 for the first and $50 for a second offense. Any person or
persons violating this chapter on a third, or more, time must appear.
(Ord. passed 4-6-04)
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
            Chapter
               
90.   ANIMALS
               
91.   HEALTH AND SANITATION
               
92.   FIRE PREVENTION
               
93.   ALARMS
               
94.   NOISE REGULATIONS
               
95.   AIR POLLUTION
               
96.   PARKS AND RECREATION
               
97.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
               
98.   CEMETERIES
               
99.   GRAFFITI
CHAPTER 90: ANIMALS
Section
General Provisions
   
90.01   Humane Officer
   
90.02   Horses on streets and commons restricted
   
90.03   Hitching animals to or near trees
   
90.04   Dog fouling prohibition
Dogs
   
90.10   Definitions
   
90.11   License required
   
90.11.1    Exclusions from annual warrant list
   
90.12   Running at large prohibited
   
90.13   [Reserved]
   
90.14   Liability for damages
   
90.15   Impoundment
   
90.16   Notice; redemption of impounded dogs; fees
   
90.17   [Reserved]
   
90.18   Disposition of unclaimed dogs
Rabid Animals
   
90.30   Destruction of rabid animals authorized
 
   
90.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 90.01 HUMANE OFFICER.
   For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter, the position of
Humane Officer is hereby established at a salary to be fixed by the Board of
Mayor and Aldermen. The Humane Officer will be responsible to the Board of
Police Commissioners, and will be directly supervised by the Chief of Police.
('71 Code, § 4-22) (Ord. passed 12-17-63; Am. Ord. passed 7-23-68)
§ 90.02 HORSES ON STREETS AND COMMONS RESTRICTED.
   No person shall, without necessity, ride or lead a horse on the side
pavements or walks of any street, lane, or alley, or across any of the commons
of the city.
('71 Code, § 4-1)
Penalty, see § 90.99
Statutory reference:
    Authority of city to regulate the keeping of horses, see R.S.A. 47:17(X)
§ 90.03 HITCHING ANIMALS TO OR NEAR TREES.
   No person shall hitch any horse or other draft animal to any tree standing
in any street, highway, or public place or shall so hitch any such horse, or
other draft animal that it may do injury to any such trees.
('71 Code, § 4-2)
Penalty, see § 90.99
§ 90.04 DOG FOULING PROHIBITION.
   (A)   Violation. It shall be unlawful for any person owning, possessing or
controlling a dog on any sidewalk, street or public area or on any private
property neither owned or occupied by said person to:
      (1)   Fail to carry any article or means to remove any feces left by such
dog; or
      (2)   Fail to remove and dispose of any feces left by such dog in a
manner consistent with law.
         (a)   Method of removal and disposal. For the purposes of this
division, the means of removal shall be any plastic bag, tool, implement, or
other device carried and used for the purpose of picking up and containing such
feces, unexposed to said person and unexposed to the public. Disposal shall be
accomplished by transporting such feces to a receptacle or other place suitable
for the disposal of waste, trash, or debris.
   (B)   Exception. This section shall not apply to any dog accompanying a
person mentally or physically impaired and who because of such impairment is
unable to comply with the requirements of this section.
('71 Code, § 17-25(a),(b),(d)) (Ord. passed 2-17-93; Am. Ord. passed 8-6-96;
Am. Ord. passd 12-17-13)
Cross reference:
   Citation penalties, see §
38.06
DOGS
§ 90.10 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AT LARGE. Off the premises of the owner and not under the control, at all
times, of the owner or a member of his immediate family or a person of
sufficient age and strength to effectively restrain the dog either by leash or
chain.
   DOG. Any canine animal, male and female, sexed or neutered.
   OWNER. Any person, firm, association, or corporation owning, keeping, or
harboring a dog.
('71 Code, § 4-21) (Ord. passed 12-17-63)
Statutory reference:
   Authority of city to regulate the keeping of dogs and their running at
large, require them to be licensed, and authorize the
     destruction of those kept or running at large contrary to the ordinance,
see R.S.A. 47:17 (XI)
   Dogs, generally, R.S.A. Ch. 466
§ 90.11 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   All dogs kept, harbored, or maintained by their owner or keeper in the
city shall be licensed annually in accordance with the provisions of R.S.A. Ch.
466 at fees established as follows:
   Puppies (4 to 7 months old)   $7.50
   Neutered male/spayed female   $7.50
   Male/female   $10.00
   Senior citizen owner
      First dog   $3.00
   Group license
      Five or more dogs   $20.00
   (B)   There shall be a charge of $1.00 for each month or any part thereof
that the fees remain unpaid if said fees are not paid before June 1 in any
year.
('71 Code, § 4-13) (Ord. passed 10-16-62; Am. Ord. passed 6-3-03; Am. Ord.
passed 2-1-05)
Penalty, see § 90.99
§ 90.11.1 EXCLUSIONS FROM ANNUAL WARRANT LIST.
   In compiling the annual list of owners of dog(s) who have not renewed their
licenses pursuant to R.S.A. 466:14, the Office of the City Clerk may exclude
from the list the names of owners or keepers whose dog(s), based upon city
records, have been sold or are deceased at the time renewal of the license is
required. The Office of the City Clerk may also exclude from the list the names
of owners or keepers of dog(s) who, based upon city records, no longer reside
in the city.
(Ord. passed 6-17-99)
Penalty, see § 90.99
§ 90.12 RUNNING AT LARGE PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No owner or keeper of any dog shall permit such dog, whether licensed
or unlicensed, to run at large within the city at any time.
   (B)   Notwithstanding anything in this section to the contrary, no person
shall be compelled to keep any dog in his possession on a leash while in or
upon any public street, alley, park, parkway, or other public place in the
city, if the dog is securely confined in an automobile.
   (C)   Notwithstanding any definition to the contrary, a dog shall be deemed
“at large” if that dog is on or being walked upon a public street, parking lot
or facility, sidewalk, or right-of-way adjacent to a street and is not actually
on a leash or chain or within a carrier which is in the possession of a person
of sufficient strength and age to effectively restrain the dog.
('71 Code, § 4-23) (Ord. passed 12-17-63; Am. Ord. passed 4-4-00)
Penalty, see § 90.99
Cross reference:
   
Citation penalties, see § 38.06
§ 90.13 [RESERVED].
   (Previous section repealed on 6-5-00)
§ 90.14 LIABILITY FOR DAMAGES.
   Should any dog which has been found to have damaged or destroyed personal
property, the owner or keeper of said dog shall be liable for the damages
caused after the case has been disposed of by the court and the owner or keeper
found guilty of the charges preferred.
('71 Code, § 4-15) (Ord. passed 10-16-62)
§ 90.15 IMPOUNDMENT.
   It shall be the duty of every police officer to apprehend any dog found
running at large contrary to the provisions of
§ 90.12 of this chapter and to impound such dog in a suitable place.
('71 Code, § 4-24) (Ord. passed 12-17-63)
§ 90.16 NOTICE; REDEMPTION OF IMPOUNDED DOGS; FEES.
   If an impounded dog has upon it the name or address of the owner, or such
name or address is otherwise known, the Police Department shall notify the
owner within 24 hours after seizure of such dog. Notice of impounded dog shall
be in writing by registered mail, postage prepaid, and shall be construed as
having been given at the time of posting thereof. If the dog impounded does not
have the name or address of the owner, and if the owner is not otherwise known,
then no notice shall be necessary.
('71 Code, § 4-25) (Ord. passed 12-17-63; Am. Ord. passed 2-15-77; Am. Ord.
passed 4-3-84; Am. Ord. passed 6-5-90; Am. Ord. passed 10-1-96; Am. Ord. passed
11-28-00)
Penalty, see § 90.99
§ 90.17  [RESERVED].
   (Previous section repealed on 11-28-00)
§ 90.18 DISPOSITION OF UNCLAIMED DOGS.
   Any dog which had been impounded by the Friends of the Manchester Animal
Shelter and has not been redeemed by the owner shall be disposed of, by
adoption or other appropriate manner, by the Friends of the Manchester Animal
Shelter; provided, that any such dog shall be held for at least seven days
after impounding, and in those cases where it is required that notice be given
the owner, the dog shall be held for at least four days after the required
notice has been given.
('71 Code, § 4-27) (Ord. passed 12-17-63; Am. Ord. passed 6-5-00)
RABID ANIMALS
§ 90.30 DESTRUCTION OF RABID ANIMALS AUTHORIZED.
   Any animal that is mad or rabid shall at once be destroyed by a
representative of the Department of Health or the Police Department. Any animal
which is found upon examination by a veterinarian of the department of health
to be rabid shall be surrendered to the department of health by the person
owning or having possession thereof and shall be destroyed by the Department of
Health.
('71 Code, § 4-38) (Ord. passed 3-20-56)
Statutory reference:
   Rabies Control, see R.S.A. 436:99 et seq.
   Dogs which are a menace, nuisance, or vicious, see R.S.A. 466:31
§ 90.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who violates
§ 90.11 of this chapter shall be subject to the civil forfeiture penalty set
forth in R.S.A. 466:13. Any person who fails to timely pay the aforementioned
civil forfeiture penalty shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine not to
exceed the maximum allowed by R.S.A. 47:17 or other law for each offense.
   (B)   Any person who violates any other provision of this chapter for which
no penalty is otherwise provided shall be subject to the penalty set forth in
§ 10.99 of this code.
('71 Code, § 17-25(c)) (Ord. passed 2-17-93; Am. Ord. passed 8-3-99)
CHAPTER 91: HEALTH AND SANITATION
Section
General Provisions
   
91.00   Health Department established
   
91.01   Day care facilities; inspections
Lead Poisoning Prevention
   
91.20   Purpose
   
91.21   Removal of paint; notification
   
91.22   [Reserved]
   
91.23   Relationship to housing code
Swimming and Bathing Facilities
   
91.35   Applicability
   
91.36   Definition
   
91.37   Annual permit required
   
91.38   Expiration of permit
   
91.39   Permit to be posted
   
91.40   Revocation procedure
   
91.41   Inspections
   
91.42   Quality of water
   
91.43   Required equipment
   
91.44   Swimmer safety
Mosquito Control
   
91.50   Purpose
   
91.51   Duty to maintain premises free of mosquito breeding conditions
Solid Waste and Littering
   
91.60   Purpose
   
91.61   Enforcement authority
   
91.62   Regulations authorized
   
91.63   Definitions
   
91.631   Eligibility requirements for municipal curbside collection
   
91.64   Placement of trash, recyclables or yard waste for collection
   
91.65   Prohibited deposits
   
91.66   Containers
   
91.67   Volume
   
91.68   Deposit of litter
   
91.69   Duty to maintain premises free of litter
   
91.70   Litter on vacant property
   
91.71   Litter removal by the city
   
91.72   Throwing litter from vehicles prohibited
   
91.73   Littering in parks
   
91.74   Littering bodies of water prohibited
   
91.75   Posting notices
   
91.76   Penalty
Syringe Service Program and Needle Disposal
   
91.80   Purpose and need
   
91.81   Definitions
   
91.82   Limitation on the location of needle disposal container sites
   
91.83   Limitation on the location of SSP operation
   
91.84   Registration information to be provided by the SSP operator
   
91.85   Days and hours of operation of the SSP
   
91.86   Security of facilities and equipment
   
91.87   Syringe service program operations
   
91.88   Data and reporting requirements for syringe service program
   
91.89   Lawful participation
   
91.90   Enforcement and penalties
 
Cross-reference:
   Air pollution, see
Ch. 95
   Duty of Board of Health as to interment and disinterment, see
§ 98.03
   Food service establishments, see
Ch. 117
   Sanitation procedures, see §
96.05
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 91.00 HEALTH DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED.
   (A)   Pursuant to Charter §
3.02, there is established a Health Department.
   (B)   Department head. The department head shall be the Health Officer who
shall be appointed as provided by Charter §
3.03. The Health Officer shall have such authority and powers as are provided
by law.
   (C)   Composition.
      (1)   The Health Department shall also include:
         (a)   The Board of Health. The Board of Health shall have five
members. The Board of Health shall have at least one physician, one dentist and
one nurse, one representative of labor, and one member of the public at large.
         (b)   The Senior Services Commis-sion. The Senior Services Commission
shall have five members. One member of the Senior Services Commission shall be
a representative from organized labor who shall hold a valid union membership
at the time of nomination and during his or her term of office. Additionally,
at least two members shall be at least 50 years-of-age at the time of their
appointment to the Commission.
      (2)   All respective members shall be appointed as provided by Charter §
3.14 and shall complete such duties and have such powers as are prescribed by
federal, state and local law.
   (D)   Duties. The department shall be responsible for routinely and
periodically assessing the public health of the community and recommending
appropriate policies, ordinances and programs to improve the health of the
community, shall investigate and control communicable diseases and shall
complete environmental inspections and investigations necessary to protect the
public health. The Health Department shall also be responsible for providing
services to the senior population of the city, and for mobilizing the human,
physical, and financial resources available to assist the senior population of
the community, and shall advise the Board of Mayor and Alder-men as to the
needs of that population. Subject to appropriation, the Health Department shall
plan, develop, and implement those programs that will best serve the senior
population and shall, at all times, be guided by the principle of maintaining
the dignity and independence of each member of the senior population.
(Ord. passed 11-4-98; Am. Ord. passed 6-6-23)
§ 91.01 DAY CARE FACILITIES; INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   Any person desiring to have the City Health Department inspect a day
care facility, home, or other premises as a prerequisite for obtaining a State
of New Hampshire license shall request such inspection on forms provided for
this purpose by the City Health Department. ('71 Code, § 12-8)
   (B)   An inspection fee of $30 for a family-type day care (less than or
equal to six children) or $50 for a day care center (more than six children)
shall be paid to the City Health Department upon requesting a day care
licensing inspection. A day care facility which holds a valid Class III food
establishment permit from the City Health Department is exempt from the day
care inspection fee. ('71 Code, § 12-9)
   (C)   Any person operating a day care facility in the City shall comply with
the New Hampshire Child Care Program Licensing Rules He-C 4000.
(Ord. passed 3-19-85; Am. Ord. passed 9-4-01)
LEAD POISONING PREVENTION
§ 91.20 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter shall be to protect the health of residents
of Manchester by ensuring that abrasive paint removal is conducted without
creating a hazard to the health of children, occupants, or the general public.
('71 Code, § 12-20) (Ord. passed 1-17-89; Am. Ord. passed 10-7-97; Am. Ord.
passed 9-4-01)
§ 91.21 REMOVAL OF PAINT; NOTIFICATION.
   (A)   Notification. The property owner or agent of a structure to receive
abrasive paint removal shall provide written notification to property abutters
and the City Health Department prior to initiating an abrasive removal project.
Such notification shall be made at least three days prior to the start of the
project and shall be on forms provided for this purpose by the City Health
Department. ('71 Code, § 12-22)
   (B)   Testing of paint to be removed. All paint which will be subjected to
abrasive paint removal shall be tested for lead content prior to the
commencement of any abrasive paint removal. Results of all testing shall be
provided to the Health Authority prior to the issuance of a permit for abrasive
paint removal.
   (C)   Work practices. Work practices employed during abrasive paint removal
shall be consistent with accepted industrial hygiene standards for personal
protection, site preparation and shall always be employed as to not create a
hazard to the public health through the release of lead containing dust.
(Ord. passed 1-17-89; Am. Ord. passed 10-7-97; Am. Ord. passed 9-4-01)
§ 91.22 [RESERVED].
   (Previous section repealed on 10-7-97)
§ 91.23 RELATIONSHIP TO HOUSING CODE.
   Nothing contained in this subchapter shall in any way conflict with or
relieve the responsibility of a property owner to comply with
§ 150.069 or any other provisions of the Housing Code,
Chapter 150 of this code of ordinances.
('71 Code, § 12-23) (Ord. passed 1-17-89; Am. Ord. passed 9-4-01)
Cross-reference:
   
Housing Code, see Ch. 150
SWIMMING AND BATHING FACILITIES
§ 91.35 APPLICABILITY.
   This subchapter shall regulate the construction and operation of all
swimming pools, recreational spas, hot tubs, and natural bathing areas except
those facilities located appurtenant to single-family or duplex family
residences. All such bathing facilities regulated by this subchapter shall be
referred to herein as public pools or public spas.
('71 Code, § 12-30) (Ord. passed 6-5-90; Am. Ord. passed 9-4-01)
§ 91.36 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, HEALTH AUTHORITY shall mean the Health
Officer of the city or his designated representative.
('71 Code, § 12-31) (Ord. passed 6-5-90; Am. Ord. passed 9-4-01)
§ 91.37 ANNUAL PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person, corporation, or other entity shall operate, maintain, or allow to
be used, any public swimming pool, spa, or hot tub except when in possession of
a valid permit issued by the Health Department. The permits shall be issued for
an annual fee of $175 for each indoor pool; or $175 per outdoor pool or natural
bathing place. Spa and hot tub permits will be issued at $125 per tub or spa up
to two units and $100 for each additional unit at each site. No permit fee
shall be charged for government-owned facilities.
('71 Code, § 12-32) (Ord. passed 6-5-90; Am. Ord. passed 9-4-01; Am. Ord.
passed 7-5-11)
§ 91.38 EXPIRATION OF PERMIT.
   Except as otherwise stipulated in this chapter, any permit issued pursuant
to this subchapter shall be valid for a one-year period and shall expire on the
last day of April, annually. There shall be a $25 late application fee for any
permit renewal application received more than ten days after its expiration.
('71 Code, § 12-33) (Ord. passed 6-5-90; Am. Ord. passed 9-4-01)
§ 91.39 PERMIT TO BE POSTED.
   Any permit issued pursuant to this subchapter shall be posted in a
conspicuous place about the pool or spa.
('71 Code, § 12-34) (Ord. passed 6-5-90; Am. Ord. passed 9-4-01)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 91.40 REVOCATION PROCEDURE.
   Whenever the Health Authority shall find that any public pool or spa is not
in compliance with the terms and conditions of this subchapter the Health
Authority may cause the operating permit to be revoked or suspended by any or
all of the following methods:
   (A)   He may physically remove the permit from its posting.
   (B)   He may notify the owner or operator of the pool in writing that the
operating permit is revoked or suspended.
   (C)   He may post a sign or signs conspicuously about the pool to the effect
that the operating permit has been revoked.
('71 Code, § 12-35) (Ord. passed 6-5-90; Am. Ord. passed 9-4-01)
§ 91.41 INSPECTIONS.
   All owners and operators of public pools and spas shall allow the Health
Authority entry onto the pool premises at all reasonable times for the purposes
of inspections and sample collection.
('71 Code, § 12-36) (Ord. passed 6-5-90; Am. Ord. passed 9-4-01)
§ 91.42 QUALITY OF WATER.
   Public swimming pools, recreational spas, hot tubs, and natural bathing
areas shall be maintained and operated at all times in accordance with New
Hampshire Public Bathing Facility Rules, Env Wq-1100. A copy of these
regulations shall be on file at the City Health Department.
('71 Code, § 12-37) (Ord. passed 6-5-90; Am. Ord. passed 9-4-01; Am. Ord.
passed 7-5-11)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 91.43 REQUIRED EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   Public pools. All public pools shall be supplied at all times with the
following items of equipment which shall be maintained in complete form and
proper working order:
      (1)   Public pools using chlorine as a disinfectant shall be equipped
with a positive displacement chlorinator which shall be maintained in operating
condition at all times. Other systems of disinfection such as bomine, and the
like, will be considered on an individual basis, capable of determining free,
combined, and residual levels or concentrations of the disinfecting agent as
well as measuring pH, alkalinity and cyanuric acid.
      (2)   One shepherd's crook with a minimum handle length of 12 feet.
      (3)   One ring buoy with a rope attached, the rope to be no less than ¼-
inch in diameter and in length one and one-half times the width of the pool or
50 feet, whichever is less.
      (4)   One backboard device for the transportation of persons with spinal
injuries.
      (5)   One standard American Red Cross 24 unit first aid kit or its
equivalent.
   (B)   Public spas and hot tubs. Public spas and hot tubs used by the public
for recreational purposes shall be operated in accordance with the following
standards:
      (1)   Adequate shower bath facilities shall be provided at all spa and
hot tub facilities. Showering is required before use of the spa and hot tub.
      (2)   Disinfection shall be by continuous feed equipment with
hypochlorite or bromine being the only acceptable disinfectants.
      (3)   Spa and tub surfaces and surrounding areas shall be smooth, easily
cleanable, and maintained in good repair at all times.
('71 Code, § 12-38) (Ord. passed 6-5-90; Am. Ord. passed 9-4-01)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 91.44 SWIMMER SAFETY.
   In public pools, supervision of bathers shall be provided in accordance with
the following standards:
   (A)   Where lifeguard service is provided, the lifeguard shall have
satisfactorily completed a senior course of instruction in lifesaving and water
safety equivalent to that offered by the American Red Cross or the YMCA.
   (B)   Where no lifeguard service is provided, a warning sign shall be placed
in plain view which shall state “WARNING - NO LIFEGUARD ON DUTY” with clearly
legible letters at least four inches in height.
('71 Code, § 12-39) (Ord. passed 6-5-90; Am. Ord. passed 9-4-01)
Penalty, see § 10.99
MOSQUITO CONTROL
§ 91.50 PURPOSE.
   It is the intent of these regulations to control and reduce the mosquito
population of the City of Manchester by removing, draining, treating, altering
or otherwise eliminating all breeding sources for mosquitoes.
(Ord. passed 9-4-01)
§ 91.51 DUTY TO MAINTAIN PREMISES FREE OF MOSQUITO BREEDING CONDITIONS.
   The owner or person in control of any piece of property shall at all times
maintain the premises free of any barrel, tire, tub, swimming pool, ornamental
pool, or any other artificial water receptacle, or shall treat and maintain
such receptacle in a manner as to prevent the breeding of mosquitoes.
(Ord. passed 9-4-01) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
   SOLID WASTE AND LITTERING
§ 91.60 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter shall be to ensure that solid waste and
litter is handled in a manner as to protect the public health, safety and
welfare of the community.
(Ord. passed 4-16-02)
§ 91.61 ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY.
   (A)   Public Works and Health Authority. The Department of Public Works and
the Health Authority are hereby authorized and empowered to enforce the
requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   Authority is additional. The enforcement authority established herein
is in addition to, and shall not abolish or restrict, the authority currently
possessed by any city department especially, but not limited to, the Police
Department to enforce the requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 4-16-02; Am. Ord. passed 5-7-19)
§ 91.62 REGULATIONS AUTHORIZED.
   The Public Works Director and the Health Officer are hereby authorized to
promulgate such rules and regulations as may be necessary and convenient to
effectuate the purposes and requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 4-16-02)
§ 91.63 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AUTHORIZED PRIVATE RECEPTACLE. Litter storage and collection receptacle as
required and authorized by this chapter.
   BULKY ITEM. Any items whose size or weight precludes or complicates its
handling by normal collection processes or disposal methods.
   COMMERCIAL. Of or pertaining to a business operating for profit.
   CONDOMINIUM COMPLEX. A type of planned development in which multiple
dwelling units are owned individually but are situated on land owned in common.
   CONTAINER. Any storage and collection receptacle for trash, recyclables, or
yard waste, as required or authorized by this chapter.
   DOWNTOWN COLLECTION ZONE.  An area bounded by the west side of Elm Street,
the north side of West Auburn Street, the west side of Pine Street, and the
south side of Orange Street; in addition to another area bounded by the west
side of Willow Street, north side of Hayward Street, east side of Elm Street,
and south side of Auburn Street, and also encompassing properties with frontage
along the following public roads and alleys: Grove  Street, between Willow
Street and Elm Street; Elm Street East Back; the north side of Monadnock Lane,
west of Union Street; Hampshire Lane, between West Merrimack street and
Mechanic Street; Franklin Street, East Back; Harry Theo Lane; Manhattan Lane;
Litchfield Lane; Londonderry Lane, west of Union Street; the east side of
Chestnut Street, between Hanover Street and Amherst Street; Lowell Street,
North Back;and the southeast corner of Elm Street and Orange Street.
   DUMPSTER. A large sturdy metal container, with a capacity exceeding two
cubic yards, for the collection of trash, designed to be emptied or transported
to a dump by a specially designed truck.
   DWELLING. A building or portion thereof containing private bath, cooking and
kitchen facilities, and sleeping quarters for the use of one or more
individuals living as a single housekeeping unit used exclusively for
residential occupancy, including single family, or multifamily dwellings, but
not including hotels, lodging facilities, or rooming houses.
   DWELLING, SINGLE FAMILY. A detached building used exclusively for occupancy
by one family.
   ELECTRONIC WASTE. A video display device, central processing unit of a
computer, or non-mobile video display media recorder/player, as defined in RSA
149-M:27.
   HEALTH AUTHORITY. The Health Officer of the city or his designated
representatives.
   LARGE MULTIFAMILY. A building or portion thereof containing five or more
dwelling units, whether in common ownership or owned as a condominium
cooperative.
   LITTER. Trash as defined herein, and all other waste material.
   LODGING HOUSE (OR BOARDING HOUSE OR ROOMING HOUSE). A house, building or
portion thereof containing one or more rooms that lack cooking facilities and
which do not
constitute dwelling units, that are provided as living quarters for tenants,
with or without provision of meals, on a weekly or monthly basis.
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK. A tract of land subdivided into sites, lots or other
leaseholds which provide for the long-term placement of transportable housing
supported by private, centrally-managed improvements, services, and facilities
for the residents therein.
   MERCURY-ADDED PRODUCT. Any item containing mercury, as defined in RSA 149-M:
58.
   MIXED-USE. A combination of residential, commercial, and/or non-profit uses.
   MUNICIPAL CART. A container with a fixed, hinged lid, wheels and a
horizontal handle. The container must be approved for size, design, color, and
durability by the Public Works Director or his designee.
   MUNICIPAL COLLECTION. The curbside collection of trash, recyclables, or yard
waste by the Department of Public Works.
   NON-PROFIT ORGANIZATION. An organization that conducts business for purposes
other than profit and which has tax-exempt status with the Internal Revenue
Service.
   PARK. Any park, reservation, playground, beach, recreation center or other
public area owned or used by the city and devoted to active or passive
recreation.
   PLANNED DEVELOPMENT. Any development involving the construction or creation
of two or more principal buildings on a single lot, developed as a whole in a
single development operation, or in a series of planned development phases.
   PRIVATE PREMISES. Any dwelling, house, building, or other structure designed
or used, either wholly or in part, for private purposes and regardless of
whether or not the premises  are inhabited or temporarily or continuously
vacant. Such premises shall include any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch,
steps, vestibule, or mailbox belonging or appurtenant thereto.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Any public building, park, square, space, grounds, street,
sidewalk, boulevard, alley or other public way.
   RECYCLABLE. Any material that, according to the current rules and
regulations of the Department of Public Works, may be separated from the waste
stream for reuse or repurposing.
   RESIDENTIAL. Designed for people to live in.
   TRASH. All putrescible and nonputrescible waste material, excluding bulky
items, industrial waste, yard waste, hazardous waste, infectious waste,
radioactive waste, and construction and demolition materials.
   VEHICLE. Any device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may
be transported or drawn on a street or highway including devices used
exclusively on stationary rails or tracks.
   YARD WASTE. Leaves, grass clippings, garden debris, small or chipped
branches (not exceeding three inches in diameter or three feet in length), and
Christmas trees.
(Ord. passed 4-16-02; Am. Ord. passed 11-5-03; Am. Ord. passed 12-20-11; Am.
Ord. passed 5-7-19; Am. Ord. passed 9-5-23)
§ 91.631 ELIGIBILITY REQUIREMENTS FOR MUNICIPAL CURBSIDE COLLECTION
   (A)   Properties that are eligible for municipal curbside collection
include:
      (1)   Any residential dwelling, lodging house, planned development or
condominium complex containing one to four dwelling units or rooms within a
lodging house; except those
residential dwellings, lodging houses, planned developments or condominium
complexes located on a private way;
      (2)   Commercial uses within the downtown collection zone that do not
produce trash that exceeds allowable volume in accordance with § 91.67;
      (3)   Commercial uses outside the downtown collection zone that occupy a
detached buildings less than 7,500 square feet that provides financial and
professional services such as banking, financial, real estate, insurance, or
other professional offices, or provides personal services such as beauty/nail
salons and spas, photographic studios, jewelry, watch, clock and small
appliance repair and tattoo parlors and that do not produce trash that exceeds
allowable volume in accordance with § 91.67.
   (B)   Properties that are ineligible for municipal curbside collection
include:
      (1)   Any large multifamily dwellings, lodging houses, planned
developments or condominium complexes with five or more dwelling units.
      (2)   Commercial uses, except for those eligible commercial uses found in
division (A)(3).
(Ord. passed 9-5-23)
§ 91.64 PLACEMENT OF TRASH, RECYCLABLES OR YARD WASTE FOR COLLECTION.
   (A)   The Department of Public Works will not collect garbage, trash,
recyclables, or yard waste from eligible properties, identified in § 91.631,
unless they have been properly prepared and placed in the right-of-way (at the
curb or back street) as required by departmental regulations.
   (B)   No trash, recyclables, or yard waste shall be placed for collection
prior to 4:00 p.m. of the day preceding the collection day that has been
designated by the Department of Public Works for that area of the city. Empty
containers shall be removed from the right-of-way, and stored on the property
to which they belong, no later than 6:00 p.m. on the day of collection. Trash,
recyclables, or yard waste that have not been collected because they have not
been properly prepared or placed shall be removed from the right-of-way, and
properly stored or otherwise disposed of, no later than 6:00 p.m. on the day
they were to have been collected.
   (C)   All materials placed for municipal collection must be placed along the
public frontage of the property at which they were generated, unless an
alternative placement has been agreed to by the Department of Public Works.
   (D)   No trash, recycling, or yard waste containers shall be stored between
collections in the front yard of a property, or forward of the building line,
if there is other available outdoor space on the property.
   (E)   Christmas trees may be placed for municipal collection only on days
designated by the Department of Public Works.
   (F)   It is mandatory that properties within the Downtown Collection Zone
properly sort and separate recyclables from their trash.
   (G)   Yard waste must be separated from trash and recyclables.
(Ord. passed 4-16-02; Am. Ord. passed 12-20-11; Am. Ord. passed 5-7-19; Am.
Ord. 9-5-23) Penalty, see §
91.76
§ 91.65 PROHIBITED DEPOSITS.
   (A)   No materials resulting from the construction or alteration of any
structure shall be placed for collection. All such materials shall be properly
disposed of by the property owner or contractor responsible for the
construction or alteration.
   (B)   Under no circumstances shall industrial, hazardous, electronic,
mercury-added, infectious or radioactive waste, or anything contaminated by any
such waste, be placed for municipal curbside collection. All such waste shall
be properly disposed of in accord with all applicable laws, ordinances, rules
and regulations.
   (C)   No liquid paint or other fluids shall be placed for municipal
collection.
   (D)   No bulky item shall be placed for municipal collection, except as may
be permitted by regulations promulgated by the Department of Public Works.
(Ord. passed 4-16-02; Am. Ord. passed 5-7-19)
Penalty, see § 91.76
§ 91.66 CONTAINERS.
   (A)   Municipal carts are mandatory containers for all dwellings and
commercial use buildings that are eligible for municipal curbside collection.
   (B)   Prior to placement of materials in a municipal trash cart, the
following additional requirements apply:
      (1)   Pet waste, diapers, feminine hygiene products, saw dust, and ashes
must be placed within a securely-tied plastic bag;
      (2)   Fats, oils, and greases must be placed within a secured container
and allowed to cool and coagulate;
      (3)   Syringes and other sharps must be enclosed within a rigid, secured,
and labeled container.
   (C)   All properties and persons utilizing private collection service for
trash or recyclables must contain said materials in a fully-covered receptacle
that is constructed of metal, plastic or other durable material resistant to
breakage.
   (D)   The owner(s) of any rental property, whether utilizing municipal or
private collection service, shall supply to the tenants of the property a
container, or containers, of sufficient capacity to provide for the safe,
secure, and sanitary storage of all trash and recyclables generated within the
property.
   (E)   All properties and persons placing yard waste for municipal collection
shall contain said material in accordance with regulations promulgated by the
Department of Public Works.
   (F)   The weight, including contents, of any single container of trash,
recyclables, or yard waste shall not exceed 75 pounds.
   (G)   The foregoing provisions of this section notwithstanding, the Public
Works Director shall have the authority to establish programs for special
municipal collection of bulky items, overflow materials, and emergency debris
that allow for the use of alternative containers or methods of placement.
(Ord. passed 4-16-02; Am. Ord. passed 11-5-03; Am. Ord. passed 12-20-11; Am.
Ord. passed 5-7-19; Am. Ord. passed 9-5-23) Penalty, see §
91.76
§ 91.67 VOLUME.
   (A)   For eligible dwellings and commercial use properties pursuant to §
91.631, the maximum volume of trash and recyclables placed for municipal
curbside collection shall be limited to 190 gallons of trash and 190 gallons of
recyclables per dwelling or operating business per collection event, contained
within no more than two municipal trash carts and two municipal recycling carts
per dwelling or operating business.
   (B)   There are no statutory limits on the volume of yard waste that may be
placed for municipal collection at any property.
   (C)   The foregoing provisions of this section notwithstanding, the Public
Works Director shall have the authority to:
      (1)   Grant a waiver to the volume limitations delineated in this section
when, in his or her sole determination, there is:
         (a)   A reasonable and demonstrated need for additional capacity; and
         (b)   Sufficient property frontage for placement of additional carts
such that street parking, traffic flow, and pedestrian safety are not adversely
affected; and
      (2)   Impose additional limitations on the volume of any material that
may be placed for municipal collection at a property when such limitations are
necessary to ensure sufficient street parking, traffic flow, or pedestrian
safety.
(Ord. passed 4-16-02; Am. Ord. passed 5-7-19; Am. Ord. passed 9- 5-23) Penalty,
see §
91.76
§ 91.68 DEPOSIT OF LITTER.
   (A)   No one shall deposit in, or sweep into, any gutter, street, alley,
sewer or other public place any accumulation of litter from any building, lot,
public or private sidewalk, or driveway.
   (B)   No one shall deposit, throw, or sweep any litter in any place or
manner that would allow the elements to carry or move it to any street,
sidewalk, alley, sewer or other public place or any occupied premises.
   (C)   No litter shall be deposited or thrown upon any street, sidewalk, or
other public place except in public receptacles, authorized private
receptacles, or an official city waste disposal facility.
   (D)   Litter placed in public receptacles or authorized private receptacles
shall be deposited so as to prevent it from being moved by the elements to any
street, sidewalk, other public place or private property.
(Ord. passed 4-16-02)
Penalty, see § 91.76
§ 91.69 DUTY TO MAINTAIN PREMISES FREE OF LITTER.
   The owner or person in control of any private premises shall at all times,
maintain the premises free of litter. This section shall not prohibit the
storage, in approved containers, of litter awaiting placement for collection.
(Ord. passed 4-16-02)
Penalty, see § 91.76
§ 91.70 LITTER ON VACANT PROPERTY.
   No person shall deposit or throw litter on any vacant or open private
property whether or not owned by that person.
(Ord. passed 4-16-02)
Penalty, see § 91.76
§ 91.71 LITTER REMOVAL BY CITY.
   (A)   Notice to remove. The Health Authority may require the owner of any
vacant or open private property, or the agent of such owner, to properly
dispose of any litter on the property which is dangerous to public health,
safety, or welfare. Notice of any such requirement shall be given by registered
mail to the last-known address of the owner or agent.
   (B)   Action upon noncompliance. Upon the failure, neglect or refusal of any
owner or agent so notified to properly dispose of litter, the Health Authority
may, in addition to any other remedy provided by law, cause the litter to be
removed in accordance with, and pursuant to the authority granted by R.S.A.
147:7-b or its statutory successor.
(Ord. passed 4-16-02) Penalty, see § 91.76
§ 91.72 THROWING LITTER FROM VEHICLES PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person in a vehicle shall throw or deposit litter on any street or
other public place or private property.
   (B)   No vehicle shall be driven or moved anywhere within the city unless it
is constructed or loaded to prevent any portion of the load or contents or any
litter from being blown or deposited on any street, alley or other public place
or private property. No vehicle shall be permitted to deposit any litter, mud,
dirt, sticky substance, or foreign matter on any street, alley or other public
place.
(Ord. passed 4-16-02)
Penalty, see § 91.76
§ 91.73 LITTERING IN PARKS.
   No litter shall be deposited on, or thrown to, the ground of any city park.
All litter shall be properly disposed of in a receptacle provided for that
purpose. Should there be no receptacle, or should all of the receptacles be
full, the person responsible for the litter shall deposit it elsewhere.
(Ord. passed 4-16-02)
Penalty, see § 91.76
§ 91.74 LITTERING BODIES OF WATER PROHIBITED.
   No litter shall be deposited in any fountain, pond, lake, stream, marsh, or
other body of water within the city.
(Ord. passed 4-16-02)
Penalty, see § 91.76
§ 91.75 POSTING NOTICES.
   No one shall post or affix any notice, poster, or other paper or device
calculated to attract the attention of the public on any structure, lamppost,
public utility pole, or tree except as permitted or required by law.
(Ord. passed 4-16-02)
Penalty, see § 91.76
§ 91.76 PENALTY.
   Any person, firm, or corporation who violates any provision of this chapter
for which another penalty is not specifically provided shall be subject to a
fine not exceeding the maximum allowed by R.S.A. 47:17 or other law. A separate
offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during which a violation occurs
or continues.
(Ord. passed 4-16-02)
SYRINGE SERVICE PROGRAM AND NEEDLE DISPOSAL
§ 91.80 PURPOSE AND NEED.
   Whereas, the regulation of Syringe Service Programs ("SSPs") and disposal
sites is necessary to ensure that such programs operate in conformity with New
Hampshire law, demonstrate a plan and implementation for injection drug users
to seek treatment for substance abuse, and require the removal of syringe
litter from public and private property; whereas the City of Manchester
Department of Health is attempting to coordinate all local agencies,
organizations, and providers into a comprehensive prevention program to best
facilitate these practices; and whereas the purpose of this subchapter is to
protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public and of the use of the
environment by coordinating syringe service programs and needle disposal sites.
(Ord. passed 10-1-24)
§ 91.81 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words shall have the meanings ascribed to them unless the text
requires or specifies a different meaning:
   CITY. The City of Manchester, New Hampshire.
   DRUG PARAPHERNALIA. All equipment, products, and materials of any kind that
are used or intended for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing,
harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing,
preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing,
concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing into the
human body a scheduled drug in violation of R.S.A. 318-B:1 et seq.
   FACILITY. A building or area within a building, which is a permanent
structure, having one or more floors and a roof, which is used for the housing
or enclosure of persons or property.
   MOBILE OR POP-UP EXCHANGE. Syringe service programs conducted through a
variety of delivery methods which include, but are not limited to: mobile vans,
cars, motorcycles or mopeds, and backpacked pedestrians; these terms also refer
to the delivery of program services in any way other than in a fixed facility.
   NEEDLE DISPOSAL CONTAINER. Any rigid puncture-resistant container used for
the collection of discarded needles or other sharps.
   OPERATOR. The contracted provider of a syringe service program.
   SAFE OR SUPERVISED INJECTION SITES. Medically supervised facilities designed
to provide a hygienic environment in which drug addicts are able to consume
illicit recreational drugs intravenously.
   SYRINGE SERVICE PROGRAM (SSP). A sterile needle and needle exchange program
authorized by R.S.A. 318-B:43.
(Ord. passed 10-1-24)
§ 91.82 LIMITATION ON THE LOCATION OF NEEDLE DISPOSAL CONTAINER SITES.
   Needle disposal containers must not be visible to the general public from
any publicly owned space or right-of-way.
(Ord. passed 10-1-24)
§ 91.83 LIMITATION ON THE LOCATION OF SSP OPERATION.
   (A)   An SSP may operate at a fixed, secure facility approved by the City of
Manchester Department of Health.
   (B)   A mobile or pop-up exchange SSP program proposed to be operated on
public property shall require prior approval of the City of Manchester
Department of Health, the Department of Public Works, Manchester Police
Department, or any department responsible for administering the public property
upon which the program intends to operate.
   (C)   The operation of an SSP, and mobile or pop-up exchange programs in a
city park is prohibited by §
96.06(J). No SSP facility or mobile or pop-up exchange program will be allowed
to operate within 750 feet of any playground, library, or state-licensed
daycare facility; and no SSP facility or mobile or pop-up exchange program
shall be located within a drug-free school zone as defined in R.S.A. 193-B:1,
II. For these purposes, the city will publish, maintain and update an accurate
and up-to-date map identifying the location and address of parks, playgrounds,
libraries, state-licensed daycare facilities and drug free school zones within
the City of Manchester.
   (D)   For the purpose of this section, measurements shall be made in a
straight line, without regard to the intervening structures or objects, from
the nearest portion of the building or structure used as a part of the premises
for a needle exchange program to the nearest property line of a church,
library, daycare center, or to the nearest boundary of a park or playground.
(Ord. passed 10-1-24)
§ 91.84 REGISTRATION INFORMATION TO BE PROVIDED BY THE SSP OPERATOR.
   (A)   An SSP shall file with the City of Manchester Department of Health a
full copy of all the registration materials provided to the New Hampshire
Department of Health and Human Services and reports pursuant to R.S.A. 318-B:
43, II.
   (B)   An SSP shall maintain a list of all staff and volunteers of the SSP.
   (C)   An SSP shall register with the City of Manchester Department of Health
within 30 days of registering with the NH Department of Health and Human
Services.
(Ord. passed 10-1-24)
§ 91.85 DAYS AND HOURS OF OPERATION OF THE SSP.
   (A)   An SSP facility, in coordinating with local agencies pursuant to
R.S.A. 318-B:43, II (b), may propose but shall only operate on days and hours
approved by the City of Manchester Department of Health.
   (B)   An SSP Mobile or Pop-Up Exchange Program, in coordinating with local
agencies pursuant to R.S.A. 318-B:43, II(b), may propose but shall only operate
on days and hours approved by the City of Manchester Department of Health.
   (C)   A request by an SSP to amend the days and hours of its operation may
be submitted to the City of Manchester Department of Health to be considered in
conjunction with the days and hours of operation of other SSPs and mobile or
pop-up exchange programs to minimize the duplication of effort. In the event of
a Public Health Emergency or outbreak of disease, the City of Manchester
Department of Health may adjust days and hours of operation to best address
public health needs.
(Ord. passed 10-1-24)
§ 91.86 SECURITY OF FACILITIES AND EQUIPMENT.
   Criteria for a fixed facility include, but are not limited to:
   (A)   A primary entrance and emergency exit with doors and locking
mechanisms;
   (B)   Needle disposal containers for securing previously used needles and
other paraphernalia;
   (C)   Must be accessible to vehicle and foot traffic, to include legal
parking areas;
   (D)   Must have ADA access for consumers;
   (E)   Must have electricity and running water availability;
   (F)   Must be a commercial type property and not residential;
   (G)   Must be in a well-lighted area for both primary entrance and emergency
exits, for safety issues;
   (H)   The fixed facility will not be used for a "safe or supervised
injection site" of any nature in the city; and
   (I)   The operator shall provide for the safety and security of the site
where needles are exchanged and of any equipment used under the needle exchange
program, and shall establish written security procedures. These security
procedures shall be included in the operator's training and on-boarding process
for all contractors, employees, and volunteers assisting in the needle exchange
program.
(Ord. passed 10-1-24)
§ 91.87 SYRINGE SERVICE PROGRAM OPERATIONS.
   (A)   An SSP shall operate in the city only if registered with the NH
Department of Health and Human Services pursuant to R.S.A. 318-B:43, II.
   (B)   All SSPs shall coordinate with the City of Manchester Department of
Health to create a comprehensive prevention program for people who inject drugs
to minimize duplication of effort. Such coordination shall include following
the City of Manchester Department of Health's direction in response to a public
health emergency or outbreak.
   (C)   An SSP shall supply its list of all staff and volunteers of the SSP to
the City of Manchester Department of Health upon request.
   (D)   An SSP shall operate to an exchange-only basis, whereby an SSP
participant shall receive sterile needles and needle units only by providing
the SSP with a used one. An SSP shall provide only the drug paraphernalia
permitted under R.S.A. 318-B:43.
   (E)   Whenever needles are exchanged or provided, the SSP shall offer
educational materials regarding the transmission of HlV, viral hepatitis, and
other bloodborne diseases, as well as educational materials regarding available
treatment and recovery services.
   (F)   SSPs shall not knowingly distribute syringes to persons less than 18
years of age.
   (G)   SSPs shall comply with all New Hampshire statutes, rules, and
regulations.
   (H)   SSPs shall not accept any form of remuneration from consumers for
delivering exchange service program services.
   (I)   Staff and their representatives shall carry identification and a copy
of their SSP's registration while conducting SSP business.
   (J)   SSPs shall provide consumer enrollment guidelines that include
notifying all consumers regarding rules and laws applicable to SSPs.
(Ord. passed 10-1-24)
§ 91.88 DATA AND REPORTING REQUIREMENTS FOR SYRINGE SERVICE PROGRAM.
   An SSP shall provide to the city on a quarterly basis a copy of the reports
submitted to the State pursuant to R.S.A. 318-B:43, II(f), and shall provide
additional data by agreement. No personal identifying information of an SSP
participant shall be submitted for any purpose.
(Ord. passed 10-1-24)
§ 91.89 LAWFUL PARTICIPATION
   Pursuant to R.S.A. 318-B:44 it is an affirmative defense, to prosecution for
possession of a hypodermic syringe or needle, as provided in R.S.A. 626:7, that
the item was obtained through participation in a syringe service program.
Nothing in that section shall be construed as an affirmative defense for any
offense other than as set forth under R.S.A. 318-B:26, Il(f). SSPs shall comply
with all applicable laws.
(Ord. passed 10-1-24)
§ 91.90 ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES.
   (A)   This subchapter shall be enforced by City of Manchester Department of
Health and the Department of Public Works. Such enforcement authority is in
addition to, and shall not restrict, the authority currently possessed by any
City Department including, but not limited to, the Manchester Police Department
to enforce the requirements of this subchapter.
   (B)   Anyone found guilty of violating any provision of this subchapter
shall be subject to a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $1,000. Each day
such a violation occurs shall constitute a new and separate offense.
(Ord. passed 10-1-24)
CHAPTER 92: FIRE PREVENTION
Section
General Provisions
   
92.00   Fire Department established
   
92.01   Definition
   
92.02   Modification
   
92.03   Interference with equipment
   
92.04   Collection of fees
   
92.05   Adoption of Fire Prevention Code
   
92.06   Application for permit
   
92.07   Emergency fire lanes
   
92.08   Inspector of Petroleum; appointment
   
92.09   Fees
   
92.10   Unvented space heaters
Fire Alarms
   
92.20   Alarm under control of Chief of Fire Department
   
92.21   Maintenance of alarm system
   
92.22   Alarm installation; inspections
   
92.23   Damaging or interfering with fire alarm system
   
92.24   Tampering with alarm boxes
   
92.25   Annual fees
   
92.26   False alarm charges
   
92.27   Rules and regulations
   
92.28   Liability limited
Emergency Medical Service
   
92.40   Provision of emergency medical service
   
92.41   Definitions
   
92.42   EMS communications
   
92.43   Ambulance transportation services
   
92.44   Command at scene of medical emergencies
   
92.45   Air medical services
   
92.46   Laws and regulations of the EMS
   
92.47   Fees
   
92.48   EMS in mass casualty
   
92.49   Reimbursement for services
Rescue Services
   
92.60   Provision for rescue services
   
92.61   Definitions
   
92.62   Fees for technical rescue services
   
92.63   Reimbursement for rescue services
Hazardous Materials
   
92.70   Policy
   
92.71   Definitions
   
92.72   Notification; cleanup required
   
92.73   Cost recovery
   
92.74   Inspection fees
Emergency Management
   
92.80   Purpose
   
92.81   Office established
   
92.82   Director appointed
   
92.83   Powers and duties
 
   
92.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 92.00 FIRE DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED.
   (A)   Pursuant to
Charter § 3.02 there is established a Fire Department.
   (B)   Department head. The department head shall be the Fire Chief who shall
be appointed as provided by
Charter § 3.03.
   (C)   Composition. The Fire Department shall also include a Fire Commission
consisting of five members who shall be appointed as provided by
Charter § 3.14, and the commission shall have those duties and responsibilities
as are assigned by the Charter.
   (D)   Duties. The Fire Department shall be responsible for providing
properly trained personnel for, and high-quality emergency response to, any
situation which threatens the life, safety and well-being of people and
property in the city including, but not limited to, fires, hazardous materials
incidents, rescue and for emergency medical incidents and disasters. The Fire
Department shall also be responsible for providing current information on
safety and fire prevention in the schools, workplace and for the general
citizenry and for all municipal workers, communications systems city-wide and
the municipal cable plant and shall perform such other duties as are prescribed
by federal, state and local law.
(Ord. passed 11-4-98)
§ 92.01 DEFINITION.
   Wherever the word MUNICIPALITY is used in the Fire Prevention Code adopted
by
§ 92.05 of this chapter, it shall be held to mean the City of Manchester.
(Ord. passed 2-7-95)
§ 92.02 MODIFICATION.
   The Chief of the Fire Department or his designee shall have power to modify
any of the provisions of the Fire Prevention Code adopted by
§ 92.05 of this chapter upon application in writing by the owner or lessee, or
his duly authorized agent, when there are practical difficulties in the way of
carrying out the strict letter of the code, provided that the spirit of the
code shall be observed, public safety secured, and substantial justice done.
The particulars of such modification, when granted or allowed, and the decision
of the Chief of the Fire Department thereon shall be entered upon the records
of the Department and a signed copy shall be furnished the applicant.
(Ord. passed 2-7-95)
§ 92.03 INTERFERENCE WITH EQUIPMENT.
   No person shall wantonly or knowingly injure any of the fire apparatus owned
by the city or provided for the extinguishment of fire, or shall ride or drive
any vehicle over or across any hose or other apparatus in use at any fire or
upon any alarm of fire, or shall place any vehicle or allow any vehicle in
their charge to stand within 300 feet of any piece of fire apparatus while it
is in service, or shall manage or control any vehicle in his charge so that it
shall follow any moving piece of fire apparatus while in service at a distance
of less than 300 feet, or in such manner as in any way to interfere with its
speed or freedom of movement. The Fire Prevention Code adopted by
§ 92.05 of this chapter shall be enforced by the Chief of the Fire Department.
(Ord. passed 2-7-95)
Penalty, see § 92.99
§ 92.04 COLLECTION OF FEES.
   (A)   The Chief of the Fire Department or his designee shall be empowered to
impose a late filing penalty due to the late filing of any business plan,
certification, or inventory. The amount of such penalty shall be 25% of the fee
for such filing. Nonpayment of the fee and penalty shall incur interest on the
amount of the billing starting 30 days after the date issued.
   (B)   If fees imposed under this chapter have not been paid within 120
calendar days, the Chief of the Fire Department shall be empowered to impose
liens and/or revoke permits or disconnect fire alarm service which shall result
in the revocation of the certificate of occupancy for the building.
(Ord. passed 2-7-95)
§ 92.05 ADOPTION OF FIRE PREVENTION CODE.
   A certain document, three copies of each which are on file in the office of
the City Clerk of the City of Manchester, being marked and designated as the
International Fire Code, 2006 Edition, including Appendix Chapters B, C, D, F,
and G, (see International Fire Code, 2006 Edition § 101.2.1), as published by
the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the code of the
City of Manchester for regulating and governing the safeguarding of life and
property from fire and explosion hazards arising from the storage, handling and
use of hazardous substances, materials and devices, and from conditions
hazardous to life or property in the occupancy of buildings and premises in the
City of Manchester and provided for the issuance of permits for hazardous uses
or operations; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions and
terms of such International Fire Code, 2006 Edition, published by the
International Code Council, on file in the office of the City Clerk and hereby
referred to, adopted and made part hereof as if fully set out in this chapter,
with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes prescribed in § 2 of the
ordinance adopted August 5, 2008.
(Ord. passed 9-4-01; Am. Ord. passed 8-5-08)
§ 92.06 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
   All permits required by the fire code adopted by § 92.05 shall be written
permits. All permits must be obtained from the Fire Prevention Bureau. All
permits shall specify the nature of the proposed activities and conditions or
requirements attached thereto. The review of all life safety code plans shall
be performed by the Fire Prevention Bureau. All inspections required by the
Department of Health and Welfare shall be requested from the Fire Prevention
Bureau, and a life safety compliance report will be completed by the Fire
Inspector.
(Ord. passed 2-7-95)
§ 92.07 EMERGENCY FIRE LANES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to park a motor vehicle on or otherwise obstruct,
at any time, a clearly designated fire lane.
   (B)   The marking of fire lanes on private property, devoted to public use,
shall be approved by the Chief of the Fire Prevention Bureau or his designee.
   (C)   Any motor vehicle parked in violation of division (A) of this section
may be towed by an agent either of the Police Department or of the Fire
Department, or by an independent contractor engaged by the Police Department or
the Fire Department if directed to do so by an agent either of the Police
Department or of the Fire Department. Any vehicle towed shall be stored and
released to the owner only upon payment of the cost of towing.
(Ord. passed 6-19-84; Am. Ord. passed 4-16-85; Am. Ord. passed 6-4-85; Am. Ord.
passed 5-3-88; Am. Ord. passed 2-7-95)
Penalty, see § 92.99
Cross-reference:
   
Traffic code, see Title VII
§ 92.08 INSPECTOR OF PETROLEUM; APPOINTMENT.
   (A)   The Board of Mayor and Alderman shall biennially, in the month of
January, elect one Inspector of Petroleum.
   (B)   The duties of the Inspector of Petroleum shall be the same as is
prescribed for the duties of such officers in R.S.A. Ch. 339.
   (C)   The Inspector of Petroleum shall receive, as compensation for his
services, the fee of $2.50 for each tank car of petroleum or its products by
him inspected, and the same shall be paid by the persons requiring his
services.
(Ord. passed 2-7-95)
§ 92.09 FEES.
   (A)   The review of any National Fire Protection Association Life Safety
Code 101 plan shall be conducted by the Fire Department at a fee of $50 per
hour required with the minimum fee being $50.
   (B)   An application for any permit to be issued by the Fire Department or
the request of a life safety compliance report, shall be accompanied by a fee
of $100. Permits are renewable every year. Permits are not transferable.
   (C)   An application for any permit to be issued by the Fire Department or
the request of a life safety compliance report for day care providers caring
for four to 12 children, shall be accompanied by a fee of $25. Permits are
renewable every three years, and are not transferable.
   (D)   The review of a fire safety site plan shall be performed by the Fire
Department at a charge of $50 per hour required with the minimum fee being $50.
   (E)   The review of a special hazards system plan shall be performed by the
Fire Department at a charge of $1 per device with a minimum fee being $50.
   (F)   Exemption. Inspections relating to the licensing of foster homes for
the state shall be exempt from the fees.
   (G)   Commercial occupancies. All commercial occupancies located in the city
shall be inspected annually to insure compliance with the fire code adopted by
§ 92.05 and NFPA Life Safety Code #101. Inspections shall be performed by Fire
Department personnel on an annual basis. There shall be no charge for this
inspection.
   (H)   A site inspection for a recreational fire permit (Class I and Class II
fires only) shall be performed by the Fire Department at a charge of $50.
Permits are renewable every year.
   (I)   An application for a welding and/or hot work permit in an occupied
building to be issued by the Fire Department shall be accompanied by a fee of
$25.
(Ord. passed 6-4-85; Am. Ord. passed 5-16-89; Am. Ord. passed 5-22-90; Am. Ord.
passed 9-4-91; Am. Ord. passed 6-4-91; Am. Ord. passed 2-7-95; Am. Ord. passed
9-5-95; Am. Ord. passed 7-5-11; Am. Ord. passed 7-5-11)
Penalty, see § 92.99
§ 92.10 UNVENTED SPACE HEATERS.
   (A)   Purpose. This section is enacted to promote the health, safety, and
general welfare of the community by regulating the sale, distribution, and use
of unvented space heaters.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      OCCUPIED STRUCTURE. Any structure, vehicle, boat, or place adapted for
overnight accommodation of persons, or for carrying on a business therein,
whether or not a person is actually present and includes structures appurtenant
to occupied structures and seasonal dwellings whether vacant or occupied.
      UNVENTED SPACE HEATERS. Any heating appliance, either wick, wickless, or
pot burner type, which uses oil, gas, or kerosene for fuel, is either
stationary or portable, and the products of combustion of which are not
directly conducted to the outside of the building via chimney connect or pipe.
   (C)   Use.
      (1)   No unvented space heater shall be installed or used in an occupied
structure.
      (2)   Unvented space heaters may be installed and used in an unoccupied
structure only by permit.
   (D)   Permit required; fee. No unvented space heater shall be sold,
distributed, or used in the city without first obtaining a permit therefore
from the Chief of the Fire Department or his designee. The fee for each permit
to use an unvented space heater in an unoccupied structure shall be $2.
   (E)   Exceptions. Nothing in this section shall prevent the sale,
installation, or use of the following heaters:
      (1)   The flameless catalyst type heaters.
      (2)   Unvented space heaters used as antiques or curios, provided they
are rendered inoperative.
      (3)   The salamander-type heaters, provided that they are used solely in
accordance with the standards contained in Chapter 4-4.7 of the National Fire
Protection Association, Number 31.
      (4)   The salamander-type heaters for temporary use in an unoccupied
structure.
(Ord. passed 4-5-83; Am. Ord. passed 2-7-95)
Penalty, see § 92.99
FIRE ALARMS
§ 92.20 ALARM UNDER CONTROL OF CHIEF OF FIRE DEPARTMENT.
   The fire alarm system in the city shall be considered as an apparatus
connected with the Fire Department, and shall be under the full control of the
Chief of the Fire Department or his designee as the apparatus commonly used by
the Fire Department for the extinguishment of fires in the city.
(Ord. passed 2-7-95)
Cross-reference:
   
Alarms, see Ch. 93
§ 92.21 MAINTENANCE OF ALARM SYSTEM.
   The Chief of the Fire Department shall have authority to appoint a Fire
Communications Chief whose duty it shall be, under the direction and control of
the Chief of the Fire Department, to keep the fire alarm system, in good
condition, ready for use at any time.
(Ord. passed 2-7-95)
Penalty, see § 92.99
§ 92.22 ALARM INSTALLATION; INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   The review of an alarm system plan shall be performed by the Fire
Department at a charge of $1 per device with the minimum fee being $50.
   (B)   The review of a sprinkler system plan shall be performed by the Fire
Department at a charge of $1 per device with a minimum fee being $50.
   (C)   The initial inspection of an installed fire alarm system shall be
performed by the Fire Department at a charge of $100 per person per hour
required with the minimum fee being $100.
   (D)   Reinspections of installed alarm systems shall be billed at a rate of
$150 per person per hour with a minimum charge of $300.
(Ord. passed 2-7-95; Am. Ord. passed 4-16-02; Am. Ord. passed 5-4-10)
§ 92.23 DAMAGING OR INTERFERING WITH FIRE ALARM SYSTEM.
   No person shall willfully deface, injure, or destroy the fire alarm system
or any portion thereof, or willfully interfere with or do anything to prevent
or delay the proper and timely use thereof.
(Ord. passed 2-7-95)
Penalty, see § 92.99
§ 92.24 TAMPERING WITH ALARM BOXES.
   No person shall open any alarm box connected with the fire alarm system
except by the authority of the Chief of the Fire Department. Those individuals
that have been authorized under the Fire Department Listed Agent Program, will
be charged an initial fee of $50 and an annual renewal fee of $50. This renewal
will take effect on January 1 of each year.
(Ord. passed 2-7-95; Am. Ord. passed 4-6-04; Am. Ord. passed 12-1-15) Penalty,
see §
92.99
§ 92.25 ANNUAL FEES.
   (A)   All wireless master fire alarm box owners shall pay an annual user fee
for each calendar year in the amount of $540. New systems installed shall be
charged a pro rata amount of $45 per month or part of a month until December 31
of the installation year after which the annual fee will take effect on January
1. Each additional building monitored by a radio master box shall be charged an
annual fee of $100 per building per calendar year. New systems shall be charged
a pro-rata amount of $25 per quarter until December 31 of the installation year
after which the annual fee will take effect on January 1.
   (B)   All existing Gamewell (wire) Master Fire Alarm Box owners shall pay an
annual user fee of $1,080 for the calendar year 2025. This user fee shall
increase to $2,500 for calendar year 2026, $5,000 for calendar year 2027 and
shall remain in effect until which time all wired master boxes have been
removed from service.
   (C)   All telephone dialer alarm systems connected to the Fire Department
shall pay an annual fee in each calendar year of $25 per year. New systems
installed shall be charged a pro rata amount of $6.25 for each quarter year
until December 31 of the installation year after which the annual fee will take
effect on January 1.
   (D)   All properties connected directly to the Fire Department through an
Underwriters Laboratory approved central station shall pay the city an initial
connection fee of $100 and an annual monitoring fee of $100. New systems
connected shall pay the initial fee plus a pro rata amount of $8.33 for each
month remaining in the calendar year until the following January 1, at which
time, they shall pay the full annual fee. All initial and annual fees shall be
paid to the city by the central fire station providing service to the property.
The central station shall be allowed to charge an administrative fee in excess
of the established initial and annual fees by the central station in order to
cover expenses incurred in the administration of this requirement.
   (E)   The Chief of the Fire Department shall issue a permit to approved
central stations for the monitoring of fire alarm systems. Permits will be
issued annually at the rate of $1,000.
(Ord. passed 2-7-95; Am. Ord. passed 11-5-03; Am. Ord. passed 5-4-10; Am. Ord.
passed 12-1-15; Am. Ord. passed 12-3-19; Am. Ord. passed 3-4-25)
§ 92.26 FALSE ALARM CHARGES.
   Any property owner having a fire alarm system on his or its premises and
installed to warn occupants of fire, which causes a response by the Fire
Department, shall pay the city a charge for false alarms to which the Fire
Department responds in each calendar year as follows:
   (A)   The first five false alarms in excess of the limit, the amount of $100
per alarm.
   (B)   All false alarms in excess of five above the limit, the amount of $200
per alarm.
   (C)   The false alarm limits shall be based on the number of alarm-
initiating devices connected to the fire alarm system as follows:
             Limit of False
Devices         Alarms Per Year
1 - 125               5
126 - 250            10
Over 250            15
(Ord. passed 2-7-95)
§ 92.27 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The Fire Communications Chief, under the direction of the Chief of the Fire
Department shall maintain the “Manchester Fire Department Rules and Regulations
for Fire Alarm Systems” based on the current National Fire Protection
Association (NFPA) Codes. Such rules and regulations shall govern the
installation, maintenance, and operation of all fire alarm systems.
(Ord. passed 2-7-95)
§ 92.28 LIABILITY LIMITED.
   The Fire Department of the city shall take every reasonable precaution to
assure that the alarm signals and alarm messages received by the Fire
Department are given appropriate attention and are acted upon with dispatch.
Nevertheless, the Fire Department shall not be liable for any defects in
operation of alarm devices, nor for the failure or neglect of any person in
connection with the installation and operation of alarm signals and prerecorded
alarm messages, or the receipt or relaying of such signals and messages. In the
event that the Fire Department finds it necessary to disconnect an alarm
device, the Fire Department shall incur no liability by such action.
(Ord. passed 2-7-95)
EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICE
§ 92.40 PROVISION OF EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICE.
   The City Fire Department under the supervision of the Chief of the Fire
Department shall provide by contract or otherwise medical services within the
city. The medical services shall be provided in life-threatening, emergency and
non-emergency situations which require the assessment, treatment, and
transportation of the sick and injured.
(Ord. passed 2-7-95)
§ 92.41 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES (EMS). The complete chain of human and physical
resources that provide patient care in cases of sudden illness or injury.
   MEDICAL SERVICES. The pre-hospital assessment and treatment of the sick and
injured patient; also the care of patients requiring nonemergency and transfer
services between healthcare facilities.
   OTHER HEALTHCARE FACILITIES. Includes hospitals, extended nursing care,
hospital satellite, and independent medical care facilities.
   PRE-ARRIVAL INSTRUCTION. A very basic, common sense approach to offering the
caller for emergency medical services the instructions of what to do prior to
the arrival of pre-hospital assistance.
   TRIAGING. To assign victims of a mass casualty incident a priority for care
and transportation based upon degree of illness or injury and an individual's
relative salvageability in a given situation.
(Ord. passed 2-7-95)
§ 92.42 EMS COMMUNICATIONS.
   The Fire Department may provide emergency medical services where it finds it
appropriate to act as first responder. The Fire Department personnel may
perform the basic skills necessary to assess, stabilize, and treat the injuries
and medical conditions of any person who is in need of emergency care.
(Ord. passed 2-7-95)
§ 92.43 AMBULANCE TRANSPORTATION SERVICES.
   The Fire Department shall provide by contract or otherwise ambulance
transportation services within the city. The services shall be provided in
emergency, nonemergency, and transfer incidents which require the
transportation of persons in need of transportation to hospitals and other
healthcare facilities. Transportation may also occur interfacility.
(Ord. passed 2-7-95)
§ 92.44 COMMAND AT SCENE OF MEDICAL EMERGENCIES.
   The Fire Department shall institute the incident command system at the scene
of every emergency medical incident. The incident commander may have
responsibility for assuming an effective position, transmitting a brief initial
radio report, evaluation of the situation, the safety of personnel,
coordination of services, requests for additional resources. A continuous
review and evaluation of efforts must be conducted.
(Ord. passed 2-7-95)
§ 92.45 AIR MEDICAL SERVICES.
   The Fire Department shall work with area air medical services to establish
operating procedures for delivery of service within the city limits.
(Ord. passed 2-7-95)
§ 92.46 LAWS AND REGULATIONS OF THE EMS.
   The Fire Department shall abide by the rules, regulations, and
administrative guidelines set forth in RAS 151-B, He-P 1200 and He-P 1210
governing emergency medical services.
(Ord. passed 2-7-95)
Penalty, see § 92.99
§ 92.47 FEES.
   The Board of Mayor and Aldermen may establish a fee structure for the
provision of emergency medical services. These fees shall be charged for all
services requiring a response from the Department. Services include but are not
limited to communications, dispatching, first responder program, and ambulance
transportation.
(Ord. passed 2-7-95)
§ 92.48 EMS IN MASS CASUALTY.
   The Fire Department shall develop and maintain the policies and procedures
to provide effective medical care and resources in the event of a mass casualty
disaster.
(Ord. passed 2-7-95)
§ 92.49 REIMBURSEMENT FOR SERVICES.
   It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city that recovery of expenses
incurred by the Fire Department shall be the responsibility of the persons
which result in the Department's response. The persons responsible for the
response shall be liable if, in the judgment of the court, the individual
negligently operated a motor vehicle, boat OHRV, or aircraft, while under the
influence of an alcoholic beverage or controlled substance; takes another
person hostage, or threatens to harm self or another; or recklessly or
intentionally creates a situation requiring a response from the Fire
Department.
(Ord. passed 2-7-95)
RESCUE SERVICES
§ 92.60 PROVISION FOR RESCUE SERVICES.
   The City Fire Department under the supervision of the Chief of the Fire
Department may provide technical rescue services within the city.
(Ord. passed 2-7-95)
§ 92.61 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   OHRV. Off-highway recreational vehicle.
   RESCUE. The saving of a life from fire or accident; removing a victim from
an untenable or unhealthy atmosphere or situation.
   TECHNICAL RESCUE. Any rescue requiring the specialized knowledge, skill, and
equipment to complete.
(Ord. passed 2-7-95)
§ 92.62 FEES FOR TECHNICAL RESCUE SERVICES.
   There shall be a fee of $250 per hour or any portion thereof for any
technical rescue. Costs include but are not limited to labor and materials.
(Ord. passed 2-7-95)
§ 92.63 REIMBURSEMENT FOR RESCUE SERVICES.
   It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city that recovery of expenses
incurred by the Fire Department shall be the responsibility of the persons
which result in the Department's response. The persons responsible for the
response shall be liable if, in the judgment of the court, the individual
negligently operated a motor vehicle, boat OHRV, or aircraft while under the
influence of an alcoholic beverage or controlled substance; takes another
persons hostage or threatens to harm self or another; or recklessly or
intentionally creates a situation requiring a response from the Fire
Department.
(Ord. passed 2-7-95)
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
§ 92.70 POLICY.
   It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city that all costs incurred
by the city for the emergency response, remediation, and cleanup of any release
of a hazardous materials shall be borne by the responsible party.
(Ord. passed 2-7-95)
§ 92.71 DEFINITIONS. 
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CLEANUP. The control, containment, removal, or neutralization of any
released hazardous material for the purpose of promoting or protecting public
health or safety.
   HAZARDOUS MATERIAL. Any substance or material in such quantity and form
which may pose a risk to health and safety or property, which may include but
is not limited to, explosives, radioactive materials, etiologic agents,
biological material, flammable liquids or solids, combustible liquids or
solids, poisons, oxidizing or corrosive materials, and compressed gasses which
are listed by the Materials Transportation Bureau of the United States
Department of Transportation in Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations and
any amendment thereto.
   RELEASE. The uncontrolled, improper or unsafe release, discharge, or escape
of any hazardous material to any place or in any manner which poses an actual
or potential threat to any person, property, wildlife, or the environment.
   RESPONSIBLE PARTY. Any individual, partnership, corporation, association,
trust, or other entity partially or solely responsible for the release of any
hazardous material within the city.
(Ord. passed 2-7-95)
§ 92.72 NOTIFICATION; CLEANUP REQUIRED.
   The Fire Department shall immediately be notified of any release of any
hazardous material within the city. At the same time, the responsible party or
parties shall take all proper measures reasonably necessary and available to
stop or mitigate the release and clean up the affected area.
(Ord. passed 2-7-95)
Penalty, see § 92.99
§ 92.73 COST RECOVERY.
   (A)   Upon the completion of any cleanup in which any city resources are
used, all costs of the cleanup shall be itemized by each city department
involved including the Fire Department. Such costs shall include, but are not
limited to, the cost of cleaning, repair, and restoration or replacement of any
city material or equipment used in the cleanup, the labor costs incurred by
city departments participating in the remediation effort and ensuing cleanup,
the costs of any illness or injury sustained by any city employee who
participated in the remediation effort and cleanup, and the costs of all
contracted services utilized in the cleanup.
   (B)   Upon receipt of these itemizations (including its own), but in no
event later than 60 days from the date of the release, the Fire Department
shall bill the full costs of the cleanup to the responsible party or parties.
The bill shall include a description of the costs incurred. Bills for less than
the full amount of these costs shall be allowed provided that the responsible
party is advised of the reason therefore and the approximate date by which it
can expect to receive a complete bill.
   (C)   Each responsible party shall be jointly and severally liable to the
city for the costs of the cleanup for which they are responsible. Such costs
may be collected by any lawful means including, but not limited to, appropriate
court proceedings. All funds received from responsible parties shall be
forwarded to the Finance Officer for deposit in the city treasury.
   (D)   Any and all costs recovered from a responsible party shall be separate
from and in addition to any penalty or fine that may be assessed for any
violation of any provision of this subchapter.
(Ord. passed 2-7-95)
§ 92.74 INSPECTION FEES.
   (A)   All businesses required to possess a hazardous materials user permit
shall be subject to annual inspections by the City Fire Department. The cost of
these inspections shall be $100 for the first hour, and $100 for every hour
thereafter. The minimum fee for hazardous materials inspections shall be $100.
   (B)   All businesses located within the city that are required by federal
law to comply with SARA 1986 reporting regulations shall acquire a hazardous
materials user permit from the Fire Department. Under the terms of this permit,
businesses will be required to file a business plan with the Fire Department
detailing the principals of their respective organizations,
disclose insurance carriers, and file a contingency plan with a facility map
and a city approved remediation contractor. All documents germane to hazardous
materials shall be maintained and stored in a Knox locker, located in the
primary entrance to the facility. The fee for the hazardous materials user
permit for each motor vehicle fueling stations shall be set at $100. The fee
for the hazardous materials user permit for all other business will be computed
as follows:
      (1)   Range determination: For the purposes of this subchapter, each
business in the city which is required to have a hazardous materials user
permit as detailed in division (A) of this section shall be assigned a “range”
consisting of a “range number” and a “range letter” determined as follows:
         (a)   Range number. The range number of a business shall be based on
the maximum quantity of all hazardous materials present on the business
premises at any one time in accordance with the following schedule:
 
             Total Quantities
Number Range Gasses         Liquids        Solids
             (cubic feet)   (gallons)      (pounds)
1            200 - 1,000    55 - 1,000     500 - 1,000
2            1,001 - 5,000  1,001 - 5,000  1,001 - 5,000
3            5,001 - 10,000 5,001 - 10,000 5,001 - 10,000
4            Over 10,000    Over 10,000    Over 10,000
 
         (b)   Range letter. The range letter of a business shall be based on
the total number of all hazardous materials listed on the inventory of the
business which is submitted to the city in accordance with the following
schedule:
               Total Number
      Letter Range      of Materials
         A      1 - 2
         B      3 - 5
         C      6 - 9
         D      10 - 20
         E      Over 20
         (c)   The range numbers of gasses, solids and liquids on the business
premises, shall be computed separately and the highest range number in any of
the three categories shall be the range number of the business.
      (2)   Fee schedule.
      1-A   $160   2-A   $210   3-A   $320   4-A   $480
      1-B    190   2-B    240   3-B    350   4-B    500
      1-C    215   2-C    270   3-C    380   4-C    550
      1-D    325   2-D    380   3-D    490   4-D    650
      1-E    540   2-E    600   3-E    700   4-E    850
(Ord. passed 2-7-95)
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
§ 92.80 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose of this section is to establish an Office of Emergency
Management to ensure that the city is adequately prepared to cope with an
occurrence of disaster resulting from fire, flood, hurricane, earthquake, or
other natural, technological or man-made causes in order to preserve the lives
of the property of the people.
   (B)   The Office of Emergency Management shall be the coordinating agency
for all activity in connection with emergency planning; it will be the
instrument through which the community officials may exercise the authority and
discharge the responsibilities vested in them in R.S.A. Chapter 107-C,
Emergency Management Act, as amended, and this section.
('71 Code, § 9-60) (Ord. passed 9-3-96)
§ 92.81 OFFICE ESTABLISHED.
   An Office of Emergency Management is hereby established under the management
of the Director of Emergency Management.
('71 Code, § 9-61) (Ord. passed 9-3-96)
§ 92.82 DIRECTOR APPOINTED.
   The Board of Mayor and Aldermen shall appoint a Director of Emergency
Management who shall serve at the pleasure of the Board.
('71 Code, § 9-62) (Ord. passed 9-3-96)
§ 92.83 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Director of Emergency Management shall, subject to the direction and
control of the Board of Mayor and Aldermen, exercise those powers and duties as
set forth in R.S.A. Chapter 107-C, Emergency Management Act.
('71 Code, § 9-63) (Ord. passed 9-3-96)
§ 92.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter for which no
penalty is otherwise provided shall be subject to the penalty set forth in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation responsible for a violation of § 92.07
of this chapter shall be subject to a notice of violation and penalty as
provided in an Ordinance Regulating Traffic upon the Public Streets of the city
and any other penalty provided by law. (Ord. passed 2-7-95)
CHAPTER 93: ALARMS
Section
   
93.01   Purpose
   
93.02   Definitions
   
93.03   Permit required; application; fee
   
93.04   Alarm systems in apartment complexes
   
93.05   Permit duration; renewal
   
93.06   Property alarm systems operation and maintenance
   
93.07   Retention of alarm company; approval of chief of police required
   
93.08   Indirect alarm reporting
   
93.09   Direct alarm reporting
   
93.10   Automatic telephone dialing alarm systems prohibited
   
93.11   Alarm system operating instructions
   
93.12   Alarm dispatch records
   
93.13   System performance reviews
   
93.14   False alarm notification
   
93.15   Revocation or loss of alarm permit
   
93.16   Appeal from denial or revocation
   
93.17   Reinstatement of permit
   
93.18   Protection of certain businesses
   
93.19   Liability of city limited
§ 93.01 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to encourage security alarm users and
alarm businesses (sales, installation, customer service, and/or monitoring) to
maintain the operational reliability and the proper use of alarm systems in
limiting unnecessary police emergency responses to false alarms.
   (B)   This chapter governs burglary, robbery, and panic systems, requires
permits, establishes fees, provides for penalties for violations, establishes a
system of administration, and sets conditions for suspension or loss of permit.
(Ord. passed 6-27-94)
§ 93.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALARM ADMINISTRATOR. A person or persons designated by the Chief to
administer, control and review alarm application, permits, and false alarm
notifications.
   ALARM NOTIFICATION. A notification intended to summon the police, which is
designed either to be initiated purposely by a person or by an alarm system
that responds to a stimulus characteristic of unauthorized intrusion. Multiple
false alarm notifications in a 24-hour period of time shall be counted as only
one F.A.N., when documentation is provided by the permit holder's alarm
maintenance company that the alarm notifications were not as a cause of
operator error.
   ALARM REVIEW BOARD. Consists of one representative of the Police Department,
two professionals from the alarm industry as well as two members of the public
at large, appointed by the Mayor.
   ALARM SITE. A single premise or location served by an alarm system or
systems.
   ALARM SYSTEM. A device or system that emits, transmits, or relays a signal
intended to summon, or that would reasonably be expected to summon police
services of the city, including but not limited to local alarms. ALARM SYSTEM
does not include:
      (1)   An alarm installed on a vehicle unless the vehicle is permanently
located at a site.
      (2)   An alarm designed to alert only the inhabitants of a premises that
does not have a local alarm.
      (3)   Fire alarms.
   AUTOMATIC TELEPHONE DIALING ALARM SYSTEM. Any automatic dialing device or an
automatic telephone dialing alarm system shall include any system which, upon
being activated, automatically transmits by telephone or telephone line to the
Police Department a recorded message or code signal indicating a need for
emergency response; or a system which, upon activation, connects to an
answering service whose function it is to transmit to the Police Department
dispatcher a need for emergency response.
   CHIEF. The Chief of Police or an authorized representative.
   FALSE ALARM NOTIFICATION (FAN). An alarm notification to the Police
Department, when the responding officer finds no evidence of a criminal offense
or attempted criminal offense. Excluded from this definition are:
      (1)   Alarms occurring during electrical storms, hurricanes, tornados,
blizzards, and acts of God.
      (2)   The intermittent disruption or disruption of the telephone circuits
beyond the control of the alarm company and/or alarm user.
      (3)   Electrical power disruption or failure.
      (4)   Alarms caused by a failure of the equipment at the communications
center.
      (5)   Other extraordinary circumstances not reasonably subject to
contract by the permit holder.
   FISCAL YEAR. The period of July 1 through June 30.
   LOCAL ALARM. An alarm system that emits a signal at an alarm site that is
audible from the exterior of a structure.
   PERMIT HOLDER. The person designated in the application as required in §
93.03 of this chapter who is responsible for responding to alarms and giving
access to the site, and who is responsible for proper maintenance and operation
of the alarm system and payment of fees.
   PERSON. An individual, corporation, partnership, association, organization
or similar entity.
(Ord. passed 6-27-94)
§ 93.03 PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATION; FEE.
   (A)   A person commits an offense if he operates or causes to be operated an
alarm system without a valid permit issued by the Chief. A separate permit is
required for each alarm system. (Optional medical or duress (panic) activation
devices whether stationary or portable will be considered as part of a burglary
system, and will be covered under a burglary permit which is in good standing.)
   (B)   Upon receipt of a completed application form and a nonrefundable
permit fee of $30 for a new permit and $30 for annual permit renewal.
      (1)   Any alarm owned, operated, or leased by any federal, state, county
or local government agency a permit may be obtained without the payment of a
fee.
      (2)   If a residential alarm user is over the age of 65 and is the
primary resident of the dwelling and if no business is conducted in the
residence, a user's permit may be obtained without the payment of a fee.
   (C)   The Chief shall issue an alarm permit to an applicant unless the
applicant has:
      (1)   Failed to pay the fee assessed under division (B) of this section.
      (2)   Had an alarm permit for the alarm site revoked, and the violation
causing the revocation has not been corrected.
   (D)   Each permit applicant must include the following information:
      (1)   The name, address, and telephone numbers of the person who will be
the permit holder and be responsible for the proper maintenance and operation
of the alarm system and payment of fees assessed under this chapter.
      (2)   The classification of the alarm site as residential, commercial, or
apartment.
      (3)   For each alarm system located at the alarm site, the purpose of the
alarm system (that is, burglary or robbery).
      (4)   The date of installation or maintenance of the alarm system,
whichever is applicable.
      (5)   Other information required by the Chief that is necessary for the
enforcement of this chapter.
   (E)   Any false statement of a material matter made by an application for
the purpose of obtaining an alarm permit shall be sufficient cause for refusal
to issue a permit.
   (F)   An alarm permit cannot be transferred to another person. A permit
holder shall inform the Chief of any change that alters any information listed
on the permit application within five business days. No fee will be assessed
for such changes.
   (G)   All fees owed by an applicant must be paid before a permit may be
issued or renewed.
(Ord. passed 6-27-94; Am. Ord. passed 6-1-04; Am. Ord. passed 5-4-10)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 93.04 ALARM SYSTEMS IN APARTMENT COMPLEXES.
   (A)   The owner or property manager of an apartment complex shall obtain a
master alarm permit from the Chief if any alarm system is operated in any
residential unit on the premises, when the alarm system is furnished by the
apartment complex owner as an amenity.
   (B)   A tenant of an apartment complex shall also obtain an alarm permit
from the Chief before operating or causing the operation of an alarm system in
the tenant's residential unit.
   (C)   For purposes of enforcing this chapter against an individual
residential unit, the alarm permit of the tenant supersedes the master alarm
permit of the apartment complex; and, the tenant is responsible for false alarm
notifications emitted from the alarm system in the tenant's residential unit.
The master alarm permit holder is responsible for false alarm notifications
emitted from unoccupied residential units.
   (D)   The owner or property manager of an apartment complex shall obtain a
separate alarm permit for any alarm system operated in a nonresidential area of
the apartment complex, including, but not limited to common tenant areas and
office, storage, and equipment areas.
(Ord. passed 6-27-94)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 93.05 PERMIT DURATION; RENEWAL.
   A permit expires annually on June 30, and must be renewed for a new one year
period by submitting an updated application and a permit renewal fee to the
Chief. It is the responsibility of the permit holder to submit an application
prior to the permit expiration date. Permits may be renewed anytime during the
month of June for the upcoming year. Failure to renew will be classified as use
of a nonpermitted alarm system and citations and penalties shall be assessed
without waiver. Original permits issued between April 1 and June 30 of each
year will be valid until June 30 of the following year.
(Ord. passed 6-27-94)
§ 93.06 PROPERTY ALARM SYSTEMS OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   A permit holder or person in control of an alarm system shall:
      (1)   Maintain the premises and the alarm system in a manner that will
minimize or eliminate false alarm notifications.
      (2)   Respond or cause his representative to appear at the systems
location within a reasonable period of time when notified by the city to
deactivate a malfunctioning alarm system, to provide access to the premises, or
to provide security for the premises.
      (3)   Not manually activate an alarm for any reason other than an
occurrence of an event that the alarm system was intended to report.
   (B)   All alarm systems will have an automatic reset which silences the
annunciator within 15 minutes after activation and which will not sound again
as a result of the same event that resulted in the original activation.
   (C)   Every permit holder shall be required to have its alarm system
inspected at least once each year by an alarm company and to post a certificate
of such inspection on the premises where the alarm system is maintained. The
certificate shall state, in the opinion of the alarm company, the alarm system
complies with the applicable installation standards and is safe and reliable.
The certificate will further indicate the date of the inspection and the typed
name and signature of the inspector. Each permit will expire on June 30 of each
year.
(Ord. passed 6-27-94)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 93.07 RETENTION OF ALARM COMPANY; APPROVAL OF CHIEF OF POLICE REQUIRED.
   A permit holder or person in control of an alarm system shall not contract
or retain an alarm company who is not properly approved by the Chief of Police.
(Ord. passed 6-27-94)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 93.08 INDIRECT ALARM REPORTING.
   A person who is engaged in the business of relaying alarm notifications to
the city shall:
   (A)   Report alarms only over special trunklines or other communication
facilities designated by the city.
   (B)   Communicate alarm notifications to the city in a manner and form
determined by the Chief.
(Ord. passed 6-27-94)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 93.09 DIRECT ALARM REPORTING.
   Effective May 1, 1994 the Police Department will only be accepting
proprietary alarm or alarms wholly owned and operated by the city and central
station facilities for the purpose of satisfying Underwriters' Laboratory
requirements.
(Ord. passed 6-27-94)
§ 93.10 AUTOMATIC TELEPHONE DIALING ALARM SYSTEMS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, natural or corporate, to sell,
offer for sale, install, maintain, lease, operate, or assist in the operation
of an automatic telephone dialing alarm system over any telephone lines
exclusively used by the public to directly request emergency service from the
Police Department.
   (B)   The Chief, when he has knowledge of the unlawful maintenance of an
automatic telephone dialing alarm system, installed or operated in violation of
division (A) of this section, shall, in writing, order the owner, operator, or
lessee to disconnect and cease operation of the system within 72 hours from
receipt of the order.
   (C)   Any automatic telephone dialing system installed unlawfully, as set
forth in division (A) of this section prior to the effective date of this
chapter, shall be removed within 30 days.
(Ord. passed 6-27-94)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 93.11 ALARM SYSTEM OPERATING INSTRUCTIONS.
   A person in control of an alarm system shall maintain at each alarm site a
complete set of written operating instructions for each alarm system. Special
codes, combinations, or passwords should not be included in these instructions.
(Ord. passed 6-27-94)
§ 93.12 ALARM DISPATCH RECORDS.
   (A)   The officer responding to a dispatch resulting from a burglary,
robbery, panic, or trouble alarm notification shall record such information as
necessary to permit the Chief to maintain records, including but not limited to
the following information:
      (1)   Identification of the permit holder.
      (2)   Identification of the alarm site.
      (3)   Arrival time and dispatch received time.
      (4)   Time of day, date.
      (5)   Weather conditions.
      (6)   Area and/or sub-area of premise involved.
      (7)   Name of permit holder's representative on premises.
      (8)   If any permit holder's representative fails or refuses to respond
the names of the individuals contacted shall be noted in the departmental
computer in the comment field under the call for service.
   (B)   The responding police officer shall indicate whether the notification
was caused by a criminal offense, an attempted criminal offense, or a false
alarm.
   (C)   In the case of an assumed false alarm (when a permit holder
representative fails or refuses to respond) the responding police officer shall
leave notice at the alarm site that the Police Department has responded to a
false alarm notification. The notice must including the following information:
      (1)   The date and time of police response to the false alarm
notification.
      (2)   The identification number of the responding police officer.
      (3)   A statement urging the permit holder to ensure the alarm system is
properly operated and maintained in order to avoid service fees.
(Ord. passed 6-27-94)
§ 93.13 SYSTEM PERFORMANCE REVIEWS.
   If there is reason to believe that an alarm system is not being used or
maintained in a manner that insures proper operation and suppresses false
alarm, the Chief may require a conference with an alarm permit holder and the
individual or association responsible for maintenance of the alarm system to
review the circumstances of each false alarm.
(Ord. passed 6-27-94)
§ 93.14 FALSE ALARM NOTIFICATION.
   (A)   The holder of an alarm permit or the person in control of an alarm
system shall be subject to warning, fines and suspension or loss of the permit
(any alarm owned, operated, or leased by any federal, state, county or local
government agency will not be subject to fines) depending on the number of
false alarm notifications emitted from an alarm system within a 12-month period
from July 1 through June 30.
   (B)   Number of false alarm notifications; action taken.
      (1)   For the first two false alarm notifications, no action will be
taken.
      (2)   The activation of three or more false alarms within a 12-month
period from July 1 through June 30, will be handled according to the following
schedule:
         (a)   The third false alarm will be billed a $25 service charge which
shall be considered a bill owed by the permit holder to the city.
         (b)   The fourth false alarm will be billed a $50 service charge which
shall be considered a bill owed by the permit holder to the city.
            1.   Each service charge incurred for the third and fourth false
alarms at the premises described in the permit holder's permit shall be paid
within 30 days from date of receipt thereof. Failure to make payment within 60
days from date of receipt shall result in revocation of the permit holder's
permit until payment is received.
         (c)   The fifth false alarm shall result in a $100 service charge
(which includes a $25 reinstatement fee) which shall be considered a bill owed
by the permit holder to the city and revocation of the permit holder's permit
in the following manner:
            1.   The permit holder shall be given ten days advance written
notification that the permit holder's permit will be revoked, the written
notice shall set forth the reasons for such revocation.
            2.   The notice shall specify the specific date of revocation, and
that any response by the Police Department will result in an assessment of $100
to alarms that occur at the premises described in the permit after the date of
revocation, in addition to any other fees incurred under this schedule.
            3.   Reinstatement of the permit will be made upon receipt of all
fees owed to the city under this chapter and upon compliance with the following
conditions:
               a.   After the fifth false alarm, the alarm permit holder shall
be required to have his alarm system inspected by a licensed and certified
installer. Certificate of such inspection will be sent to the Police
Department, and a copy of the inspection will be posted on the premises where
the alarm system is maintained. The certificate will indicate the date of the
inspection and the typed name and signature of the inspector.
               b.   A letter from the inspector will accompany the certificate,
explaining what corrective action was taken to assure against further false
alarms, either by repairing the systems, checking for proper installation and/
or training the user in the proper use of the system.
         (d)   The sixth false alarm shall result in a written notification to
the permit holder that upon activation of the next false alarm, the permit
holder's permit will be revoked. The sixth false alarm will be billed a $150
service charge, which shall be considered a bill owed by the permit holder to
the city.
         (e)   The seventh false alarm shall result in revocation of the permit
holder's permit in the manner described in division (B)(c)1. through 3. of this
section, except the false alarm will be billed at $200 (which includes a $50
reinstatement fee) and shall be considered a bill owed by the permit holder to
the city.
         (f)   The eighth false alarm will be billed a $350 service charge,
which shall be considered a bill owed by the permit holder to the city.
         (g)   The ninth false alarm shall result in a written notification to
the permit holder that upon activation of the next false alarm the permit
holder's permit will be revoked. The ninth false alarm will be billed a $400
service charge, which shall be considered a bill owed by the permit holder to
the city.
         (h)   The tenth false alarm and each subsequent false alarm, the
permit holder's permit shall be revoked in the manner described in division (B)
(c)1. through 3. of this section and also that an inspection of the premises
shall be conducted by a representative of the Police Department, along with a
representative of the permit holder's alarm company and a representative of the
permit holder. The tenth false alarm and each subsequent false alarm will be
billed a $500 service charge, which shall be considered a bill owed by the
permit holder to the city.
   (C)   Any person who operates a newly installed system will not be subject
to false alarm notifications action during the 30 days following the system
completion provided a permit application is received by the Chief. The
completion date shall be certified by a person where the system is
professionally installed, or the date of the purchase receipt for self-
installed systems.
   (D)   Any person operating a nonpermitted alarm system will be subject to a
citation and assessment of a $100 fee for each alarm without benefit of the
notifications provided for in this section. Subsequent submittal of an alarm
permit application shall have all previously received alarms counted in
accumulating the five notification total.
   (E)   Alarm activations, caused by actual criminal offense or with evidence
of a criminal attempt, shall not be counted, nor false alarm notifications
accumulated.
(Ord. passed 6-27-94; Am. Ord. passed 1-17-95; Am. Ord. passed 5-4-10)
§ 93.15 REVOCATION OR LOSS OF ALARM PERMIT.
   (A)   The Chief may revoke an alarm permit if it is determined that:
      (1)   There is a false statement of a material matter in the application
for a permit.
      (2)   The permit holder has violated
§§ 93.06 through
93.10, or
93.13 of this section.
      (3)   The permit holder has failed to make payment within 60 days of a
fee assessed under
§ 93.14(B)(2) of this chapter.
      (4)   Six or more false alarm notifications have been emitted from the
alarm site within a 12-month calendar year period.
   (B)   A person commits an offense if he operates an alarm system during the
period in which an alarm permit is revoked.
(Ord. passed 6-27-94)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 93.16 APPEAL FROM DENIAL OR REVOCATION.
   (A)   (1)   If the Chief denies the issuance or renewal of a permit, or
revokes a permit, he shall send written notice of his action and a statement of
the right to an appeal by certified mail, return receipt requested, to both the
applicant or permit holder and the applicable alarm installing or service
company.
      (2)   The applicant or permit holder may appeal the decision of the Chief
to the Alarm Review Board, by filing a written request for a review, setting
forth the reasons for the appeal within ten days, after receipt of the notice
from the Chief.
      (3)   Filing of a request for appeal shall stay the action by the Chief
of revoking the permit until the Alarm Review Board has completed its review.
If a request for appeal is not made within the ten-day period, the action of
the Chief is final.
      (4)   Any review ordered under § 93.13 of this chapter requires the
attendance of both permit holder and applicable alarm company.
      (5)   Any request for any waiver applicable under division (5) of the
definition for ALARM SYSTEM set forth in
§ 93.02 of this chapter or any request for waiver of fees, or any request for
waiver of any false alarm notifications action, must be made to the Alarm
Review Board by the permit holder.
      (6)   The Alarm Review Board shall be the sole authority in the final
determination of any waiver request of any kind not specifically exempted
elsewhere within this chapter.
   (B)   Permit holders shall be entitled to a hearing, if requested within 30
days of receipt of notice of a sustained revocation of permit or false alarm
notifications action taken. The hearing shall be conducted by an Alarm Review
Board.
   (C)   The Alarm Review Board shall conduct a formal hearing and consider the
evidence of any interested persons. The Board shall make their decision on the
basis of a preponderance of the evidence presented at the hearing. The Board
must render a decision within ten days after the hearing. The Board shall
affirm, reverse, or modify the action of the Chief. The decision of the Board
is final as to administrative remedies with the city.
(Ord. passed 6-27-94)
§ 93.17 REINSTATEMENT OF PERMIT.
   A person whose alarm permit has been revoked may be issued a new permit if
the person:
   (A)   Pays or otherwise resolves, all fees assessed against the permit
holder under this chapter; and
   (B)   Upon submission of certification from a professional alarm company,
stating that the alarm system has been inspected and maintained by, or with the
direct supervision and approval of the alarm company.
(Ord. passed 6-27-94)
§ 93.18 PROTECTION OF CERTAIN BUSINESSES.
   (A)   Any business or any individual, partnership, corporation, or other
entity engaged in selling, leasing, maintaining, servicing, repairing,
altering, replacing, moving of any firearms, explosives, or ammunition
including but not limited to all federal firearms licensed dealers, to be sold,
leased, maintained, serviced, repaired, altered, replaced, moved, or installed
in or on any building, structure or facility shall be required to install and
maintain an Underwriters' Laboratory approved burglar alarm system covering all
accessible access points or a combination of interior devices, including but
not limited to photoelectric, ultrasonic, microwave, proximity, and sound
devices. The method of alarm transmission must be a direct wire or a supervised
line to an Underwriters' Laboratory approved central station or a method of
transmission to an Underwriters Laboratory approved central station approved by
the Chief of Police in keeping with industry standards.
   (B)   Any business which manufactures, sells, stores, or trades in any
controlled substance which is defined under the classification of Schedules I
through IV of The Controlled Substance Act (Title II, Comprehensive Drug Abuse
Prevention and Control Act of 1970 (Public Law 91-513)), 21 USC 812, shall be
required to install and maintain an Underwriters' Laboratory approved burglar
alarm system covering all accessible access points or a combination of interior
devices, including but not limited to photoelectric ultrasonic, microwave,
proximity and sound devices. The method of alarm transmission must be a direct
wire or a supervised line to an Underwriters' Laboratory approved central
station or a method of transmission to an Underwriters' Laboratory approved
central station approved by the Chief of Police in keeping with industry
standards.
   (C)   All financial institutions which operate under the provisions of the
Bank Protection Act of 1968 (12 U.S.C., Section 1882) operating within the city
limits shall be required to, at a minimum, install and maintain an
Underwriters' Laboratory approved burglar alarm system covering all accessible
access points or a combination of interior devices, including but not limited
to photoelectric, ultrasonic, microwave, proximity, and sound devices. The
method of alarm transmission must be a direct wire or a supervised line to an
Underwriters' Laboratory approved central station or a proprietary system
approved by the Chief of Police in keeping with industry standards.
   (D)   Any business operating under the definitions of divisions (A) through
(C) of this section must be in compliance by January 1, 1995.
   (E)   The Chief of Police may require any business to install and maintain
an Underwriters' Laboratory burglar alarm system. In making a determination of
the necessity for an alarm system, the Chief of Police shall consider such
factors as the history of the unlawful entries against the particular
establishment and the type of business and the nature and value of the
inventory of the particular establishment.
(Ord. passed 6-27-94)
§ 93.19 LIABILITY OF CITY LIMITED.
   The Police Department of the city shall take every reasonable precaution to
assure that the alarm notifications received by the Police Department are given
appropriate attention and are acted upon with dispatch. Nevertheless, the
Police Department, the city, or any of its officers or agents, shall not be
liable for any defects in operation of alarm devices, for any failure or
neglect to respond appropriately upon receipt of an alarm notification, nor for
the failure or neglect of any person in connection with the installation and
operation of alarm devices or their components, the transmission of alarm
signals, or the relaying of such signals and notifications. In the event the
Police Department finds it necessary to disconnect an alarm device, the Police
Department, the city, or any of its officers or agents, shall incur no
liability by such action.
(Ord. passed 6-27-94)
CHAPTER 94: NOISE REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
94.01   Purpose
   
94.02   Scope
   
94.03   Definitions
   
94.04   Enforcement
   
94.05   Measurements
   
94.06   Submission of fees
Minimum Standards
   
94.10   Noise levels
   
94.11   Exemptions
   
94.12   Motor vehicles
Administration and Enforcement
   
94.40   Noise Variance Board
   
94.41   Application procedures
   
94.42   Prohibited conduct
   
94.43   Penalties
Statutory reference:
   Authority of city to regulate noise, see R.S.A. 47:17 (II) & (XV)
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 94.01 PURPOSE.
   It is the policy of the Board of Mayor and Aldermen of the city to protect,
preserve and promote the health, safety, welfare, peace and quiet of the
citizens of Manchester through the reduction, control and prevention of noise.
It is the intent of this chapter to establish standards that will eliminate and
reduce unnecessary environmental noise throughout the community which may be
physically harmful or otherwise detrimental to individuals and the community in
the enjoyment of life, property and the conduct of business.
(Ord. passed 9-5-06)
§ 94.02 SCOPE.
   This chapter shall only apply to noise originating within the city limits of
the city that is traveling in the atmosphere or environment. This chapter shall
apply to all bodies of water within the city limits of the city, irrespectively
if they flow through or are contained partially or entirely within the city
limits.
(Ord. passed 9-5-06)
§ 94.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AMBIENT SOUND LEVEL. The A-weighted sound level of all sound associated with
a given environment, exceeded 90% of the time measured and being a composite of
sounds from many sources during the period of observation while the sound from
the noise source of interest is not present.
   ANSI. The American National Standards Institute.
   ANSI S SERIES STANDARDS. Those ANSI standards relevant to sound, acoustics,
shock, vibration and bioacoustics.
   A-WEIGHTED SOUND PRESSURE. The sound pressure level as measured with a sound
level meter using the A-weighting network. The standard notation is dB(A) or
dBA.
   COMMERCIAL POWER EQUIPMENT. Any equipment or device rated at more than five
horsepower and used for building repairs or property maintenance excluding snow
removal equipment.
   COMMERCIAL PREMISES. Any land parcel with buildings where the use of less
than 50% of the gross floor area meets the definition of residential premises.
Includes locations of various scale operating as retail, automotive use,
restaurant, governmental, financial, entertainment and cultural and shopping
centers as identified pursuant to the Manchester Zoning Ordinance.
   CONSTRUCTION EQUIPMENT. Any device or mechanical apparatus operated by fuel,
electric, or pneumatic power in the excavation, construction, repair, or
demolition of any building, structure, land parcel, street, alley, waterway, or
appurtenance thereto.
   DECIBEL. A logarithmic unit of measure often used in measuring magnitudes of
sound. The symbol is dB.
   DOMESTIC POWER EQUIPMENT. Any equipment or device rated at five horsepower
or less and used for building repairs or grounds maintenance excluding snow
removal equipment.
   EMERGENCY VEHICLE. An authorized motor vehicle that has sound warning
devices such as whistles, sirens and bells which can lawfully be used when
responding to an emergency, during a police activity or which is required by
state or federal regulations (i.e., reverse alarms).
   EMERGENCY WORK. An activity made necessary to restore property to a safe
condition following a public calamity or work required to protect persons or
property from exposure to imminent danger. It includes work by private or
public entities for providing or restoring immediately necessary service as
well as all situations deemed necessary by the city.
   EMERGENCY POWER GENERATOR. The equipment used to generate electrical power
in the event of an interruption, malfunction or failure of the electrical power
supplied by the service provider.
   GROSS FLOOR AREA. The floor area within the inside perimeter of the exterior
walls of the building under consideration, exclusive of vent shafts and courts,
without deduction for corridors, stairways, closets, the thickness of interior
walls, columns or other features. The floor area of a building or portion
thereof, not provided with surrounding exterior walls shall be the usable area
under the horizontal projection of the roof or floor above.
   INDUSTRIAL PREMISES. Any premise where the production of goods, materials or
knowledge takes place. May include locations for manufacturing, warehousing,
research and development, distribution or other selected offices as identified
pursuant to the Manchester Zoning Ordinance.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Any vehicle that is self-propelled, used primarily for
transporting persons or property upon public roadways and required to be
licensed according to motor vehicle registration laws. The term motor vehicle
shall not include: aircraft, watercraft, motor vehicles operated on private
property for recreational or amusement purposes, vehicles used exclusively on
stationary rails, or specialized utility vehicles normally used only on private
property in the daily course of business such as forklifts, and pallet movers.
   NOISE. Any sound that exceeds the standards set forth in this chapter,
annoys or disturbs a reasonable person of normal sensibilities, or causes or
tends to cause any adverse psychological or physiological effect on humans.
   NOISE VARIANCE. Specific relief from the terms of this chapter as granted by
the Noise Variance Board.
   PERSON. An individual, corporation, partnership, association, organization
or similar entity.
   PREMISES. Any building, structure, land, utility or portion thereof,
including all appurtenances, and shall also include yards, lots, courts, inner
yards and real properties without buildings or improvements, owned or
controlled by a person.
   PROPERTY LINE. The real or imaginary line and its vertical extension which
separates real property owned or controlled by any person from contiguous real
property owned or controlled by another person. The vertical and horizontal
boundaries of a dwelling unit in a multi-dwelling unit building, condominium,
or townhouse complex shall not be considered property lines separating one
property from another.
   PUBLIC PREMISES. All real property including appurtenances thereon which is
owned or controlled by any governmental entity and shall include streets,
alleys, parks and waterways.
   RECEPTOR PREMISES. The premises (residential, commercial, industrial, or
public) as listed in §
94.10, Table A which is receiving noise emitted from the source premises after
crossing one or more property lines. Also referred to as the receiving premise.
   RESIDENTIAL PREMISES. Any premises where single or multiple dwelling units
exist and shall include primary schools, churches, nursing homes and similar
institutional facilities including any commercial premises where the use of
more than 50% of the gross floor area meets this definition of residential
premise.
   SOUND. An oscillation in pressure, stress, particle displacement and
particle velocity which induces auditory sensation.
   SOUND LEVEL METER. An apparatus for the measurement of sound levels. The
sound level meter shall be of a design and have the characteristics of a Type 2
or better instrument  as established by the American National Standards
Institute, publication S1.4 entitled Specification for Sound Level Meters.
   SOUND PRESSURE LEVEL. Twenty times the logarithm to the base ten of the
ratio of the pressure of a sound to the reference pressure of 20 micronewtons
per square meter (20 X 10-6 Newtons/meter2) and is expressed in decibels (dB).
   SOURCE PREMISES. The premises (residential, commercial, industrial, or
public) as listed in §
94.10, Table A that is emitting noise that is crossing one or more property
lines and impacting the receptor premises.
   SNOW REMOVAL EQUIPMENT. Any equipment used for removing snow from land or
building surfaces and shall include snowplows, snow blowers, snow sweepers, and
snow shovels.
   TABLE A. The reference table contained in §
94.10 that details the maximum allowable noise levels for all premises in the
city, including a time of day allowance. Measurements of noise levels are made
at the property line of the receiving premises.
   TABLE B. The reference table contained in §
94.12 that details the maximum allowable noise levels for all motor vehicles
operating in the city during any time of the day or night. Measurements of
noise levels are made 25 feet from the source motor vehicle.
   TREE MAINTENANCE EQUIPMENT. Any equipment used in trimming or removing trees
only and shall not be limited to chainsaws, chippers and stump removers.
(Ord. passed 9-5-06)
§ 94.04 ENFORCEMENT.
   The Chief of Police or his or her designee shall have and exercise the power
to enforce the provisions of this chapter. Licenses or permits issued pursuant
to this chapter shall also be enforced by a designee of the Office of the City
Clerk. Enforcement shall include entering areas of public access or operation,
free of charge, to ensure compliance and issuance of citations for any
violations with penalties to be assessed as provided in §
94.43.
(Ord. passed 9-5-06)
§ 94.05 MEASUREMENTS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the measurement of all physical parameters
or entities associated with acoustics, sound, noise, or vibration shall comply
with the most recent S series standards of ANSI, American National Standards
Institute, Standards for Sound, Acoustics, Shock and Vibration, Bioacoustics.
Furthermore, all physical parameters, or entities determined or calculated from
such measurements relevant to acoustics, shock, vibration or bioacoustics shall
be determined or calculated in accordance to the most recent S series standards
of ANSI where so applicable.
(Ord. passed 9-5-06)
§ 94.06 SUBMISSION OF FEES.
   Fees for permits, applications and licenses shall be submitted with the
applications under this chapter and shall be considered nonrefundable.
(Ord. passed 9-5-06)
MINIMUM STANDARDS
§ 94.10 NOISE LEVELS.
   Noise levels shall be measured at any point along the property line or
within the property line of the receiving premises to determine compliance of
the source. When it is determined that the ambient sound level at the receiving
premises equals or exceeds the maximum allowable sound pressure level specified
in Table A, then the ambient sound level is the standard which cannot be
exceeded by the source. The following table identifies allowable noise levels
within various areas throughout the city:
TABLE A
Maximum Allowable Noise Levels (in dBA) with Time of Day Allowance
            Receptor Premises
            Residential     Commercial      Industrial        Public
Source      7 a.m.  10 p.m. 7 a.m. 10 p.m.  7 a.m. - 10 p.m.  7 a.m. - 10 p.m.
Premises    - 10    - 7     - 10   - 7 a.m. 10 p.m.  - 7 a.m. 10 p.m.  - 7 a.m.
            p.m.    a.m.    p.m.
Residential 55      50      65     60       80       75       75       70
Commercial  55 [60] 50 [60] 65     60       80       75       75       70
Industrial  55 [65] 50 [65] 65     60       80       75       75       70
Public      55 [60] 50 [60] 65     60       80       75       75       70
Body of     55      50      65     60       80       75       75       70
Water
(The numbers in brackets are the allowable limits that comply with §
94.11(N).)
 
(Ord. passed 9-5-06)
§ 94.11 EXEMPTIONS.
   The maximum permissible sound pressure levels as specified in §
94.10, Table A shall not apply to sounds emitted from:
   (A)   Any bell or chime from any building clock, school or church, not
including any amplified bell or chime sounds emitted from loudspeakers.
   (B)   Any siren, whistle or bell lawfully used by emergency vehicles or any
other alarm systems used in case of fire, collision, civil defense, police
activity or imminent danger.
   (C)   Any aircraft in flight subject to federal law regarding noise control.
   (D)   Any ground-based aircraft activity including testing or engine run-up
noise.
   (E)   Any motor vehicles designed for and operated on public streets,
alleys, highways or freeways that are regulated by §
94.12, Table B.
   (F)   Any tree maintenance equipment operated upon a residential,
commercial, industrial or public premises provided that operation of tree
maintenance equipment between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. shall not
exceed the maximum noise levels as specified in §
94.10, Table A.
   (G)   Any construction equipment or activities in compliance with §
94.42(F).
   (H)   Any domestic power equipment operated upon any residential,
commercial, industrial or public premises between 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
provided that such equipment does not exceed a sound pressure level of 80 dBA
when measured at the property line of the receiving premise.
   (I)   Any commercial power equipment operated upon any residential,
commercial, industrial or public premises between 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
provided that such equipment does not exceed a sound pressure level of 88 dBA
when measured at the property line of the receiving premise.
   (J)   The musical instruments of any school marching band while performing
at any sporting event or marching band competition, and the musical instruments
of any school marching band practicing on school grounds between the hours of
9:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. that do not exceed 65 dBA when measured at the property
line of the receiving residential premise.
   (K)   Following a snowstorm, snow removal equipment operated on any premises
between the hours of 5:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. provided that such equipment does
not exceed the sound pressure limits for commercial power equipment (88 dBA) or
domestic power equipment (80 dBA) when measured at the property line of the
receiving premise.
   (L)   Any power generator providing emergency electrical power at any
hospital, health clinic, nursing home or similar facility where the loss of
electrical power creates an immediate risk to the health, safety or welfare of
any person, or at any premises where such equipment is required by the Fire
Department. Additionally, the noise emitted during the routine testing of
emergency electrical power generators shall not exceed 88 dBA when measured at
the property line of the receiving premise. Routine testing shall not exceed
one hour in any one-week period, or two hours in any six-week period and shall
be confined to the hours of 10:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. or as otherwise approved.
   (M)   Any industrial, commercial, or public premises exceeding the standards
of §
94.10, Table A at a receiving residential premises when the zoning of the
receiving residential premises does not allow residential use (residential use
is nonconforming). However, in such a situation, the noise emitted by the
industrial, commercial, or public premises shall not exceed the standards for
receiving industrial premises.
   (N)   Any industrial, commercial, or public premises exceeding the standards
of §
94.10, Table A at a receiving residential premises when such industrial,
commercial, or public premises and their emitted noise level were in existence
prior to the existence of the residential premises, provided however that the
existing industrial premises does not exceed 65 dBA and the commercial premises
do not exceed 60 dBA when measured at the receiving residential premises.
   (O)   Any water craft or noise emanating from or on a body of water between
the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. provided that such noise does not exceed
a sound pressure level of 88 dBA when measured at the property line of the
receiving property and further provided that between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
such equipment does not exceed the maximum sound pressure levels as specified
in §
94.10, Table A.
   (P)   Any city-sponsored fireworks display or a fireworks display approved
by the city in conjunction with a specific licensed event and emanating from
city property, a public recreational area, or a civic stadium.
(Ord. passed 9-5-06; Am. Ord. passed 7-5-11)
§ 94.12 MOTOR VEHICLES.
   All noise levels from motor vehicles shall be measured at 25 feet from the
source vehicle to determine compliance. Except where preempted by state law the
standards in Table B shall apply to all noise emitted from motor vehicles
including any and all equipment thereon, under any condition of acceleration,
deceleration, idle, grade or load and whether or not in motion.
TABLE B
Maximum Allowable Noise Levels for Motor Vehicles
 
                                Maximum Allowable Sound Measurement Distance
Type of Vehicle     Time Period Pressure Level measured from Motor vehicle
                                in dBA
Motor vehicles
weighing less than
10,000 pounds,      At any time 80                      25 feet
manufacturers gross
vehicle weight
 
(Ord. passed 9-5-06)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 94.40 NOISE VARIANCE BOARD.
   (A)   It is recognized that in initiating community noise limits, any number
of unanticipated situations may occur. Although the city is primarily concerned
with protecting, preserving and promoting the health, safety, welfare and peace
and quiet of the citizens of Manchester, the city realizes that there may be
preexisting conditions that need an extended period of time to conform to the
noise limits imposed by this chapter. The city also recognizes that events or
incidents can occur where there was every good faith expectation of complying
with the noise limits imposed by this chapter, but for some unforeseen
circumstance, those events or incidents failed to comply.
   (B)   This section hereby establishes a Noise Variance Board in which
members shall approve or deny variances to this chapter, hereinafter referred
to as a noise variance. The Board shall consist of the Committee on
Administration of the Board of Mayor and Aldermen.
(Ord. passed 9-5-06)
§ 94.41 APPLICATION PROCEDURES.
   Applications must be submitted to the Office of the City Clerk. General
guidelines may be considered in the issuance of a noise variance. These
guidelines are not all inclusive and other criteria may be established that is
reasonable and prudent to protect the public or limit the anticipated
detrimental impact of noise upon the community. The guidelines are as follows:
   (A)   Variances shall be granted prior to or in anticipation of an event.
   (B)   The city reserves the right to grant a variance after the fact if it
is deemed by the Noise Variance Board to be in the public good, if the Board
believes that an honest, fair and reasonable attempt was made to comply with
the noise limits imposed by this chapter, or the failure to comply was due to
some unforeseen circumstance.
   (C)   A variance for the continuation of a non-complying activity may be
granted after a reasonable attempt was made to comply and may contain such
stipulations as the Board may deem necessary to protect the public that may
include, but is not limited to:
      (1)   Regulation of times;
      (2)   The erection of noise barriers, shielding or other noise abatement;
and
      (3)   A demonstration of compliance progress.
   (D)   The applicant bears the burden of presenting evidence sufficient to
allow the Noise Variance Board to reach conclusions and make findings to
support the authorization of a variance.
   (E)   The Board may require a public hearing on a certain matter to permit
abutting landowners to present written or oral testimony for consideration of
granting or denying a variance.
   (F)   The Board may request review and recommendations from various city
departments including the Public Health Director, Director of Planning and
Community Development, Chief of Police, City Clerk or their designees.
Testimony of department representatives may be requested at a variance hearing.
   (G)   Final decisions shall be made available within 72 hours after a vote
on an application. A written decision will be mailed to the applicant with
copies made available to the Departments of Health, Police and City Clerk.
   (H)   In granting a variance, the Board may impose such conditions or
stipulations as it deems necessary and proper in order to preserve the intent
of this chapter.
   (I)   All decisions by the Noise Variance Board are final and may not be
appealed to any other municipal board, committee or commission.
   (J)   As community noise is a public health concern, noise variances shall
only be granted for a reasonable period of time, not more than two years.
   (K)   The renewal of a variance after two years requires the consent of the
Board of Mayor and Aldermen.
   (L)   Variances shall not be granted for continued or sustained violations
that may be physically injurious to one or more persons as determined by the
Public Health Director.
   (M)   Once an application has been denied by the Noise Variance Board, the
same application may only be considered if the Board finds that the application
is materially different in nature and degree from the prior application.
(Ord. passed 9-5-06; Am. Ord. passed 2-7-09)
§ 94.42 PROHIBITED CONDUCT.
   The following conduct is prohibited:
   (A)   Provide any false or inaccurate information to any city board,
committee, commission or any employee of the city, in an attempt to deceive or
otherwise avoid compliance with this chapter.
   (B)   Hinder, obstruct, delay, resist, interfere, or attempt to interfere
with any authorized person while in the performance of their duties under this
chapter.
   (C)   Emit or cause to be emitted any noise which leaves the premises on
which it originates, crosses a property line, and enters onto any other
premises in excess of the sound pressure levels during the time periods as
specified in §
94.10, Table A, without a variance.
   (D)   Emit or cause to be emitted any noise within the public premises in
excess of the limits defined in §
94.10, Table A without a variance.
   (E)   [Reserved]
   (F)   Operate any construction equipment or conduct any construction
activities between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. that exceed the noise
limits of §
94.10, Table A. The city may grant variances from the construction restrictions
if it can be demonstrated that a construction project will interfere with
traffic if completed during daytime hours.
   (G)   Operate any trash compacting mechanism on any motor vehicle, or engage
in any trash, rubbish or garbage collection activity between the hours of 10:00
p.m. and 7:00 a.m., when such activity takes place on any premises adjacent to
a residential premises.
   (H)   Operate or permit the operation of any motor vehicle or combination of
motor vehicles at any time or place when such operation exceeds the noise
limits for the category of motor vehicle and for the designated time period as
specified in §
94.12, Table B.
   (I)   Sound any horn or other audible signal device of an automobile,
motorcycle, streetcar, or other vehicle unless it is necessary as a warning to
prevent or avoid a traffic accident or reasonably inform or warn of a vehicle
presence.
   (J)   Modify or change the exhaust muffler, air intake muffler or any other
sound reducing device in such a manner that the noise emitted from the motor
vehicle exceeds the sound pressure levels as established in §
94.12, Table B except where permitted by state law.
   (K)   The noise limits in §
94.10, Table A and §
94.12, Table B notwithstanding, no person shall:
      (1)   Make, continue, or cause to be made or continued any loud,
unnecessary or unusual noise or any noise which either annoys, disturbs,
injures, or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace, or safety of others,
within the limits of the city.
      (2)   Use, operate or permit to be played, used or operated of any radio,
receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, or other machine or device for
the producing or reproducing of sound in such manner as to disturb the peace,
quiet and comfort of the inhabitants of a neighboring premises. The operation
of any such set, instrument, phonograph, machine or device by a commercial
establishment between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in such a manner as
to be plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet from the lot line, structure or
vehicle in which it is located shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of
this section.
      (3)   Use, operate, or permit to be played, used, or operated, any radio
receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, loudspeaker, sound amplifier, or
other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound which is cast
upon the public streets for the purpose of commercial advertising or attracting
the attention of the public to any building or structure in such a manner that
the occupants of a neighboring premises disturbed or annoyed.
      (4)   Yell, shout, hoot, whistle, or sing on the public streets,
particularly between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. or any time or place
so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort, or repose of persons in
neighboring premises.
      (5)   Keeping of any animal or bird which by causing frequent or long
continued noise shall disturb the comfort or repose of any person in a
neighboring premises.
      (6)   Use any automobile, motorcycle, or vehicle so out of repair, so
loaded or in such manner as to create loud and unnecessary grating, grinding,
rattling or other noise.
      (7)   Transport rails, pillars, or columns of iron, steel or other
material, over and along streets and other public places upon carts, drays,
cars, trucks, or in any other manner so loaded as to cause loud noises or as to
disturb the peace and quiet of such streets or other public places.
(Ord. passed 9-5-06)
§ 94.43 PENALTIES.
   (A)   Each act of violation of §
94.42 and every day upon which any such violation shall occur in one calendar
year shall constitute a separate offense and follow the penalty schedule below:
      (1)   First offense: A citation shall be issued to the offender in the
amount of $100.
      (2)   Second offense: A citation shall be issued to the offender in the
amount of $250.
      (3)   Third offense: A citation shall be issued to the offender in the
amount of $500.
      (4)   Fourth and subsequent offenses: A citation shall be issued to the
offender in the amount of $1,000.
   (B)   If the court finds for the city, the city shall recover its costs of
suit including reasonable expert fees, attorney fees and necessary investigate
costs.
(Ord. passed 9-5-06)
CHAPTER 95: AIR POLLUTION
Section
   
95.01   Hazardous or offensive fumes restricted
   
95.02   Enforcement
Cross-reference:
   
Health and sanitation, see Ch. 91
§ 95.01 HAZARDOUS OR OFFENSIVE FUMES RESTRICTED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to permit the emission from
any heating plant or from any apparatus in which fuel is consumed or smoke,
vapor, or odor in excess of that which such heating plant or apparatus may
reasonably be expected to emit, when the same is properly fired with suitable
fuel, or to use automobile tires, rags, or other noxious substances for fuel,
at any point in the city within a distance of 500 feet of any habitation
located within any business or residential zoning district during a continuous
period of more than five minutes or for more than two hours of each day.
('71 Code, § 3-1)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 95.02 ENFORCEMENT.
   Any party aggrieved by the emission of excessive smoke, vapor, or odor may
make his complaint in writing to the City Clerk, who shall refer the same
directly to the Committee on City Planning of the Board of Mayor and Aldermen.
The Committee shall carefully investigate the complaint and refer its findings
to the Board of Mayor and Aldermen who, by vote, may direct the City Prosecutor
to proceed against the alleged offender under the provisions of this chapter.
('71 Code, § 3-2)
CHAPTER 96: PARKS AND RECREATION
Section
   
96.00   Division of Parks, Recreation and Cemetery established as a division of
the Highway Department
   
96.01   Parks designated
   
96.02   Title
   
96.03   Definitions
   
96.04   Park operating policy
   
96.05   Sanitation
   
96.06   Behavior
   
96.06.1    Smoking at Gill Stadium
   
96.07   Traffic
   
96.08   Enforcement
§ 96.00 DIVISION OF PARKS, RECREATION AND CEMETERY ESTABLISHED AS A DIVISION OF
THE HIGHWAY DEPARTMENT.
   (A)   Pursuant to
Charter § 3.01 the Department of Parks, Recreation and Cemetery is hereby
reorganized and combined with the Highway Department as a division of the
Highway Department.
   (B)   The division head shall be the Chief of Parks, Recreation and Cemetery
who shall be appointed by the Public Works Director.
   (C)   The Division of Parks, Recreation and Cemetery shall also include a
Parks, Recreation and Cemetery Division Commission consisting of five members
who shall be appointed as provided by
Charter § 3.14 and the Commission shall have those duties and responsibilities
as assigned by the Charter and city ordinances.
   (D)   The Parks, Recreation and Cemetery Commission on the effective date of
this section shall become members of the Parks, Recreation and Cemetery
Division Commission with the same terms as previously held.
   (E)   The Division of Parks, Recreation and Cemetery shall be responsible
for city parks, recreational facilities and programs, including school athletic
facilities, and public cemeteries and shall perform such other duties as are
prescribed by federal, state and local law.
   (F)   The Division of Parks, Recreation and Cemetery shall be responsible
for maintaining the silicone bronze sculpture of a bull to be erected at the
eastern end of the Hands Across the Merrimack Bridge.
   (G)   The positions of Parks, Recreation and Cemetery Director/
Superintendent; Parks, Recreation and Cemetery Deputy Director and Parks,
Recreation and Cemetery Business Service Officer are hereby eliminated in this
reorganization. These positions shall be eliminated June 30, 2010. All other
employees of the Department of Parks, Recreation and Cemetery are hereby
transferred by this reorganization to the Division of Parks, Recreation and
Cemetery of the Highway Department.
(Ord. passed 11-4-98; Am. Ord. passed 5-20-08; Am. Ord. passed 5-4-10)
§ 96.01 PARKS DESIGNATED.
   (A)   The name “Ray Cross Pony League Field” shall be bestowed on the Pony
League Field located at the corner of Maple Street and Auburn Street.
   (B)   The name “Thomas J. Enright Park” shall be bestowed on that park to be
developed on the site of the former Lincoln School.
   (C)   The name “Stanton Plaza Park” shall be bestowed on the park to be
constructed in the vicinity of Elm and Pleasant Streets in conjunction with the
Granite Street Redevelopment Project.
('71 Code, § 17½-1) (Ord. passed 3-2-71; Am. Ord. (2), passed 12-28-81)
§ 96.02 TITLE.
   Sections
96.03 through
96.08 of this chapter shall be known and may be cited as “An Ordinance
Regulating Conduct in Public Parks.”
('71 Code, § 17½-16) (Ord. passed 2-16-71)
§ 96.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of
§§ 96.04 through
96.08 of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PARK. A park, playground, beach, recreation center, cemetery, or any other
area in the city, owned or used by the city, and devoted to active or passive
recreation.
   PERSON. Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or
organization of any kind.
('71 Code, § 17½-17) (Ord. passed 2-16-71; Am. Ord. passed 3-16-10; Am. Ord.
passed 10-1-19)
§ 96.04 PARK OPERATING POLICY.
   (A)   Parks shall be closed to the public every day of the year from sunset
to sunrise, except for such functions as fireworks displays and other community
programs as may be authorized by the Public Works Director, or his or her
designee.
   (B)   The Public Works Director or his or her designee may, after being
advised by the Police Department of repeated disturbance to the public peace,
in a specific park, immediately order a change in curfew hours for said park
for such a period as deemed necessary, provided however that immediate public
notice is given through the news media and that such change in curfew is
conspicuously posted at the affected park.
   (C)   This section is not intended to discourage the legitimate use of parks
and playgrounds which have been specifically designed for nighttime use and for
which use, the proper permission has been granted to conduct legitimate
sporting or recreational activities.
('71 Code, § 17½-21) (Ord. passed 2-16-71; Am. Ord. passed 10-9-79; Am. Ord.
passed 3-16-10; Am. Ord. passed 12-7-21)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 96.05 SANITATION.
   No person in a park shall do any of the following:
   (A)   Pollute waters. Throw, discharge, or otherwise place or cause to be
placed in the waters of any fountain, pond, lake, stream, or other body of
water in or adjacent to any park or any tributary, stream, storm sewer, or
drain flowing into such waters any substance, matter, or thing, liquid or
solid, which will or may result in the pollution of the waters.
   (B)   Deposit refuse and trash. Have brought in or dump, deposit, or leave
any bottles, broken glass, ashes, paper, boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish, waste,
garbage, or refuse, or other trash. No such refuse or trash shall be placed in
any water in or contiguous to any park, or left anywhere on the grounds
thereof, but shall be placed in the proper receptacles where these are
provided; where receptacles are not so provided, all such rubbish or waste
shall be carried away from the park by the person responsible for its presence,
and properly disposed of elsewhere.
('71 Code, § 17½-18) (Ord. passed 2-16-71)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 96.06 BEHAVIOR.
   No person in a park shall do any of the following:
   (A)   Possess intoxicating beverages.
      (1)   Prohibition. Have brought alcoholic beverages, possess an open and
uncapped container of alcoholic beverages, nor shall any person drink alcoholic
beverages at any time in the park.
      (2)   The sale, possession and consumption of alcoholic beverages may be
permitted in parks and recreational centers in such areas as are designated by
the Public Works Director, or his or her designee, subject to the provisions of
state law and the regulations of the State Liquor Commission and subject to
such terms and conditions as the Public Works Director, or his or her designee,
may prescribe.
   (B)   Build fires. Build or attempt to build a fire except in such areas and
under such regulations as may be designated by the Public Works Director, or
his or her designee.
   (C)   Engage in games of chance. Gamble, or participate in or abet any game
of chance except raffles, bingo, lucky 7 and other games of chance authorized
by state law. Such games of chance authorized by state law may be permitted in
parks and recreational centers, in areas designated by the Parks and Recreation
Commission, and subject to such terms and conditions as the Commission may
prescribe. Such games of chance shall be conducted in strict compliance with
state law and the terms and conditions established by the Commission.
   (D)   Loiter or behave in a boisterous manner. Sleep or protractedly lounge
on the seats or benches, or other areas, or engage in loud, boisterous,
threatening, abusive, insulting, or indecent language, or engage in any
disorderly conduct or behavior tending to a breach of the public peace.
   (E)   Camp. Set up any tent, tarp, shack, market umbrella, beach umbrella,
other temporary shelter or structure, at any hour of the day or night, for the
purpose of camping without the permission of the Public Works Director or the
Director’s designee. In determining whether an action is "for the purpose of
camping", the indicia of camping set forth in §
130.13 shall apply. The provision shall not be read to prohibit any parent,
guardian, or caretaker of any child under the age of ten from erecting a
temporary shelter for the purpose of child care, provided the child has
accompanied that person into the park and is in their care during their visit
to the park.
   (F)   Golf. Swing at or hit a golf ball in any city park or on any city
property that is not specified by the Public Works Director, or his or her
designee, for golfing or unless otherwise approved by the Public Works
Director, or his or her designee.
   (G)   Glass bottles. In any city park possess a glass bottle or bottles
during a concert or other sponsored event or unless otherwise approved by the
Public Works Director, or his or her designee.
   (H)   Smoke. Smoke any tobacco, tobacco-related product, filter or other
plant or weed except in such areas as are specifically designated for smoking
by the Public Works Director, or his or her designee, subject to the provisions
of state law. For the purposes of this section, TOBACCO-RELATED PRODUCT means
any product containing tobacco or nicotine, including but not limited to
cigars, pipe tobacco, snuff, chewing tobacco, dipping tobacco, bidis, snus,
dissolvable tobacco products, and electronic cigarettes; provided, however,
that such term shall not include any product that has been approved by the U.S.
Food and Drug Administration as a tobacco  cessation product. This section
shall only apply to the Stanton Plaza, Victory, Veterans, Pulaski, Kalivas and
Bronstein Parks.
   (I)   Hang items. Hang items, including but not limited to clothes,
textiles, tarps, bags, or ropes, from any tree, fence, lamp, post, or structure
in any city park.
   (J)   Syringe service programs. Conduct a syringe service program, needle
exchange program, or any similar program related to the exchange of devices
used for injecting drugs in any city park.
   (K)   Shopping carts. Bring in, use, or otherwise possess any shopping cart
in any city park.
   (L)   Bicycles. Bring in, use, or otherwise possess more than one bicycle at
a time in any city park.
('71 Code, § 17½-19) (Ord. passed 2-16-71; Am. Ord. passed 11-19-85; Am. Ord.
passed 10-4-88; Am. Ord. passed 11-28-00; Am. Ord. passed 3-16-10; Am. Ord.
passed 3-16-10; Am. Ord. passed 4-7-15; Am. Ord. passed 9-5-17; Am. Ord. passed
9-3-19 Am. Ord. passed 10-1-19; Am. Ord. passed 1-19-21; Am. Ord. passed 10-18-
22) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 96.06.1 SMOKING AT GILL STADIUM.
   (A)   In order to protect the health, welfare and safety of the citizens of
the city and all other persons also attending activities at Gill Stadium, no
person shall, at any time, smoke any tobacco, tobacco-related product, filter
or other plant or weed while within the perimeter fenced in area of Gill
Stadium.
   (B)   Exception. The smoking of any tobacco or tobacco-related product may
be permitted in Gill Stadium in such areas as are specifically designated for
smoking by thePublic Works Director, or his or her designee, subject to the
provisions of state law and review by the Health Department. The Commission may
prescribe such terms and conditions as it deems appropriate to smoking to the
designated area or areas.
(Ord. passed 8-5-97; Am. Ord. passed 3-16-10) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 96.07 TRAFFIC.
   No person in a park shall do any of the following:
   (A)   Fail to obey state motor vehicle laws. Fail to comply with all
applicable provisions of the state motor vehicle traffic laws in regard to
equipment and operation of vehicles together with such regulations as are
contained in this section and other ordinances.
   (B)   Fail to obey traffic enforcement officers. Fail to obey all traffic
officers and park employees, such persons being hereby authorized and
instructed to direct traffic whenever and wherever needed in the parks and on
the highways, streets, or roads immediately adjacent thereto in accordance with
the provisions of these regulations and such supplementary regulations as may
be issued subsequently by the Public Works Director, or his or her designee.
   (C)   Fail to obey traffic signs. Fail to observe carefully all traffic
signs indicating speed, direction, caution, stopping, or parking, and all
others posted for proper control and to safeguard life and property.
   (D)   Exceed speed limits. Ride or drive a vehicle at a rate of speed
exceeding the statutory speed limit as determined by the state as it may be
changed and posted by ordinance of the city.
   (E)   Operate a vehicle in unauthorized areas. Drive any vehicle, including
but not limited to motor vehicles, motorcycles, mini-bikes, or motorized go-
carts, on any area except the paved park roads or parking areas, or such other
areas as may on occasion be specifically designated as temporary parking areas
by the Public Works Director, or his or her designee, provided the vehicles are
registered and authorized to be operated as motor vehicles.
('71 Code, § 17½-20) (Ord. passed 2-16-71; Am. Ord. passed 3-16-10) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
Cross-reference:
   
Traffic code, see Title VII
§ 96.08 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Officials. The Public Works Director, or his or her designee, park
attendants, and police shall, in connection with their duties imposed by law,
diligently enforce the provisions of §§
96.04 through
96.07 of this chapter.
   (B)   Ejectment. The Public Works Director, or his or her designee, park
attendants, and police shall have the authority to eject from the park any
person acting in violation of this chapter.
   (C)   Seizure of property. The Public Works Director, or his or her
designee, park attendants, and police shall have the authority to seize and
confiscate any property, thing, or device in the park, or used, in violation of
this chapter.
('71 Code, § 17½-22) (Ord. passed 2-16-71; Am. Ord. passed 3-16-10)
Penalty, see § 10.99
CHAPTER 97: STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Section
General Provisions
   
97.00   Highway Department established
   
97.01   Driving on sidewalks prohibited
   
97.02   [Reserved]
   
97.03   Throwing or putting snow in the city way is prohibited
   
97.04   Uncovered wells, cisterns, drains prohibited
   
97.05   Collecting or removing dirt or manure from streets
   
97.06   Police Chief and Department of Public Works to enforce
Building Numbers and Street Names
   
97.15   Designated by Board
   
97.16   Numbers to be affixed
   
97.17   Unauthorized building numbers prohibited
   
97.18   Master plan for numbering buildings
   
97.19   Master plan for street prefixed
   
97.20   City Hall Plaza
Excavations and Obstructions
   
97.30   Permit and compliance with conditions required
   
97.31   Granting of permit
   
97.32   Bus shelters
   
97.33   Bond and insurance certificates required for permit
   
97.34   Encumbrances prohibited
   
97.35   Erection of obstructions prohibited; exception
   
97.36   Fence and light required
   
97.37   Railing or fence required for excavation near street
   
97.38   Erection or alteration of outer walls
   
97.39   Attachments to outer walls
   
97.40   Lamp restrictions
   
97.41   Protection of cellar or basement entrance
   
97.42   Banners over streets prohibited
   
97.43   Restrictions on location of fuel
Overpasses
   
97.55   Overpasses prohibited; exceptions
   
97.56   Liability insurance required
   
97.57   Removal
   
97.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Authority of city to regulate all streets and public ways, see R.S.A. 47:17
(VII)
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 97.00 HIGHWAY DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED.
   (A)   Pursuant to
Charter § 3.02 there is established a Highway Department.
   (B)   Department head. The department head shall be the Public Works
Director who shall be appointed as provided by
Charter § 3.03. The Public Works Director shall also be the Chief Engineer for
the city.
   (C)   Composition. The Highway Department shall also include a Highway
Commission consisting of five members who shall be appointed as provided by
Charter § 3.14 and the Commission shall have those duties and responsibilities
as assigned by the Charter.
   (D)   Duties. The Highway Department shall be responsible for the
construction and maintenance of all public roadways and bridges, the collection
and treatment of wastewater, the control and collection of storm drainage, the
collection and disposal of solid waste, shall provide for custodial, corrective
and preventive maintenance, environmental compliance and capital improvements
for city buildings, and the related mechanical facilities, shall provide for
city-wide centralized purchasing and fleet management initiatives, shall be
responsible for the electric aggregation program and shall perform such other
duties as are prescribed by federal, state and local law.
   (E)   Division of Parks, Recreation and Cemetery. The Highway Department
through its Division of Parks, Recreation and Cemetery shall be responsible for
city parks, recreation facilities and programs, including school athletic
facilities, and public cemeteries and shall perform such other duties as are
prescribed by federal, state and local law.
(Ord. passed 11-4-98; Am. Ord. passed 12-7-99; Am. Ord. passed 3-16-10)
§ 97.01 DRIVING ON SIDEWALKS PROHIBITED.
   No person shall, without necessity, drive a wheeled carriage, sled, or
wheelbarrow, upon or over the side pavements or walks of any street within the
city.
('71 Code, § 22-1)
Penalty, see § 97.99
§ 97.02 [RESERVED].
§ 97.03 THROWING OR PUTTING SNOW IN THE CITY WAY PROHIBITED.
   No person shall throw, place, of put, dispose of or cause to be thrown,
placed, put, or disposed of, any snow, slush or ice onto any city-owned
sidewalk or upon any city way.
('71 Code, § 22-3) (Ord. passed 6-4-63; Am. Ord. passed 6-21-22) Penalty, see §
97.99
Statutory reference:
   Snow obstructions, see R.S.A. 236.20
§ 97.04 UNCOVERED WELLS, CISTERNS, DRAINS PROHIBTED.
   No person shall permit his well, cistern, or drain, in any street or
sidewalk in the city to be uncovered.
('71 Code, § 22-4)
Penalty, see § 97.99
§ 97.05 COLLECTING OR REMOVING DIRT OR MANURE FROM STREETS.
   No person shall collect, gather up, or remove any earth, soil, muck, manure,
or offal from any street in the city except by permission of the Department of
Highways.
('71 Code, § 22-5)
Penalty, see § 97.99
§ 97.06 POLICE CHIEF AND DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS TO ENFORCE.
   It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police and the Department of Public
Works to cause to be removed any awnings, shades, signs, advertisements,
banners, overpasses, thing, substance, or other objects constructed or placed
otherwise than as provided in this chapter and to prosecute any person
offending against any of its provisions.
('71 Code, § 22-6) (Am. Ord. passed 6-21-22)
BUILDING NUMBERS AND STREET NAMES
§ 97.15 DESIGNATED BY BOARD.
   The Department of Highways shall, as the convenience of the public may
require, designate the numbers to be affixed to the buildings on the streets
and squares in the city, and shall designate the names of new streets when laid
out.
('71 Code, § 22-15) (Am. Ord. passed 10-31-78)
§ 97.16 NUMBERS TO BE AFFIXED.
   Any building or structure for which a number has been designated shall have
such number affixed thereto in such manner so as to be plainly visible from the
street which abuts the main entrance to the property.
('71 Code, § 22-16) (Ord. passed 10-31-78)
Cross reference:
   Citation penalties, see § 38.06
§ 97.17 UNAUTHORIZED BUILDING NUMBERS PROHIBITED.
   No person shall affix, or permit to be affixed to, or shall allow to remain
upon any building in the city, any different number from the one designated by
the Department of Highways.
('71 Code, § 22-18)
Cross reference:
   
Citation penalties, see § 38.06
§ 97.18 MASTER PLAN FOR NUMBERING BUILDINGS.
   On all streets in the city, the odd numbers to be affixed to the buildings
thereon shall be on the right-hand side and the even numbers on the left-hand
side in the progressive order of numbering commencing with the lowest numbers,
and proceeding therefrom with increasing numbers, as follows:
   (A)   On the east side of the Merrimack River, in streets running northerly
and southerly, the numbering shall commence at Kennedy Street, West Baker
Street, Baker Street and Cilley Road, or at the northerly or southerly ends of
streets not connecting with Kennedy Street, West Baker Street, Baker Street and
Cilley Road on the northerly and southerly sides thereof.
   (B)   On the east side of the Merrimack River, in streets running easterly
and westerly, the numbering shall commence at Elm Street from Mitchell Street
and West Mitchell Street northerly; from Mitchell Street to the junction of
Brown Avenue and Calef Road, the numbering shall commence at Calef Road in
streets running easterly; from West Mitchell Street to the junction of Brown
Avenue and Calef Road, the numbering shall commence at Brown Avenue in streets
running westerly; from the junction of Brown Avenue and Calef Road southerly,
in streets running easterly and westerly, the numbering shall commence at Brown
Avenue.
   (C)   On the west side of the Merrimack River, in streets running northerly
and southerly, the numbering shall commence at Granite Street from Main Street
and South Main Street to the Merrimack River; from South Main Street
northwesterly, the numbering shall commence at the Piscataquog River, or at the
northerly or southerly ends of streets not connecting with Granite Street or
the Piscataquog River on the northerly or southerly sides thereof.
   (D)   On the west side of the Merrimack River, in streets running easterly
and westerly, the numbering shall commence at the Merrimack River, or at the
easterly or westerly ends of streets not extending to or crossing the Merrimack
River, and at Elm Street in streets crossing the river.
   (E)   Any entrance or door to a building fronting the street shall be
designated by a separate number, but numbers may be omitted for vacant lots and
spaces which may be built upon hereafter.
('71 Code, § 22-19)
§ 97.19 MASTER PLAN FOR STREET PREFIXES.
   (A)   The names of streets crossing Kennedy Street, West Baker Street, Baker
Street, Cilley Road, Granite Street and the Piscataquog River shall be prefixed
by the word “South” on the southerly side of said Kennedy Street, West Baker
Street, Baker Street, Cilley Road, Granite Street, and the Piscataquog River;
the northerly portions of the streets to have no-prefix name. This provision
shall not apply to Willow Street and Calef Road.
   (B)   The names of streets crossing Elm Street from Mitchell Street and West
Mitchell Street northerly and Brown Avenue from Calef Road southerly shall be
prefixed by the word “West” on the west side of Elm Street and Brown Avenue;
the easterly portions of the streets to have no prefix name.
('71 Code, § 22-20)
§ 97.20 CITY HALL PLAZA.
   The City Hall and the City Hall Annex together shall be known as City Hall
Plaza and together shall have an address of One City Hall Plaza.
(Ord. passed 8-4-98)
EXCAVATIONS AND OBSTRUCTIONS
§ 97.30 PERMIT AND COMPLIANCE WITH CONDITIONS REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person shall break or dig up the pavement, ground, or stones in any
street or on any sidewalk or common in the city, or erect any staging for
building, or place or deposit any earth, stone, bricks, timber, or other
building materials thereon without first obtaining a written permit from the
Department of Highways or some person authorized by them to grant such permit.
('71 Code, § 22-31)
   (B)   Any person issued a permit pursuant to this subchapter, shall comply
in all respects with the conditions thereof. ('71 Code, § 22-34)
Penalty, see § 97.99
Statutory reference:
   Obstructions and encroachments, see R.S.A. 236:15 et seq.
§ 97.31 GRANTING OF PERMIT.
   The Department of Highways may grant a permit in writing to any person, for
the purpose of building, or other lawful purposes to dig up, obstruct, or
encumber so much and such parts of any street or sidewalk, or other public
place in the city, and on such terms and conditions as it shall deem to be safe
and proper.
('71 Code, § 22-32)
§ 97.32 BUS SHELTERS.
   The Public Works Director with the approval of the Board of Mayor and
Aldermen may grant permits to the Manchester Transit Authority for the erection
and maintenance of bus shelters on public streets and sidewalks on such
conditions as he shall deem to be safe and proper including approval of the
location, design, type, size and adequacy of such shelters. The permits shall
prescribe the manner of use of the shelters including maintenance requirements.
The permits may be revoked as public convenience or necessity requires. The
Planning and Community Development Department with the approval of the Board of
Mayor and Aldermen may grant permits to the Manchester Transit Authority for
the erection and maintenance of bus shelters on private property on such
conditions as it deems to be safe and proper including approval of the
location, design, type, size and adequacy of such shelters. The permits shall
set forth the manner of use of the shelters including maintenance requirements
and may be revoked by the Planning and Community Development Department as
public convenience or necessity requires and shall be exempt from the
provisions of the Zoning Code, Chapter 155 of this code.
('71 Code, § 22-32.1) (Am. Ord. passed 8-26-80; Am. Ord. 2-7-09)
§ 97.33 BOND AND INSURANCE CERTIFICATES REQUIRED FOR PERMIT.
   (A)   Any person applying for a permit pursuant to this subchapter, shall
file with the Department of Highways a bond in such sum and with such sureties
as the Department shall approve, conditioned to indemnify the city against all
loss, cost, damage, or expense, by persons on account of such obstruction or
encumbrance, and further conditioned to guarantee the city that any part of any
street or sidewalk or other public place excavated by the licensee will be
replaced at no cost to the city, and in a manner satisfactory to the Department
of Highways, within a period of time not to exceed five days from the date of
the completion of the project.
   (B)   The permittee, as a condition of the permit, shall agree to indemnify
and protect the city and the Highway Department against all liability, claims,
or demands for injuries or damages, including claims for loss or interruption
of business in cases where the encumbrance or construction impedes the flow of
traffic, to any person or property arising out of activities of the permittee,
its servants, employees, agents, representatives or subcontractors.
   (C)   The permittee, as a condition of the permit, shall agree to carry the
following insurance:
      (1)   Comprehensive general liability insurance with limits not less than
$1,000,000 per occurrence for bodily injury and $500,000 per occurrence for
property damage and automobile liability insurance with limits not less than
$500,000 per person and $1,000,000 per occurrence for bodily injury and
$500,000 per occurrence for property damage covering all activities of the
permittee for the full period of the permit. Such insurance shall include the
city and the Highway Department, including all officials and employees thereof.
Such insurance shall include:
         (a)   All activities including use of all vehicles.
         (b)   Contractual liability covering this permit.
         (c)   Coverage for the so-called “x, c, u,” hazards (for example,
collapse of buildings, blasting, and damage to underground property).
         (d)   Completed operations hazard for a period of at least two years
following the acceptance by the Highway Department of the completed permit.
         (e)   “Personal” injury coverage (in addition to “bodily injury”).
      (2)   The permittee shall carry worker's compensation insurance including
employer's liability insurance with limits of $100,000, whether or not required
by The New Hampshire Revised Statutes Annotated, 1955, as amended, for all
activities of the permittee during the period of the permit.
      (3)   Insurance similar to that required of the permittee shall be
provided by, or on behalf of all independent contractors used by the permittee
during the period of this permit. The permittee shall be held responsible for
any modifications in these insurance requirements as they apply to independent
contractors.
      (4)   Insurance certificates evidencing the above coverage are to be
furnished to the Highway Department prior to issuance of the permit, and shall
provide for not less than 30 days prior notice to the Highway Department of any
cancellation or major change in the policies.
      (5)   The purchase of the insurance required or the furnishing of the
aforesaid certificates shall not be a satisfaction of the permittee's liability
hereunder or in any way modify the permittee's indemnification responsibilities
to the city or the Highway Department.
('71 Code, § 22-33) (Am. Ord. passed 8-7-73; Am. Ord. passed 5-1-79)
Penalty, see § 97.99
§ 97.34 ENCUMBRANCES PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall encumber the street or sidewalk before his place of
business, or elsewhere in the city, with any boxes, shelves, stands,
merchandise, or other things, excepting that the Board of Mayor and Aldermen
may grant a license to any person or persons to use and occupy a portion of the
street or sidewalk for the purpose of conducting thereon street fairs or other
community events. Each such license shall contain the following provisions:
      (1)   Each license shall be valid for not in excess of three consecutive
business days.
      (2)   Each license shall allow the encumbering of no more than half of
the sidewalk area immediately adjacent to the building so that a minimum of
half of the sidewalk is maintained free and clear for pedestrian traffic unless
otherwise ordered by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen.
      (3)   Each license shall also be subject to such rules and regulations as
are deemed appropriate by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen.
   (B)   The City Clerk, with the review and approval of the Director of
Planning and Community Development and the Risk Manager may, in accordance with
Chapter 110 of this code, license businesses located in the downtown area
bounded by Queen City Avenue to Salmon Street and the easterly side of the
Merrimack River to Chestnut Street to encumber no more than half of the
sidewalk area immediately adjacent to the building in which the business is
located so that a minimum of half of the sidewalk is maintained free and clear
for pedestrian traffic. Each such license shall contain the following
provisions:
      (1)   Each license shall be valid from April 1 through October 15 and the
hours of operation shall be from 9:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. The City Clerk, upon
application by a licensee, shall have the discretion to extend the dates and
times of operation.
      (2)   Each license shall be subject to the insurance provisions contained
in
§ 115.60 of this code and shall be subject to the restrictions contained in §
115.44 of this code with the exception of times of operation.
      (3)   Each license shall also be subject to such rules and regulations as
are deemed appropriate by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen.
      (4)   Each license shall be issued only to establishments as identified
in division (B) of this section.
      (5)   Application fee. Each application for a permit under this section
shall be submitted with a fee of $50.
      (6)   Any establishment licensed pursuant to this subsection and serving
alcoholic beverages to its patrons, must be a restaurant as defined in R.S.A.
175:1 and must provide the City Clerk with a copy of a current liquor license
issued by the New Hampshire State Liquor Commission.
   (C)   Letter or package collection boxes may be erected upon a street or
sidewalk, at sites chosen by, and under the direction and supervision of the
Public Works Director and the Director of Planning and Community Development.
Letter or package collection boxes shall be subject to such insurance and
indemnification agreements as the Risk Manager may require.
   (D)   Newspaper distribution boxes may be erected upon a street or sidewalk
under the direction and supervision of the Public Works Director who may impose
such reasonable time, place and manner requirements as are necessary to protect
the public safety and convenience. Newspaper distribution boxes shall be
subject to such reasonable insurance and indemnification agreements as the Risk
Manager may require.
   (E)   Notwithstanding the requirements in (B) of this section and Article
9.07D of the Zoning Ordinance, under the direction and supervision of the City
Clerk, portable signage may be erected upon a public right-of-way adjacent to a
place of business for the purposes of advertising. The City Clerk may issue
permits for such portable signage only after review by the Planning and
Community Development Department and the Public Works Director, who may impose
such reasonable time, place, manner and dimensional requirements as are
necessary to protect the public safety and convenience. Each application for a
permit under this section shall be accompanied with a fee of $25. Portable
signage authorized under this section shall be subject to such insurance and
indemnification agreements as the Risk Manager may require.
('71 Code, § 22-35) (Am. Ord. passed 7-3-73; Am. Ord. passed 9-2-75; Am. Ord.
passed 11-20-84; Am. Ord. passed 7-12-90; Am. Ord. passed 2-21-95; Am. Ord.
passed 6-5-00; Am. Ord. passed 11-7-01; Am. Ord. passed 4-16-02; Am. Ord.
passed 2-19-08; Am. Ord. passed 2-7-09; Am. Ord. passed 5-19-09; Am. Ord.
passed 10-3- 17; Am. Ord. passed 7-17-18)  Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.35 ERECTION OF OBSTRUCTIONS PROHIBITED; EXCEPTION.
   No person shall make, erect, or maintain any door-step, portico, porch
entrance, or passageway to any cellar, basement, or other structure, upon any
sidewalk in the city, except that handicapped accessible entrances may be
erected under the supervision of the Director of Public Works and Director of
Planning and Community Development; and by a 2/3 vote of the Board of Mayor and
Aldermen installation of stairs within the public right-of-way and marquees or
porte cocheres or canopies may be erected under the supervision of the Director
of Planning and Community Development.
('71 Code, § 22-36) (Am. Ord. passed 9-6-83; Am. Ord. passed 10-19-93; Am. Ord.
passed 11-20-07; Am. Ord. passed 2-7-09)
Penalty, see § 97.99
§ 97.36 FENCE AND LIGHT REQUIRED.
   Whenever any street, sidewalk, or other public place in the city shall,
under any permit granted pursuant to this subchapter, be dug up, obstructed,
encumbered, or otherwise rendered thereby unsafe, or inconvenient for
travelers, the person granted a permit shall at all times:
   (A)   Keep a suitable railing or fence around the section or parts of any
street, sidewalk, or other public place, dug up, obstructed or encumbered, so
long as the same shall be unsafe or inconvenient.
   (B)   Keep one or more lighted lanterns fixed to such fence, or in some
other proper manner, every night from twilight in the evening and through the
whole night, so long as such railing or fence shall be kept standing.
   (C)   Repair, within such reasonable time as the Department of Highways
shall direct, any street, sidewalk, or public place, to the acceptance of the
Board of Highway Commissioners.
('71 Code, § 22-37)
Penalty, see § 97.99
Statutory reference:
   Authority of city to regulate the digging up of ground in streets or public
ways, see R.S.A. 47:17 (VII)
§ 97.37 RAILING OR FENCE REQUIRED FOR EXCAVATION NEAR STREET.
   No person shall dig or sink, or cause to be dug or sunk, or permit to
remain, any well, cellar, cistern, drain, or other cavity in the ground, near
to or adjoining any street or sidewalk in the city, unless he first puts up,
and at all times keeps up, a railing or fence, on or near the line of such
street, lane, or alley, sufficient to guard and protect travelers and
passengers from falling into it or being injured thereby.
('71 Code, § 22-38)
Penalty, see § 97.99
§ 97.38 ERECTION OR ALTERATION OF OUTER WALLS.
   (A)   Any person who intends to erect or to make alterations in the external
walls of any building shall, before he proceeds to build or erect the same, or
to lay the foundations thereof, or to make the said alterations, or to do any
act for carrying into execution his intention to do such things, give to the
Department of Highways at least two days notice in writing of his intention.
The notice shall state therein the dimensions of the structure proposed, the
materials to be used, the precise location, and the name of the owner in order
that and encroachment, injury, or other inconvenience to the public streets,
which might otherwise happen, may be thereby prevented.
   (B)   If any person fails to give notice to the Department of Highways, the
city shall be discharged from all liability for damages of any nature
whatsoever resulting from the failure to give notice, particularly from all
liability for such damages or expenses as have been enhanced or occasioned by
reason of anything done previously to or without such notice.
('71 Code, § 22-39)
Penalty, see § 97.99
§ 97.39 ATTACHMENTS TO OUTER WALLS.
   (A)   No appliance fixture, or other type unit or appendage, shall be hung,
placed, or fastened to the outer walls of a building or structure, or in the
window openings of same, any of which are located above the first story or
seven feet above grade and within six feet of a public way and facing same,
unless such installation is made in a secure and workmanlike manner with an
adequate metal shelf or angle brackets to which the unit shall be fastened and
so arranged that it will support the weight of the unit without danger of
overturning from any cause.
   (B)   No such installation shall be made prior to having received a permit
for the same from the Director of Planning and Community Development, and no
such permit shall be issued unless the owner of the unit in question shall have
filed with the Director of Planning and Community Development a public
liability insurance policy with the same provisions as specified in section
1408.0 of the building code of the city.
('71 Code, § 22-40) (Am. Ord. passed 2-7-09)
Penalty, see § 97.99
Cross-reference:
   
Building regulations, see Ch. 151
§ 97.40 LAMP RESTRICTIONS.
   No person shall place or maintain upon the street frontage of any building
in which is located a place of business, one or more incandescent lamps and the
fixtures for supporting the same, except that the same may be placed or
maintained on streets which are not provided with street lights under the
following conditions:
   (A)   A permit for placing such light or lights shall be obtained from the
Director of Planning and Community Development and the installation, when made,
shall be approved by him.
   (B)   Each lamp shall be supported by a separate fixture, securely attached
to the building.
   (C)   The overall projection of such lamp or fixture, over the sidewalk,
shall not exceed 24 inches, and no part of said lamp or fixture shall be less
than ten feet above the sidewalk.
   (D)   The lamp, shade, globe, or fixture shall bear no word or marking of
any kind.
   (E)   Should the street, upon which any such light is installed, be provided
with special illumination, as specified above, the right to maintain such light
shall terminate.
   (F)   No lights installed as herein provided shall be so arranged as to form
any letter, emblem, or device, or in any way to constitute an electric sign, it
being expressly understood that the sole purpose of this provision is to afford
illumination.
   (G)   The Director of Planning and Community Development may order and
effect the removal of any such light or fixture, if in his judgment, the same
adversely affects the safety or convenience of the public.
   (H)   No such installation shall be altered, except with the consent of the
Director of Planning and Community Development.
('71 Code, § 22-41) (Am. Ord. passed 2-7-09)
Penalty, see § 97.99
§ 97.41 PROTECTION OF CELLAR OR BASEMENT ENTRANCE.
   (A)   Any entrance or passageway to a cellar or basement in any street or
sidewalk in the city shall at all times be either covered by a suitable and
substantial platform or grate or, in case it is kept open, it shall be guarded
and protected by a sufficient railing, on both sides thereof, at least two and
one-half feet high, and well-lighted at night.
   (B)   No person shall make or maintain any opening in any street or sidewalk
opposite the basement windows in any building owned or occupied by him, unless
the same shall be covered by a strong iron grate.
   (C)   No person shall permit the platform or gate of the entrance or
passageway to his cellar or basement, in any street or sidewalk, to rise above
the surface of such street or sidewalk in the city.
('71 Code, § 22-42)
Penalty, see § 97.99
Statutory reference:
   Authority of city to regulate the securing by railings or otherwise any
well, cellar or other dangerous place in or near the line of the street, see
R.S.A., 47:17
   Authority of city to regulate the erection of posts, signs, steps or awnings
on all streets and public ways, see R.S.A. 47:17 (VII)
§ 97.42 BANNERS OVER STREETS PROHIBITED.
   No person shall erect or maintain a temporary or permanent banner over and
above any street of the city for any purpose whatsoever, except by special
license of the Board of Mayor and Aldermen.
('71 Code, § 22-43) (Am. Ord. passed 8-5-86)
Penalty, see § 97.99
§ 97.43 RESTRICTIONS ON LOCATION OF FUEL.
   No person shall permit his fire-wood, coal, or other fuel, in any quantity,
to remain unnecessarily on any sidewalk or street in the city overnight, or
after twilight in the evening. If the same must of necessity remain after
twilight, or through the night, the owner thereof shall place and keep a
sufficient light over or near the same through the night, in order to give
notice thereof to travelers and passengers, and thereby prevent injury to them.
('71 Code, § 22-44)
Penalty, see § 97.99
OVERPASSES
§ 97.55 OVERPASSES PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS
   (A)   No person shall erect upon any premises, building, or structure
abutting a public street in the city, any device designed for the
transportation or delivery of any article of merchandise over or across the
street.
   (B)   The Board of Mayor and Aldermen may, subject to the approval of the
Public Works Director and the Director of Planning and Community Development,
permit the erection of enclosed overpasses for the purpose of providing passage
or for the transportation of merchandise, materials, or other articles between
buildings in industrial districts, when such overpasses may be erected without
undue interference with the use of public highways.
('71 Code, § 22-50) (Am. Ord. passed 2-7-09)
Penalty, see § 97.99
§ 97.56 LIABILITY INSURANCE REQUIRED.
   No person shall erect an overpass over any street in the city without first
filing with the Director of Planning and Community Development a public
liability insurance policy with the same provisions as specified in section
1408.0 of the building code of the city.
('71 Code, § 22-51) (Am. Ord. passed 2-7-09)
Penalty, see § 97.99
Cross-reference:
   
Building regulations, see Ch. 151
§ 97.57 REMOVAL.
   The Board of Mayor and Aldermen may require the removal of any overpass
erected under the authority of this subchapter whenever, in its opinion, upon
advice from the Director of Planning and Community Development and the Public
Works Director, such overpass is no longer being used by the property owner and
constitutes a danger or encumbrance to the use of the public street over which
it is located.
('71 Code, § 22-52) (Am. Ord. passed 2-7-09)
§ 97.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be subject
to the penalty set forth in
§ 10.99 of this code.
   (B)   Any person who shall violate any provision of
§ 97.34 shall upon conviction thereof be fined not more than $100. Each day
that a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. ('71 Code, §
22-35(c)) (Am. Ord. passed 7-3-73; Am. Ord. passed 11-20-84; Am. Ord. passed 7-
12-90; Am. Ord. passed 2-21-95)
CHAPTER 98: CEMETERIES
Section
   
98.01   Management of cemeteries
   
98.02   Disposition of proceeds from lot sales
   
98.03   Enforcement of interment and disinterment regulations
Cross-reference:
   General authority in relation to cemeteries, R.S.A., 47:17 (XV)
   Division of Parks, Recreation and Cemetery,
§ 96.00
§ 98.01 MANAGEMENT OF CEMETERIES.
   The cemeteries of the city shall be under the care, supervision, and
management of the Highway Department acting by and through its Division of
Parks and Recreation and Cemetery. Duties formerly performed by the Board of
Cemetery Trustees shall to the extent authorized by the charter henceforth be
performed by the Parks, Recreation and Cemetery Division Commission.
('71 Code, § 7-1) (Ord. passed 2-17-93; Am. Ord. passed 3-16-10)
§ 98.02 DISPOSITION OF PROCEEDS FROM LOT SALES.
   The proceeds of the sale of lots in cemeteries shall be paid into the city
treasury and a receipt taken for same, and shall be subject to the
appropriations of the Board of Mayor and Aldermen for any legal municipal
expenditure, except that of the price paid to the City Treasurer for burial
lots in any cemetery which shall hereafter be graded and offered for sale, 75%
of the purchase price shall be paid by the City Treasurer to the trustees of
trust funds, who shall hold, manage, and invest the same in the same manner as
other funds in the hands of the trustees are held, managed, and invested and
shall authorize expenditure of the net annual income thereof in the payment for
watering the burial lots and keeping the grass upon the same cut. The remaining
25% of the price shall be paid into the city treasury.
('71 Code, § 7-2) (Ord. passed 2-17-93)
§ 98.03 ENFORCEMENT OF INTERMENT AND DISINTERMENT REGULATIONS.
   It shall be the duty of the Board of Health to see that all laws and
ordinances relating to the interment and disinterment of the dead are
faithfully executed.
('71 Code, § 12-2)
CHAPTER 99: GRAFFITI
Section
   
99.01   Purpose and intent
   
99.02   Definitions
   
99.03   Graffiti declared public nuisance
   
99.04   Prohibited conduct
 
   
99.99   Penalty
§ 99.01 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   The purpose and intent of this chapter is to establish means to prevent,
prohibit and remove graffiti from structures and surfaces on public and private
property in the city.
(Ord. passed 1-19-99)
§ 99.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AEROSOL PAINT CONTAINER. Any aerosol container which is adapted or made for
the purpose of applying spray paint, or other substances capable of defacing
property.
   FELT TIP MARKER. Any indelible marker or similar implement with a tip which,
at its broadest width, is greater than of an inch, containing ink or other
pigmented liquid which is not water soluble.
   GRAFFITI. Any inscription, word, figure, painting or other defacement that
is written, marked, etched, scratched, sprayed, drawn, painted, engraved on or
otherwise affixed to or on any surface or structure on public or private
property within the city, to the extent such is not authorized by the owner or
occupant thereof.
   GRAFFITI IMPLEMENT. Any aerosol paint container, a felt tip marker, gum
label, paint or graffiti stick, etching tool or any other device capable of
scarring or leaving a visible mark on glass, metal, concrete, wood, or any
other surface.
   PAINT OR GRAFFITI STICK. Any device containing a solid form of paint, chalk,
wax, epoxy or other similar substance capable of being applied to a surface by
pressure and upon application, of leaving a mark at least of an inch in width.
(Ord. passed 1-19-99)
§ 99.03 GRAFFITI DECLARED PUBLIC NUISANCE.
   The Board of Mayor and Aldermen (hereinafter, the “Board”) hereby declares
and finds graffiti to be a public nuisance subject to abatement according to
the provisions and procedures established herein. Graffiti defaces and damages
both public and private property. Moreover, graffiti, whether on public or
private property, is often visible to the general public and thereby detracts
from the aesthetics of the city.
(Ord. passed 1-19-99)
§ 99.04 PROHIBITED CONDUCT.
   (A)   No person may apply graffiti to any surface or structure on public or
private property within the city.
   (B)   No person shall possess any graffiti implement with the intent to
violate the provisions of division (A).
(Ord. passed 1-19-99)
Penalty, see § 99.99
§ 99.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
violation and may be subject to a fine up to $1,000. A separate offense shall
be deemed committed each day during or on which the violation occurs or
continues.
(Ord. passed 1-19-99)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
            Chapter
               
110.   LICENSING
               
111.   ENTERTAINMENT
               
112.   EMPLOYMENT OFFICES
               
113.   [RESERVED]
               
114.   SECONDHAND AND JUNK DEALERS
               
115.   SOLICITATIONS, SALES, PEDDLERS, AND FAIRS
               
116.   [RESERVED]
               
117.   FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS
               
118.   VEHICLES FOR HIRE
               
119.   TRANSPORTATION NETWORK SERVICES
CHAPTER 110: LICENSING
Section
General Provisions
   
110.01   Definitions
   
110.02   Business license required
   
110.03   License remains property of city
   
110.04   Duty of corporate officers or agents to procure license
   
110.05   [Reserved]
   
110.06   Evidence of liability for securing license
   
110.07   Separate license for each premise
   
110.08   Exemptions
   
110.09   Location of licensee; zoning regulation
License Restrictions
   
110.20   Business license fees
   
110.21   Proration of initial annual license fees
   
110.22   Delinquency and cancellation
   
110.23   Changes to business license
   
110.24   Rebate of license fees
   
110.25   Application for license
   
110.26   Compliance with title; revocation of license
   
110.27   Hearing
   
110.28   Enforcement
 
   
110.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
    
Central Business Service Districts, see Ch. 37
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 110.01 DEFINITIONS.
   FFor the purpose of this title, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ANTIQUE. A unique object of personal property that is not less than 60 years
old and has special value primarily because of its age. Jewelry, timepieces,
candlesticks, firearms, and items composed of precious metals shall not be
considered ANTIQUES under this definition.
   AUCTION HOUSE. Any establishment in which is carried on the business of
auctioning articles for sale by public outcry and where such items offered for
auction are sold immediately to the highest bidder.
   AUCTIONEER. Any person who shall operate an auction house or who, as a
principal or agent, shall offer any article for sale by public outcry and where
such items offered at auction are sold immediately to the highest bidder.
   BRANCH ESTABLISHMENT. A different and separate location, or a separate kind
or class of business carried on at one location, or in the case of vehicles, a
different and separate vehicle, from that mentioned in any other license held
by the same licensee, in or from which any business may be conducted at the
same time. Any person carrying on a business at one location containing several
departments, all of which are presided over and carried on exclusively by the
person as proprietor, is required to apply for only one business license.
   BUSINESS. Any profession, trade, occupation, lessor, and all and every kind
of calling carried on for income, profit, or livelihood as provided for under
§ 110.02 of this chapter.
   CASUAL ACTIVITY OR SALE. A transaction of an isolated nature made by an
individual who neither represents himself to be nor is engaged in a business
subject to licensing by this title. However, no sale, rental, license for use,
or lease transaction concerning real property shall be treated, or be exempt,
as casual. This definition shall include sales of used capital assets, provided
that the volume and frequency of such sales do not indicate that the seller
regularly engages in selling such property.
   CHARITABLE INSTITUTIONS. Only nonprofit corporations operating physical
facilities in this state at which are provided charitable services, a
reasonable percentage of which are without cost to those unable to pay.
   CONSIGNMENT. Any transaction where a person places goods into the custody of
another but retains ownership until such time as the good is sold or
transferred to another person.
   ENGAGED IN BUSINESS. The conducting, managing, or carrying on of any
profession, trade, calling, occupation or commercial enterprise in the city for
which a license is required under the provisions of this title as owner,
officer, agent, manager, employee, or lessee of any of them.
   EXEMPT LICENSE. A license issued under this title for which a payment of a
fee is not required.
   FOOD-SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT. Any fixed or mobile restaurant; cafeteria;
coffee shop; cocktail lounge; catering kitchen; sidewalk cafe; commissary;
grille, luncheonette; short-order cafe; sandwich shop; soda fountain; tea-room;
drive-in; nightclub; roadside stand; industrial feeding establishment; private,
public or non-profit organization or institution serving the public; or similar
place in which food or drink is prepared for sale for food service on the
premises or elsewhere; and any other eating or drinking establishment where
food is served or provided for the public with or without charge. A FOOD-
SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT also means a grocery store; meat market; or bakery.
   HIGH-IMPACT RETAIL STORE. Any business which is accessible to the public
where food, goods, merchandise or equipment is sold at retail and where
tobacco, tobacco paraphernalia, smoking paraphernalia, including products that
contain nicotine, liquid nicotine, vapors or inhalants and/or involve the on-
site inhaling or smoking of such products, and/or lottery tickets are sold.
   JUNK COLLECTOR. A person, firm, or corporation having a trucking license as
provided in this code, traveling from place to place within the city for the
purpose of purchasing junk, or making a business of purchasing junk from anyone
who desires to sell it and carries it away upon purchasing it.
   JUNK DEALER. Any person who collects or buys junk, including such items as
rags, bottles, scrap metal, paper, and such other material as is usually
collected for salvage purposes and where such person holds it for storage or
offers it for sale.
   LICENSEE. A person holding or applying for licensure under this title.
   PAWNBROKER. Any person, firm, partnership, or corporation engaged in the
business of lending money or other goods secured by taking possession of
personal property with the understanding that such property may be sold,
transferred or redeemed under certain terms and conditions.
   PAWNSHOP. Any establishment in which is carried on the business of pawn
brokerage, or the business of loaning money, receiving as security for payment
thereof pawns or pledges of property, or the business of purchasing personal
property and reselling or agreeing to resell, trade, or exchange such articles
to vendors, their personal representatives, or their assignees at a price
agreed upon at or before the time of such purchase, whether such business be
the principal or sole business so carried on or be merely incidental to, in
connection with, or a branch or a department of some other business.
   PERSON. Any individual, tradesperson, self-proprietorship, partnership,
joint venture, firm, corporation, association, organization, group, syndicate,
or combination acting as a unit, association, corporation, estate, trust,
business trust, trustee, executor, administrator, receiver, or other fiduciary,
and shall include those operating or intending to operate for-profit, not-for-
profit, or non-profit. A subsidiary corporation shall be considered a separate
person from its parent corporation for purposes of licensure. This definition
shall not include the U.S. Government, the state, the county, the city, or any
political subdivision or agency of the federal, state, county or municipal
governments.
   SALE. Any transfer of title or possession, or both, exchange, barter,
conditional or otherwise, in any manner or by any means whatsoever, including
consignment transactions and auctions, of property for a consideration. Sale
includes any transaction whereby the possession of such property is transferred
but the seller retains the title as security for the payment of the price. SALE
also includes the fabrication of tangible personal property for consumers who,
in whole or in part, furnish either directly or indirectly the materials used
in such fabrication work.
   SECONDHAND DEALER. Any person, firm, partnership or corporation whose
business is the retail buying, selling, buy-back, exchanging, dealing in or
dealing with secondhand articles, including but not limited to jewelry,
watches, clocks, diamonds or other precious stones or gems, gold, silver,
platinum, other precious metals, musical instruments and equipment, cameras,
furs, fur coats, televisions, DVD players, CDs, DVDs, videocassette recorders,
VHS tapes, gaming systems and other electronic equipment, tools, computers and
computer equipment, firearms, auto accessories and office and store fixtures
and related equipment; regardless of the number of transactions (frequency of
sales shall not be relevant) or the location where such sales take place
(having a dedicated shop, or store and the use of residential property shall
not be relevant). The term shall not be construed to exclude trade-ins,
dealers, or auctioneers in articles of property, the transfer of title to which
is required by the laws of the state to be evidenced by written instrument and
recorded in all appropriate offices of state or county government.
   SQUARE FEET. The total square feet of floor area, all floors, based on the
exterior dimensions of the building space utilized or occupied by the person
for business purposes, including warehouse, storage, interior dock space,
washroom, restroom, hallways, lunchroom, and maintenance areas, and all other
such square footage necessary for the conduct of the business operation. It
shall not include: common areas leading to occupied business areas within
shared commercial building space situations; parking lots, lumber yards,
orchards, or other outdoor areas; accessory shelters, repair or storage
facilities, provided it shall not occupy more than 25% of the gross floor area
of the business; or property represented, managed, or listed by a landlord,
real estate company, or lessor other than the square footage utilized for the
conduct of the business of the landlord, real estate company, or lessor.
   TRADE-IN. The acceptance, sale, or disposal of used automobile tires or
automobile batteries, farm implement parts, farm machinery parts, road
equipment parts, mining equipment parts, automobile parts, or road equipment
parts taken in part payment for new or reconditioned automobile tires,
automobile batteries, farm implement parts, farm machinery parts, road
equipment parts, mining equipment parts, or automobile parts. Dealers
exchanging articles in the course of service or construction work shall not be
deemed to constitute the doing of any business defined under this term.
(Ord. passed 3-7-95; Am. Ord. passed 6-5-12; Am. Ord. passed 4- 18-17; Am. Ord.
passed 2-4-20)
§ 110.02 BUSINESS LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to commence or conduct, or propose
to commence or conduct, either directly or indirectly, a business within the
city and identified by the provisions of this chapter, unless a license
therefor, expiring on April 30 annually, has been issued by the City Clerk upon
payment of the fee prescribed by the provisions of this chapter. A business or
business activity required to file under this chapter shall include: common
victualers; dealers in and keepers of shops for the purchase, sale or barter of
junk, old metals or second-hand articles; pawnbrokers; hotels, motels, inns,
bed and breakfasts; high- impact retail stores; tattoo and body piercing
establishments; farmer’s markets; food-service establishments; taxicab
companies; transportation network companies, companies engaged in towing motor
vehicles without the consent or authorization of the owner or operator;
employment offices; circuses; carnivals; performers and exhibitors; arcades;
dances, dance halls or entertainment places of assembly; peddlers; fairs; and
such other activities, devices, or vehicles that may be cited by this chapter.
   (B)   A business required to file under this title shall comply with all
applicable municipal rules, regulations, and ordinances including, but not
limited to, those issued by the Planning and Community Development, Zoning,
Health, Police and Fire Departments and the applicable statutes, rules and
regulations of the state or its agencies.
   (C)   As a condition of licensure, and at any time during the license
period, a business required to file under this chapter may be subject to
additional restrictions or conditions ordered by the Planning and Community
Development, Health, Police or Fire Departments as may be warranted by any
circumstances pertaining to a specific establishment or to prevent any nuisance
related to or caused by the licensed activity. A nuisance, in addition to its
common law meaning, is anything that endangers life, health or safety, gives
offense to senses, violates common standards of decency or obstructs reasonable
and comfortable use of any property.
(Ord. passed 3-7-95; Am. Ord. passed 6-4-96; Am. Ord. passed 11-19-96; Am. Ord.
passed 2-4-97; Am. Ord. passed 7-1-97; Am. Ord. passed 1-19-99; Am. Ord. passed
2-7-09; Am. Ord. passed 5-3-16; Am. Ord. passed 4-18-17) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.03 LICENSE REMAINS PROPERTY OF CITY.
   Licenses granted under this title shall remain the property of the city and
are to be returned to the office of the City Clerk during a period of
suspension, after revocation, or if the person, firm, corporation, or
association holding the business license ceases to operate.
(Ord. passed 3-7-95)
§ 110.04 DUTY OF CORPORATE OFFICERS OR AGENTS TO PROCURE LICENSE.
   It shall be the duty of all officers and agents of any corporation to see
that such corporation complies with the provisions of this title. All officers
or agents of any corporation required by this title to be licensed which shall
do business without having paid the license fee and procured such license shall
be subject to the penalties imposed by this title upon persons violating this
title.
(Ord. passed 3-7-95)
§ 110.05 [RESERVED].
§ 110.06 EVIDENCE OF LIABILITY FOR SECURING LICENSE.
   Any person registered as a business with the Secretary of State of New
Hampshire, or who shall hold himself out to the public as being engaged in a
business and who is required to file for a business license, shall be liable
for obtaining a business license under this title. Representing himself as
being engaged in a business for the transaction of which requires a business
license or displaying a sign, business card, or advertisement indicating the
conduct of such business in the telephone directory, city directory or other
media shall be evidence that such person is holding himself out to the public
as being engaged in a business, regardless of whether any business transaction
occurs.
(Ord. passed 3-7-95)
§ 110.07 SEPARATE LICENSE FOR EACH PREMISE.
   A separate business license shall be obtained and a separate licensing fee
paid for each branch establishment or separate place of business in which any
business is commenced or conducted. Each license shall authorize the licensee
named therein to commence and conduct only that business described in such
license and only at the location or place of business indicated therein. Any
person who operates a separately-owned department or concession in a department
store or a building structure or enclosure in which separate departments or
concessions are operated shall pay a license fee in accordance with the
provisions of this title for the department or concession so operated by him,
except in such case where the lessor secures the business license for the
square footage of the leased department.
(Ord. passed 3-7-95)
§ 110.08 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   Vehicles used by any person licensed under this title for the sale and
delivery of tangible personal property at either wholesale or retail from his
place of business on which a business license is paid shall not be construed to
be separate places of business, and no license may be levied on such vehicles
or the operators thereof as salespersons.
   (B)   Casual activity or sales by minors or by persons who may or may not be
licensed under the provisions of this title shall not be construed to be
engaged in a business activity and no license may be levied on such persons for
such activity.
   (C)   A local nonprofit corporation, community chest, fund or foundation
organized and operated exclusively for religious, charitable, scientific,
literary, or educational purposes, when no part of the entity's earnings
benefit any private shareholder or individual and when the entity does not hold
title to real estate within the city, shall be issued an “exempt license,” for
which a payment of a fee is not required, upon compliance with the provisions
of this chapter. Provided, however, that an “exempt license” shall not be
issued for activities or devices regulated under
§§ 111.40 through
111.55.
(Ord. passed 3-7-95; Am. Ord. passed 10-1-96)
§ 110.09 LOCATION OF LICENSEE; ZONING REGULATION.
   Each application for a business license shall definitely state and set out
the exact location at which the business shall be operated. Before issuance of
a license, verification of applicable zoning will be made. If the applicable
zoning regulations do not permit the practice of such business, the license
will be denied.
(Ord. passed 3-7-95)
Cross-reference:
   Central Business Service Districts, see
Ch. 37
LICENSE RESTRICTIONS
§ 110.20 BUSINESS LICENSE FEES.
   (A)   A person licensed under this title shall pay the fee prescribed, based
on the gross square feet of area occupied by the business seeking such license
as follows: For the first 1,500 square feet or fraction thereof, $50; plus $2
per 100 square feet or fraction thereof over 1,500 square feet, except that the
maximum fee for any license shall be $1,000.
   (B)   The applicant for a license shall provide the City Clerk with the
floor area from which the fee shall be computed and both the floor area and fee
shall be indicated on the license. Misrepresentation of any information
required to obtain a license shall be cause for revocation of the license
without refund and a new business license must be applied for and issued for
the business activity to be permitted.
   (C)   Exceptions and minimum fees. Persons outlined in this division shall
not be required to pay fees pursuant to division (A) of this section, but
shall, however, be licensed and/or pay fees as licensed herein:
      (1)   Persons licensed to conduct a circus, carnival, or other form of
amusement or entertainment pursuant to
Chapter 111 of this title shall pay a business license fee, for the use of the
city, of $300. A license to conduct such activity in a hall shall be $50.
      (2)   Persons licensed as performers and exhibitors pursuant to
§§ 111.80 and
111.81 of this title shall pay a business license fee of $10 for each day such
person shall perform or exhibit. A license to conduct such activity in a hall
not licensed under this title shall be $50. Any person who is employed by a
sponsor or an establishment which holds a valid business license under this
title shall not be required to obtain a license.
      (3)   A special event pursuant to §
111.66 for non- profit purposes and not receiving a fee exemption under §
110.08, shall pay a business license fee of $15 per day. All other applicants
shall pay a business license fee of $100 per day.
      (4)   Persons licensed as peddlers pursuant to §§
115.40 through
115.44 of this title shall pay an annual business license fee of $150, cash,
money order, or bank check, or $25, cash, money order, or bank check for a
temporary license, and meet the conditions set therein. Persons licensed as
civic center peddlers pursuant to §§
115.50 through
115.53 of this title shall pay an annual business license fee of $400, cash,
money order, or bank check, or $75, cash, money order, or bank check for a
temporary license, and meet the conditions set therein.
      (5)   Persons licensed to conduct a fair pursuant to §
115.60 of this title shall pay a business license fee of $300 for the first day
and $50 for each additional day and meet the conditions set therein. Fair
applicants proposing to operate as a farmer’s market shall pay a fee of $300
for the season (no more than 40 non-consecutive days within a year).
      (7)   A towing company licensed under this title pursuant to §
110.02(A) and located outside of the city shall pay an annual fee of $50.
(Ord. passed 3-7-95; Am. Ord. passed 6-4-96; Am. Ord. passed 11-7-01; Am. Ord.
passed 4-18-17)
§ 110.21 PRORATION OF INITIAL ANNUAL LICENSE FEES.
   Licensees whose initial application for a business license is received by
the City Clerk after May 1 of the year, or who renews a license in effect
during the calendar year following enactment of this title shall be subject to
all annual license fees on a proration schedule as follows:
Business Start Date         Applicable Licensing Rate
May 1 - July 31            100%
August 1 - October 31             75%
November 1 - January 31          50%
February 1 - April 30             25%
(Ord. passed 3-7-95)
§ 110.22 DELINQUENCY AND CANCELLATION.
   (A)   Any person required to obtain a business license as provided pursuant
to this title who fails to obtain or renew the appropriate license on or before
the date as specified herein shall be considered delinquent and subject to a
delinquency penalty of 10% for the first 30 days of delinquency plus an
additional 10% for the next 30 days.
   (B)   The City Clerk shall be authorized to cancel the business license of
any inactive licensee if the business has neither filed a license renewal nor
remitted to the city the license fee imposed by this title for a period of 60
days. The nonlicensed status may be removed by payment of an annual license fee
in the amount of 150% of the annual business license fee imposed under
§ 110.20(A) of this subchapter.
   (C)   No business license for any succeeding, current, or unexpired license
period shall knowingly be issued to any person who at the time of making
application or renewal thereof is indebted to the city for any unpaid municipal
permit or fee.
(Ord. passed 3-7-95)
Penalty, see § 110.99
§ 110.23 CHANGES TO BUSINESS LICENSE.
   Unless otherwise prohibited business licenses may be transferred to a new
owner when there is a bona fide sale of the business; the business is
transferred to a new location; or the existing business name is changed from
one name or DBA (doing business as) to another business name. These changes to
the existing business license must be accompanied by a new business application
and a transfer fee of $25 along with any additional fees or information
required by the city due to the changes.
(Ord. passed 3-20-01; Am. Ord. passed 4-18-17)
§ 110.24 REBATE OF LICENSE FEES.
   No portion of any business license fee paid pursuant to this title shall be
rebated, unless it clearly appears that such fee was collected by, or
calculated by mistake or error, and before making such rebate of such fees, all
amounts due and payable under proper fees and permits are deducted from the
amount previously paid or are paid by the licensee.
(Ord. passed 3-7-95)
§ 110.25 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   Applications for a business license shall be made to the City Clerk upon a
form to be determined by the City Clerk. The application shall include:
   (A)   The name, home address, home phone number, business address and
business phone number of the applicant.
   (B)   Trade name under which the applicant proposes to do business.
   (C)   A description of the business activity the applicant will be engaged
in.
   (D)   When requested by the City Clerk, a certificate of insurance that the
applicant has been issued an insurance policy by an insurance company licensed
to do business in the state.
   (E)   If applicable, the square footage of the business location.
   (F)   Any other information that may be requested for licensing purposes or
for reasons of public health or safety by other municipal departments
including, but not limited to, Health, Planning and Community Development,
Zoning, Police, or Fire.
   (G)   Any other information reasonably required by the Board of Mayor and
Aldermen or Committee on Administration to the extent necessary and appropriate
for licensing a business activity.
   (H)   Any other information that may be required under an application
process outlined elsewhere in this title for specific business activity.
(Ord. passed 3-7-95; Am. Ord. passed 2-7-09)
§ 110.26 COMPLIANCE WITH TITLE; REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   (A)   No license shall be issued or granted to any applicant to engage in
the business of selling or disposing of any merchandise of any kind as retail
or wholesale or the practice or pursuit of any profession or occupation in this
city, except upon terms and conditions subject to the provisions of this title.
   (B)   Notwithstanding other provisions of this title, licenses issued under
this title may be revoked by the City Clerk after notice and hearing for any of
the following causes:
      (1)   Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement contained in the
application for license.
      (2)   Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement made in the course of
carrying on the business.
      (3)   Any violation of this title.
      (4)   Any violation of applicable municipal building, zoning, health,
police and fire rules, regulations, and ordinances, and applicable statutes,
rules and regulations of the state.
      (5)   Any violation of a restriction or condition placed on the license.
      (6)   The business or activity creates a nuisance as defined by
§ 110.02 (C).
      (7)   The operation of the business or activity endangers the public
health, welfare or safety.
      (8)   Any pawnshop, secondhand dealer, or junk dealer that does not
comply with the rules and requirements of this chapter, unless otherwise
exempted, shall be subject to a graduated fine policy set forth below:
 
First offense  Written warning detailing the nature of the offense(s)
Second offense A $500 fine and written warning detailing the nature of the
               offense(s)
               Suspension of business license until all violations are
Third offense  corrected, a $1,000 fine and written warning detailing the
               nature of the offense(s)
Fourth offense Revocation of business license for one calendar year, a $1,000
               fine and written warning detailing the nature of the offense(s)
Fifth offense  Permanent revocation of business license in the City of
               Manchester
 
(Ord. passed 3-7-95; Am. Ord. passed 2-4-97; Am. Ord. passed 7-1-97; Am. Ord.
passed 6-5-12) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.27 HEARING.
   (A)   Upon receipt of notification of denial of, or pending suspension or
revocation of, a business license, or for the issuance of new or revised
conditions or restrictions on the licensee from the office of the City Clerk,
the applicant or licensee may request, in writing, a hearing before the
Committee on Administration of the Board of Mayor and Aldermen. The request
must be made within ten days of the date of notice. The Committee on
Administration shall set a hearing date, notifying the applicant or licensee of
said hearing date. The hearing will be held at the earliest possible date and
the matter shall be decided within a reasonable time. The applicant or licensee
will be notified of the decision of the Committee, and the decision by the
Committee to deny, restrict, suspend, or revoke a business license shall be
final.
   (B)   A license that has been revoked shall not be subject to renewal or
restoration except that an application for a new license may be presented and
acted upon after the expiration of at least one year from the date of
revocation.
   (C)   Licenses revoked pursuant to
§ 110.26(B)(7) may be revoked immediately and prior to the hearing process
provided by
§ 110.27(A) where the danger to public health, welfare and/or safety is
immediate.
(Ord. passed 3-7-95; Am. Ord. passed 2-4-97; Am. Ord. passed 7-1-97; Am. Ord.
passed 10-7-97)
§ 110.28 ENFORCEMENT.
   The Chief of Police shall have and exercise the power to issue citations for
the violation of any of the provisions of this title and to enter public access
areas of a business, free of charge, during hours of public access or operation
and at any time a license is required by this title, and to demand the
exhibition of the license for the current term by any person engaged or
employed in the transaction of such business. If the person fails then and
there to exhibit the license, the person shall be liable to the penalties
provided for as a violation of this title.
(Ord. passed 3-7-95)
Penalty, see § 110.99
§ 110.99 PENALTY.
   Each act of violation and every day upon which any such violation shall
occur shall constitute a separate offense. The city may enjoin or abate any
violation of this title by appropriate action. In addition to the penalty set
forth in
§ 10.99 of the code of ordinances, if the court finds for the city, the city
shall recover its costs of suit including reasonable experts' fees, attorney
fees, and necessary investigative costs.
(Ord. passed 3-7-95)
CHAPTER 111: ENTERTAINMENT
Section
General Licensing Provisions
   
111.01   License and application
   
111.02   License prerequisites
   
111.03   Revocation of license
General Regulations
   
111.15   Overcrowding of premises prohibited
   
111.16   Requirements for fixed seats
   
111.17   Requirements for movable seats
   
111.18   Requirements for aisles
   
111.19   Exit specifications
   
111.20   Canvas to be flame-proof
   
111.21   Smoking prohibited
   
111.22   Fire alarms required
   
111.23   Electric wiring requirements
   
111.24   Restrictions on heating or cooking devices
   
111.25   Removal of combustible trash required
   
111.26   Restrictions on acts using fire
   
111.27   Grounds on stopping performance
   
111.28   Minor to be accompanied by adult
Amusement Devices
   
111.40   Definitions
   
111.41   License exceptions
   
111.42   Location of amusement devices
   
111.43   Operation by minors prohibited; exceptions
   
111.44   Amusement device vendor license and fees
   
111.45   Amusement device license and fees
   
111.45.1   [Reserved]
   
111.46   Arcades
   
111.47   Nuisance
   
111.48   Prizes prohibited
   
111.49   Gambling devices prohibited
   
111.50   Seizure and destruction of gambling devices
   
111.51   Additional prohibited practices
   
111.52   Conditions and restrictions
   
111.53   Transfer of license
   
111.54   Suspension or revocation
   
111.55   Enforcement
Dances; Dance Halls; Assembly
   
111.65   Definitions
   
111.66   License required
   
111.67   Police attendance at function
   
111.68   Minors to be accompanied by parent or guardian
   
111.69   Restricted areas at dances
   
111.70   Curfew at dances
   
111.71   Curfew for entertainment
Noise Activities
   
111.75   Noise activities; purpose
   
111.76   Permit fees
   
111.77   Prohibited conduct
Performers and Exhibitors
   
111.80   License required
   
111.81   Terms and conditions of license
 
   
111.99   Penalty
GENERAL LICENSING PROVISIONS
§ 111.01 LICENSE AND APPLICATION.
   (A)   License required. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or
corporation to conduct a circus, carnival, or other form of amusement or
entertainment in any place within the city without first having secured a
license therefor.
   (B)   Application. Application for a license shall be made to the City Clerk
upon a form to be determined by the City Clerk. The application shall include:
      (1)   The name, home and business address, and telephone number of the
applicant and operator of the event.
      (2)   A description of the general purpose of the activity.
      (3)   A description of the location of the activity.
      (4)   A license from the City Health Department for any person who will
sell any food or beverages.
      (5)   Dates and hours of operation of the activity.
      (6)   A certificate of insurance that the applicant has been issued an
insurance policy by an insurance company licensed to do business in the state,
protecting the licensee and the city from all claims for damages to property
and bodily injury, including death which may arise from operations under or in
connection with the license. Such insurance shall provide combined primary and
excess coverage which meet a $1,000,000 minimum limit; such policy shall
provide for automobile liability insurance for owned, non-owned, and hire
vehicles as applicable; and such policy shall provide that the policy shall not
terminate or be cancelled prior to the expiration date except within 30 days'
advance written notice to the city.
(Ord. passed 3-7-95)
Penalty, see § 111.99
Cross-reference:
   
Business license fees, see § 110.20
§ 111.02 LICENSE PREREQUISITES.
   A license to conduct any circus, carnival, or other form of amusement or
entertainment in any place where 100 or more persons may assemble, other than
approved established places of assembly, shall not be granted unless the
premises are approved by the Fire, Police, and Planning and Community
Development Departments, and the applicant provides such fire and police
protection as are deemed necessary by the Chiefs of the Fire and Police
Departments.
(Ord. passed 3-7-95; Am. Ord. passed 2-7-09)
§ 111.03 REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   For the violation of any of the provisions of this division by the licensee
of a circus, carnival, or other form of amusement or entertainment, the
licensing authority may immediately revoke the license.
(Ord. passed 3-7-95)
GENERAL REGULATIONS
§ 111.15 OVERCROWDING OF PREMISES PROHIBITED.
   In any place where a circus, carnival, or other form of amusement or
entertainment is conducted, overcrowding of the premises shall be prohibited.
(Ord. passed 3-7-95)
Penalty, see § 111.99
§ 111.16 REQUIREMENTS FOR FIXED SEATS.
   In any place where a circus, carnival, or other form of amusement or
entertainment is conducted, the seats that are fixed and firmly secured therein
shall be placed not less than 32 inches apart, back to back, measured
horizontally. Rows with an opening into an aisle at both ends shall contain not
more than 14 seats, while rows opening into an aisle at one end only shall
contain not more than seven seats.
(Ord. passed 3-7-95)
Penalty, see § 111.99
§ 111.17 REQUIREMENTS FOR MOVABLE SEATS.
   In any place where a circus, carnival, or other form of amusement or
entertainment is conducted, the movable seats therein shall not be placed less
than 32 inches apart, back to back, measured horizontally; and each row, if
provided with an opening into an aisle at both ends, shall contain not more
than nine seats, while each row opening into an aisle at one end only, shall
contain not more five seats.
(Ord. passed 3-7-95)
Penalty, see § 111.99
§ 111.18 REQUIREMENTS FOR AISLES.
   In any place where a circus, carnival, or other form of amusement or
entertainment is conducted, aisles having seats on both sides shall be not less
than four feet wide; and where there are 30 or more transverse rows of seats,
cross aisles, not less than four feet in width, shall be provided 16 rows apart
which shall extend through each side of the center section of seats or from
center aisles and extend to the side aisles or exits.
(Ord. passed 3-7-95)
Penalty, see § 111.99
§ 111.19 EXIT SPECIFICATIONS.
   All exits in places where any circus, carnival, or other form of amusement
or entertainment is conducted shall open directly to outside areas and shall be
kept open and unobstructed at all times and shall be clearly indicated by red
lights and signs. The width of exits shall be proportioned on the basis of not
less than 22 inches in width for each 100 persons or each major portion
thereof, but no exit shall be less than five feet in width. The total length of
travel from any point to an exit shall not exceed 150 feet, provided, however,
that there shall be no intervening enclosed passageway, corridor or tunnel if
the travel distance to any exit exceeds 100 feet. Stairways shall not be less
than 44 inches wide in the clear.
(Ord. passed 3-7-95)
Penalty, see § 111.99
§ 111.20 CANVAS TO BE FLAME-PROOF.
   No circus, carnival, or other form of amusement or entertainment shall be
held under canvas, unless a certificate certifying that the canvas has been
flame-proofed is furnished by the applicant. The Fire Department may require
tests to be made to determine the fire resistive qualities of materials.
(Ord. passed 3-7-95)
Penalty, see § 111.99
§ 111.21 SMOKING PROHIBITED.
   Smoking shall be prohibited in any place where a circus, carnival, or other
form of amusement or entertainment is conducted.
(Ord. passed 3-7-95)
Penalty, see § 111.99
§ 111.22 FIRE ALARMS REQUIRED.
   Proper facilities for summoning the Fire Department shall be provided in any
place where a circus, carnival, or other form of amusement or entertainment is
conducted, and all members assigned to this detail advised as to the procedure
in carrying out this assignment.
(Ord. passed 3-7-95)
Penalty, see § 111.99
§ 111.23 ELECTRIC WIRING REQUIREMENTS.
   Electric wiring in any place where a circus, carnival, or other form of
amusement or entertainment is conducted, shall be in accordance with the
applicable provisions of the National Electric Code.
(Ord. passed 3-7-95)
Penalty, see § 111.99
§ 111.24 RESTRICTIONS ON HEATING OR COOKING DEVICES.
   Gasoline, gas, charcoal, or other heating or cooking devices shall not be
stored or be permitted to operate in or near the main enclosure of a circus,
carnival, or other form of amusement or entertainment.
(Ord. passed 3-7-95)
Penalty, see § 111.99
§ 111.25 REMOVAL OF COMBUSTIBLE TRASH REQUIRED.
   In any place where a circus, carnival, or other form of amusement or
entertainment is conducted, all unnecessary hay, straw, dry grass, and
combustible trash shall be removed from the enclosure before it is opened to
the public.
(Ord. passed 3-7-95)
Penalty, see § 111.99
§ 111.26 RESTRICTIONS ON ACTS USING FIRE.
   If the use of fire or open flames is required in any act or exhibition of a
circus, carnival, or other form of amusement or entertainment, suitable
safeguards shall be provided, otherwise their use shall be prohibited.
(Ord. passed 3-7-95)
Penalty, see § 111.99
§ 111.27 GROUNDS ON STOPPING PERFORMANCE.
   For violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, the Chief of the
Fire Department or the Chief of the Police Department or any of their
authorized deputies may refuse to permit the performance to continue.
(Ord. passed 3-7-95)
Penalty, see § 111.99
§ 111.28 MINOR TO BE ACCOMPANIED BY ADULT.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to admit a child under the age of 14
years to any circus, carnival, or other form of amusement or entertainment
required by law to be licensed, after sunset, or before sunset during the hours
that the public schools are in session, unless he is accompanied by a person of
the age of 21 years or over; or to permit any such child to remain in the show
or place of amusement after the person in charge is informed or has reason to
believe that the child is under said age and is unaccompanied by a person as
above required.
(Ord. passed 3-7-95)
Penalty, see § 111.99
AMUSEMENT DEVICES
§ 111.40 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AMUSEMENT DEVICE. Any non-coin operated machine or machine which, upon
deposit for credit with a person, or upon the insertion of a slug, token,
plate, disc, coin, or any other form of currency may be operated by the public
generally for use as a game, entertainment or amusement, whether or not
registering a score. It shall include, but not be limited to such devices as
electronic video machines, electronic video poker machines, pinball machines,
skeeball, photography devices, fortune-telling machines, mechanical grab
machines, shooting gallery, movie, video or music devices, rides, billiard or
pool tables, and all games, operations or transactions similar thereto under
whatever name they may be designated or described.
   AMUSEMENT DEVICE VENDOR. Any person, firm, corporation or association in
which is engaged in the business of selling, leasing, renting, or serving as an
agent for the sale, lease, or rental of any amusement device.
   ARCADE. For the purposes of this division shall mean any place of business
or establishment containing six or more amusement devices.
   DISQUALIFYING CRIMINAL CONVICTION. Any felony conviction; any conviction
involving gambling, theft, fraud, or endangering the welfare or a child or
incompetent.
   PERSON. Any person, firm, corporation or association which owns any
amusement device; the person, firm, corporation or association in whose place
of business any amusement device is placed for use by the public; or the
person,  firm, corporation or association having control over an amusement
device.
(Ord. passed 3-7-95; Am. Ord. passed 6-4-96; Am. Ord. passed 12-2-14; Am. Ord.
passed 4-18-17)
§ 111.41 LICENSE EXCEPTIONS.
   The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to radios of any type in
hotels or other public places for the convenience of their guests or customers,
telephones, or to fax machines, copiers, or other types of coin-operated office
equipment, or to food, drink, merchandise vending, or similar nonamusement
devices.
(Ord. passed 3-7-95)
§ 111.42 LOCATION OF AMUSEMENT DEVICES.
   All amusement devices shall be kept and placed in plain view of any person
or persons who may frequent or be in any place of business where such devices
are kept or used and are not to be obstructed in any way by curtains, doors,
partitions, or other types of screening devices.
(Ord. passed 3-7-95)
Penalty, see § 111.99
§ 111.43 OPERATION BY MINORS PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   No person shall permit persons under 16 years-of-age to play or
operate any amusement device as defined in
§ 111.40 of this subchapter; provided, however, that the provisions of this
section do not apply to persons under 16 years-of-age accompanied by his or her
parent, guardian, or other suitable adult person having care or custody of said
person.
   (B)   No person shall permit persons under 16 years-of-age unless
accompanied by a parent or guardian to enter any place in which an amusement
device licensed under this subchapter is kept between the hours of 8:00 a.m.
and 2:30 p.m. on days in which public schools are in session. This division
shall only apply to any place in which the primary business is the operation of
amusement devices.
(Ord. passed 3-7-95)
Penalty, see § 111.99
§ 111.44 AMUSEMENT DEVICE VENDOR LICENSE AND FEES.
   No amusement device vendor shall provide any such device to any arcade,
business, or establishment in the city, except for private use, unless a
business license for that purpose is obtained from the City Clerk. The form of
application and license shall be determined by the City Clerk.
   (A)   Each license issued under this section shall commence on the date of
issue and shall expire on April 30 next following its issuance and may be
renewed only after compliance with the procedures established by this
subchapter.
   (B)   The application shall list:
      (1)   The name and residence of the applicant; and if a firm,
corporation, partnership, or association, the principal officers thereof and
their addresses.
      (2)   The address of the licensee's principal place of business.
      (3)   A general description of the various types of devices to be
provided, sold, leased, or rented to any arcade, business, or establishment in
the city.
      (4)   If the applicant has a fixed place of business within the city, the
fee shall be as provided for under
§ 110.20 of this title.
      (5)   If the applicant does not have a fixed place of business within the
city, the fee shall be $100 annually.
   (C)   In addition to the aforementioned application requirements, license
applications for amusement device vendors providing devices identified under §
111.45(C)(1) shall be accompanied by a complete criminal record of the
applicant obtained from the Criminal Records Division, State Police, Department
of Safety, State of New Hampshire, and/or from the appropriate out-of-state
agency or agencies if not a resident of New Hampshire for the five years
preceding the application. If the applicant is a corporate entity or
partnership, a complete criminal records may be required of the applicant’s
Chief Operating Officer, Director, Managing General Partner, or Manager.
      (1)   Standards for denial. In addition to the application requirements
set forth in this section, a license to keep amusement devices pursuant to this
section shall be denied to the following persons:
         (a)   An applicant who has not attained the age of 18 years.
         (b)   An applicant who has received a disqualifying criminal
conviction, or who has been imprisoned at any time during the period for a
disqualifying criminal conviction, provided that the conviction was for an
offense which rationally related to the purpose of licensing amusement devices.
      (2)   An applicant who is denied an amusement device vendor license under
the standards of this section, or who has reason to believe that he or she may
be denied an amusement device vendor license under these standards, may file a
written request for a review of the application before the Committee on
Administration. The Committee on Administration will approve or disapprove the
fitness of the applicant for an amusement device vendor license. The Committee
on Administration may require the submission of qualifying evidence to make an
assessment, including character references and/or evaluation by a qualified
professional, and may set such conditions, review procedures, or monitoring
activities as it deems appropriate as a condition of licensure.
   (D)   Each duly licensed amusement device vendor whose principal place of
business is located within the city shall be required to keep a log which shall
contain not less than the following information: the names and addresses of all
arcades, businesses, and establishments that purchased amusement devices from
the licensee during the 12 months prior to date of license application and/or
renewal and a description of each of the machines placed with those
establishments, and the names and addresses of all arcades, businesses and
establishments that have leased, rented, or otherwise used amusement devices
owned by the licensee during 12 months prior to the date of the license
application and/or renewal and a description of each of the machines placed
within those establishments. The log may be updated by the amusement device
vendor during the licensed period and shall be made available, upon request,
for review by any law enforcement agency or by office of City Clerk. A duly
licensed amusement device vendor whose principal place of business is not
located within the city shall provide such list to the City Clerk at the time
of license application and/or renewal and shall again provide the office of the
City Clerk a current listing six months from the date of said application and/
or renewal.
(Ord. passed 3-7-95; Am. Ord. passed 12-2-14) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.45 AMUSEMENT DEVICE LICENSE AND FEES.
   (A)   No person, firm, corporation or association shall display for public
patronage, maintain on the premises, or keep for operation, any amusement
device, operable or inoperable, without first having obtained a proper license
from the City Clerk. The form of application and license shall be determined by
the City Clerk. All licenses under this section shall expire on the April 30
next following their issuance and are to be renewed within the procedures
established by this subchapter.
   (B)   Any application or renewal for an amusement device license shall be
accompanied by a statement setting forth the following:
      (1)   Name and residence of owner of the device.
      (2)   Name and residence of the applicant, and if a firm, corporation,
partnership or association, the principal officers thereof, and their
addresses.
      (3)   Address and current use of premises where the licensed device or
devices are to be operated.
      (4)   A general description of each type of device or devices to be
licensed and the deposit or fee charged for a single game, use or play for each
device.
      (5)   The maximum number of amusement devices to be on the premises
during the license period.
   (C)   Any person applying for an initial amusement device license or
renewing an amusement device license shall, prior to receipt of same, pay a
license fee for each device used, played, or exhibited for use or play in
accordance with the schedule set herein:
      (1)   For each so-called “slot” machine that, by application of the
element of chance, may deliver, or entitle the person playing or operating the
machine to receive premiums or tokens; or an amusement device that displays a
poker hand or delivers a ticket with a poker hand symbolized on it that may
entitle the player to a prize if the poker hand displayed by the machine or
symbolized on the ticket constitutes a winning hand; or an amusement device
that, even though it does not dispense prizes or tokens, has the features and
characteristics of a gaming device that upon insertion of multiple coins
changes the format and/or outcome of the game, the license fee is $2,000.
      (2)   For each children's amusement device, pinball machine, concession
game, basketball device, or skeeball machine, billiard table or pool table, the
license fee is $25; and
      (3)   For all other amusement devices, the license fee is $50.
   (D)   The applicant may substitute and “rotate” devices without an
additional fee provided the maximum number of amusement devices recorded on the
license application or renewal is not exceeded and the substituted device
requires the same license fee, or less, required of the device it replaced. If
additional devices or devices requiring an increased license fee are to be
installed during the license period, the licensee must obtain licensure prior
to installation and pay the additional and appropriate license fee for the
device.
   (E)   No fee or portion thereof shall be refunded in the event a lesser
number of machines are maintained than applied for during the license period.
   (F)   Each license issued for an amusement device shall bear the name of the
owner of the device, the total number of devices licensed to the licensee at
that address, and shall be posted in a conspicuous manner, as determined by the
City Clerk, where it is clearly visible to the general public and/or patrons of
the premises where such devices are maintained throughout the license period.
The City Clerk may require such other additional license identification on
individual amusement devices as he may deem appropriate.
   (G)   In addition to the aforementioned application requirement, license
application for amusement devices under §
111.45(C)(1) shall be accompanied by a complete criminal record of the
applicant obtained from the Criminal Records Division, State Police, Department
of Safety, State of New Hampshire, and/or from the appropriate out-of-state
agency or agencies if not a resident of New Hampshire for the five years
preceding the application. If the applicant is a corporate entity or
partnership, a complete criminal record may be required of the applicant’s
Chief Operating Officer, Director, Managing General Partner, or Manager.
      (1)   Standards for denial. In addition to the application requirements
set forth in this section, a license to keep amusement devices pursuant to this
section shall be denied to the following persons:
         (a)   An applicant who has not attained the age of 18 years.
         (b)   An applicant who has received a disqualifying criminal
conviction, or who has been imprisoned at any time during the period for a
disqualifying criminal conviction, provided that the conviction was for an
offense which rationally related to the purpose of licensing amusement devices.
      (2)   An applicant who is denied an amusement device license under the
standards of this section, or who has reason to believe that he or she may be
denied an amusement device license under these standards, may file a written
request for a review of the application before the Committee on Administration.
The Committee on Administration will approve or disapprove the fitness of the
applicant for an amusement device license. The Committee on Administration may
require the submission of qualifying evidence to make an assessment, including
character references and/or evaluation by a qualified professional, and may set
such conditions, review procedures, or monitoring activities as it deems
appropriate as a condition of licensure.
(Ord. passed 3-7-95; Am. Ord. passed 4-6-99; Am. Ord. passed 5- 4-10; Am. Ord.
passed 12-2-14; Am. Ord. passed 4-18-17) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.45.1 [RESERVED].
   (Previous section repealed 2-17-98)
§ 111.46 ARCADES.
   (A)   Every person desiring to obtain a license for an arcade shall file a
license application with the City Clerk on forms to be determined by the City
Clerk, together with an application fee of $300. The application fee shall be
the fee for the initial license. The license shall expire on April 30 next
following its issuance and the applicant shall annually on or before May 1,
obtain a new arcade license from the City Clerk and pay a business license fee
of $300.
      (1)   The application shall include the following:
         (a)   The applicant's name, residence, occupation and date of birth;
         (b)   A complete criminal record of the applicant obtained from the
Criminal Records Division, Department of Safety, State of New Hampshire, and/or
from the appropriate out-of-state agency or agencies if the applicant has been
a resident of another state prior to establishing residence in New Hampshire;
         (c)   The location of premises to be used; and
         (d)   A scale drawing of the premises showing proposed or actual
locations of the amusement devices.
      (2)   In the case when the applicant is a corporation authorized to do
business in this state, the application shall be made by the agent of such
corporation who will have principal charge of the premises, and such
application shall contain all the information of such agent as is required of
individuals. In case the applicant is a partnership, each active partner shall
join in the application for such license, and shall furnish all of the
information required of an individual.
      (3)   In the event there is any change in management, the agent or the
proprietor during the term of the license, the City Clerk shall immediately be
notified. This notification shall contain the same information required on an
application for license and shall be subject to investigation by the office of
the City Clerk, the Chief of Police or his designee.
   (B)   No applicant for an arcade license shall be issued a license for a
location within 1,000 feet of any hospital, nursing home, day care center,
private educational institution, public educational institution, or group home.
Distance shall be measured from front door to front door.
   (C)   Prior to any arcade license being issued, the premises may be
inspected by the appropriate departments of the city to ensure that the
premises are in compliance with all applicable statutes, ordinances, codes, and
regulations of the state and the city. The license shall not be unreasonably
withheld.
   (D)   A license issued for an arcade shall be conspicuously posted and
maintained in a place where it is clearly visible to the general public and/or
patrons of the premises where the amusement devices are in operation through
the license period.
   (E)   (1)   When it is determined after investigation by the Chief of Police
to be necessary to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens the
city, each arcade shall be required to hire an off-duty police officer during
the hours of 8:00 p.m. to closing.
      (2)   Each arcade that is required to hire an off-duty police officer
may, after six months of such requirement, request the Chief of Police to
determine the necessity of such requirement. The Chief of Police may suspend
the requirement after investigation as he deems appropriate. This requirement
may be reinstated following receipt of complaints and investigation by the
Chief of Police.
(Ord. passed 3-7-95)
Penalty, see § 111.99
§ 111.47 NUISANCE.
   (A)   If the Chief of Police, or his duly appointed representative, upon
investigation has reason to believe that any premises containing amusement
devices licensed under this subchapter is a public nuisance, the person so
licensed shall be ordered to appear before the Committee on Administration of
the Board of Mayor and Aldermen within 30 days of written notice by certified
mail specifying the nature of the charge. If it is determined that a public
nuisance does exist, the Committee on Administration may revoke the licenses.
   (B)   The meaning of public nuisance shall include but not be limited to the
following:
      (1)   Nuisance as defined in R.S.A. 544:1;
      (2)   Common nuisance as defined in R.S.A. 318-B:16;
      (3)   Repeated violations of law which are against the interest of the
public health, safety, and welfare.
(Ord. passed 3-7-95)
Penalty, see § 111.99
§ 111.48 PRIZES PROHIBITED.
   No person shall be awarded or receive any monetary prize in connection with
the use of an amusement device.
(Ord. passed 3-7-95)
Penalty, see § 111.99
§ 111.49 GAMBLING DEVICES PROHIBITED.
   Nothing in this subchapter shall in any way be construed to authorize,
license, or permit any gambling devices whatsoever, or any mechanism that has
been judicially determined to be a gambling device, or in any way contrary to
law, or that may be contrary to any future laws of the state.
(Ord. passed 3-7-95)
Penalty, see § 111.99
§ 111.50 SEIZURE AND DESTRUCTION OF GAMBLING DEVICES.
   If the Chief of Police shall have reason to believe any amusement device is
used as a gambling device, such machine may be seized by the police and
impounded and if, upon trial, a person allowing the operation of such device is
found guilty of allowing the same to be used as a gambling device, such machine
shall be destroyed by the police, without compensation to the owner.
(Ord. passed 3-7-95)
Penalty, see § 111.99
§ 111.51 ADDITIONAL PROHIBITED PRACTICES.
   (A)   The operation, installation, or maintenance of an unlicensed amusement
device or arcade, or the operation or maintenance of amusement devices or
arcades without having the appropriate licenses posted in an area clearly
visible to the public, is a separate violation each day such operation
continues.
   (B)   Any knowing misrepresentation in a license application or renewal is a
violation which shall be punishable, after hearing as provided for in
§ 111.55, by revocation of the license.
(Ord. passed 3-7-95)
Penalty, see § 111.99
§ 111.52 CONDITIONS AND RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   Upon the recommendation of the City Clerk, Chief of Police, Health
Officer, or Director of Planning and Community Development or their designee,
an initial license shall be subject to such conditions and restrictions as the
Committee on Administration deems to be proper to impose when such conditions
or restrictions would serve the public safety, convenience, or character of the
area. The license shall not be unreasonably withheld.
   (B)   Licenses granted under this subchapter shall remain the property of
the city and are to be returned to the office of the City Clerk during a period
of suspension, after revocation, or if the person, firm, corporation, or
association holding the arcade or amusement device licenses ceases to operate.
(Ord. passed 3-7-95; Am. Ord. passed 2-7-09)
Penalty, see § 111.99
§ 111.53 TRANSFER OF LICENSE.
   A license shall not be transferable from person to person and shall be
useable only at the place and by the person designated on the license, except
as provided for in § 111.45(D) of this subchapter.
(Ord. passed 3-20-01)
Penalty, see § 111.99
§ 111.54 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.
   (A)   A violation of any section or division of this subchapter will result
in a warning letter from the office of the City Clerk, outlining the violation,
being sent to the location at which the violation occurred, using the name and
address or other information which may be available from the records of the
licensee on file with the City Clerk. A citation issued by any city department
or official charged with the responsibility for enforcing the ordinances and
codes of the city shall also serve as a notice of violation within this
subchapter.
   (B)   The Committee on Administration of the Board of Mayor and Aldermen
shall have the responsibility for the suspension or revocation of licenses for
noncompliance with this subchapter. Suspension or revocation of amusement
devices or arcade licensing shall be based on the following guidelines:
      (1)   A second violation will result in the licenses to display for
public patronage or keep for operation any mechanical amusement device, and/or
to operate an arcade, being suspended for a period of up to 60 days.
      (2)   A third violation will result in a suspension of the license for an
indefinite period of time, or the revocation of the license. The Committee on
Administration may revoke the licenses after three or more violations of the
provisions of this subchapter.
      (3)   If aggrieved, the licensee may request, in writing, a hearing
before the Committee on Administration of the Board of Mayor and Aldermen. The
request must be made within ten days of notice of suspension or revocation.
      (4)   The Committee on Administration shall set a hearing date, notifying
the licensee of the hearing date. The hearing will be held at the earliest
possible date and the matter shall be decided within a reasonable time. The
licensee will be notified of the decision of the Committee.
(Ord. passed 3-7-95)
Penalty, see § 111.99
§ 111.55 ENFORCEMENT.
   Each person holding a license under this subchapter shall allow the Police
Department or a designee of the office of the City Clerk to enter, during hours
of operation, any arcade or mechanical amusement business for the purpose of
making inspections to ensure compliance with this subchapter. Such inspection
shall include an examination of required records, licenses, amusement device
meters, and/or any amusement devices.
(Ord. passed 3-7-95)
Penalty, see § 111.99
DANCES; DANCE HALLS; ASSEMBLY
§ 111.65 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   A-WEIGHTED SOUND PRESSURE. The sound pressure level as measured with a sound
level meter using the A-weighting network. The standard notation is dB(A) or
dBA.
   DANCE HALL. Any location, other than a food-service establishment as defined
by §
117.01, which permits or permits to occur, dancing. This definition shall not
include a public or private school licensed by the state or the city for the
purpose of conducting regular dancing  classes or dance courses of study as its
regular and recurrent business activity.
   DECIBEL. A logarithmic unit of measure often used to measure magnitudes of
sound. The symbol is dB.
   ENTERTAINMENT PLACE OF ASSEMBLY. A room or space in which provision is made
for occupancy or assembly for entertainment purposes. For the purpose of this
definition such room or space shall include any occupied connecting rooms,
space, or area on the same level or in the same story, or in a story or storied
above or below, where entrance is common to the rooms, space, or areas.
   NOISE. Any sound that exceeds the standards set forth in this chapter,
annoys or disturbs a reasonable person of normal sensibilities, or causes or
tends to cause any adverse psychological or physiological effect on humans.
   SOUND. An oscillation in pressure, stress, particle displacement and
particle velocity which induces auditory sensation.
   SOUND LEVEL METER.  An apparatus for the measurement of sound levels. The
sound level meter shall be of a design and have the characteristics of a type 2
or better instrument as established by the American National Standards
Institute.
   SPECIAL EVENT. A daily event which requires the closure of a public street
or the usage or closure of another public place or park, and which involves
public entry, vending of food, drink or merchandise, public entertainment, or a
moving athletic event like a race or walk; or an outdoor event on private
property which is open to the public and due to its size and activities has an
impact on the surrounding streets and neighborhoods or may require special
police or fire attention or the use of other special City services or
facilities. A special event pursuant to this title shall only apply to either
commercial for profit or non-profit events.
(Ord. passed 1-17-95; Am. Ord. passed 3-7-95; Am. Ord. passed 11-7-01; Am. Ord.
passed 10-4-05; Am. Ord. passed 4-18-17)
§ 111.66 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person shall own or operate a dance hall or entertainment place of
assembly within the city unless a license shall first be obtained from the City
Clerk.
   (B)   No person shall conduct or allow to be conducted any entertainment,
public dancing or hold a special event which is not part of the regular and
recurrent business activity of the owner or operator of the room or space
within the city unless a license shall first be obtained from the City Clerk.
   (C)   (1)   Notwithstanding any other licensing ordinance, a duly licensed
establishment in the city may allow dancing and entertainment upon obtaining an
annual entertainment place of assembly license from the city at no charge.
      (2)   The application for a entertainment place of assembly license shall
be made to the City Clerk upon forms to be determined by the City Clerk, the
licensee shall be liable for any applicable police officer's fee and the
license shall expire annually on April 30.
(Ord. passed 1-17-95; Am. Ord. passed 3-7-95; Am. Ord. passed 10-4-05; Am. Ord.
passed 4-18-17) Penalty, see §
111.99
Cross-reference:
   Business license fees, see §
110.20
§ 111.67 POLICE ATTENDANCE AT FUNCTION.
   When it is determined after investigation by the Chief of Police to be
necessary to preserve order, protect the health, safety, and welfare of the
citizens of the city, or to help avoid traffic-related problems, public
disturbance, or public nuisance, all establishments required to be licensed
under this subchapter shall be required to hire an off-duty police officer or
officers during those hours the Chief of Police deems appropriate. The Chief of
Police may suspend the requirement after investigation as he deems appropriate,
but his or her requirement may be reinstated following receipt of complaints
and investigation by the Chief of Police.
(Ord. passed 1-17-95; Am. Ord. passed 3-7-95; Am. Ord. passed 10-4-05)
§ 111.68 MINORS TO BE ACCOMPANIED BY PARENT OR GUARDIAN.
   Minors under the age of 17 years shall not be admitted to a dance hall
unless accompanied by parent or guardian or under the supervision of school
authorities.
(Ord. passed 1-17-95; Am. Ord. passed 3-7-95; Am. Ord. passed 10-4-05)
Penalty, see § 111.99
§ 111.69 RESTRICTED AREAS AT DANCES.
   No person attending a public dance shall enter any room designated for the
use of the opposite sex.
(Ord. passed 1-17-95; Am. Ord. passed 3-7-95; Am. Ord. passed 10-4-05)
Penalty, see § 111.99
§ 111.70 CURFEW AT DANCES.
   No public dancing shall be permitted between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 2:00
p.m. on Sunday, 1:00 a.m. and 12:00 p.m. on Monday, or 2:00 a.m. and 12:00 p.m.
Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday, and Saturday.
(Ord. passed 9-4-01; Am. Ord. passed 3-5-02; Am. Ord. passed 10-4-05; Am. Ord.
passed 6-6-06)
Penalty, see § 111.99
§ 111.71 CURFEW FOR ENTERTAINMENT.
   (A)   No exhibit of natural or artificial curiosities, theatrical
performances, or other shows shall be permitted outdoors after 10:00 p.m., as
specified in §
111.75(B)(1), or indoors between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. on
Sunday, 1:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. on Monday, or 2:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. Tuesday,
Wednesday, Thursday, Friday, and Saturday, except as may be permitted by the
Committee on Administration.
   (B)   The Committee on Administration may approve applications for
Entertainment Licenses if applications meet the criteria listed below. The
criteria are as follows:
      (1)   The location of the event shall not substantially impact a
residential zone or district by excessive noise, traffic or other negative
impact;
      (2)   The proposed event shall not be more than two consecutive calendar
days in length;
      (3)   The sponsors, applicants, or management of the event are of
sufficiently good character to leave no substantial doubt that the proposed
event shall be operated in strict accordance with all state or municipal rules,
regulations, ordinances or statutes which are rationally related to the
issuance of this license; and
      (4)   The event must be held in accordance with all applicable municipal
building, zoning, health, police, and fire rules, regulations and ordinances
and applicable rules, regulations, and statutes of the state.
(Ord. passed 6-6-06)
NOISE ACTIVITIES
§ 111.75 NOISE ACTIVITIES; PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this section is to establish standards that will eliminate
and reduce unnecessary noise at outdoor venues throughout the city which may be
physically harmful or otherwise detrimental to individuals and the community in
the enjoyment of life, property and the conduct of business.
   (A)   No person shall conduct an event that involves the amplification of
sound or speech above 60 dBA for the purpose of presenting a musical selection,
show, performance or concert at an outdoor venue within the limits of the city
without obtaining a noise permit issued by the office of the City Clerk.
   (B)   The following general guidelines shall apply to the issuance of a
noise permit. These guidelines are not all inclusive as other criteria may be
established that is reasonable and prudent to protect the public or limit the
anticipated detrimental impact of the events noise upon the community:
      (1)   All outdoor venues shall have a curfew of 10:00 p.m. Any event
which exceeds this curfew shall be assessed the penalty identified in §
111.99(C)(4) for each 15-minute period beyond this curfew.
      (2)   The office of the City Clerk shall not grant a permit to conduct
noise at level greater than 100 dBA to be measured 100 feet from the noise
source.
      (3)   Any sound board or mix position present at an event shall be placed
at 100 feet from the noise source.
      (4)   The office of the City Clerk may require any applicant to be
monitored for sound levels to ensure compliance with this chapter. Monitoring
may be conducted by a representative of the city or an independent third party
using an appropriate sound level meter. In the event of third party monitoring,
all expenses associated with the sound monitoring shall be assumed by the
applicant.
      (5)   In granting a license, the office of the City Clerk may impose
additional conditions or stipulations it deems necessary and proper to preserve
the intent of this chapter.
      (6)   Should an application for a noise permit be denied, the applicant
can appeal the decision to the Committee on Administrative/ Information Systems
of the Board of Mayor and Aldermen.
(Ord. passed 10-4-05; Am. Ord. passed 6-6-06)
§ 111.76 PERMIT FEES.
   Each application for a noise permit shall include an application fee of $200
cash, money order or bank check made payable to the city.
(Ord. passed 10-4-05; Am. Ord. passed 6-6-06)
§ 111.77 PROHIBITED CONDUCT.
   The following conduct is prohibited:
   (A)   Provide any false or inaccurate information to any city board,
committee, commission or any employee of the city, in an attempt to deceive or
otherwise avoid compliance with this subchapter.
   (B)   Hinder, obstruct, delay, resist, interfere, or attempt to interfere
with any authorized persons while in the performance of their duties under this
ordinance.
   (C)   Emit or cause to be emitted any noise which exceeds the established
limits in §
111.75(B)(2).
   (D)   Violate any subsection of §
111.75.
   (E)   Conduct an event that involves the amplification of sound or speech
above 60 dBA for the purpose of presenting a musical selection, show,
performance or concert at an outdoor venue in the city without obtaining a
license from the office of the City Clerk pursuant to §
111.75(A).
(Ord. passed 10-4-05; Am. Ord. passed 6-6-06)
PERFORMERS AND EXHIBITORS
§ 111.80 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No showman, tumbler, rope-dancer, ventriloquist, juggler, or other person
shall for pay exhibit any feats of agility, horsemanship, sleight-of-hand,
rope-dancing, or feats of cards, or any animals, wax figures, puppets, or other
show, or shall perform or exhibit any theatrical or dramatic representation or
other exhibition, performance, or show of any kind or description in the city,
unless a license therefor in writing, specifying the day and hour such person
is allowed to perform or exhibit, shall first be obtained from the office of
the City Clerk; provided, however, that any person who is employed by a
licensed conductor of a circus, carnival, or other form of amusement or
entertainment or who is employed by a sponsor or an establishment which holds a
valid business license under this chapter, shall not be required to obtain a
license.
(Ord. passed 3-7-95)
Penalty, see § 111.99
Cross-reference:
   
Business license fees, see § 110.20
§ 111.81 TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF LICENSE.
   Any license issued pursuant to this subchapter shall be subject to such
terms and conditions as the office of the City Clerk shall order and require.
(Ord. passed 3-7-95)
Penalty, see § 111.99
§ 111.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who shall fail to comply with any of the provisions of this
chapter or who shall violate any of the provisions set forth herein, unless a
penalty is specified elsewhere, shall be subject to the penalties as set forth
in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   Any person who commits an act prohibited or made unlawful by §§
111.40 through
111.55 or §§
111.65 through
111.77 of this chapter or fails to perform any act required by such subchapter
shall be guilty of a violation. Each act of violation, or in the case of
continuous violation, and every day upon which any such violation shall occur
shall constitute a separate offense. In addition, if the court finds for the
city, the city shall recover its costs of suit including reasonable experts'
fees, attorney fees, and necessary investigative costs. Parties held
responsible for violations of §§
111.40 through
111.55 or §§
111.65 through
111.77 shall include corporate officers, partners, or owners as identified on
the business license application or as may be otherwise identified by the city
as a result of any related investigation.
      (2)   The Police Department is hereby authorized to seize any amusement
device located within the city in contravention of any of the provisions of
§§ 111.40 through
111.55. Upon such seizure the Police Department shall notify the owner of the
seized devices, or the person in whose place of business the amusement device
was placed, of such seizure and the reason therefor. The Police Department
shall hold any such seized devices for a period of not less than ten days from
the date of the required notification to the owner or operator of the premises.
During this period the owner or operator may redeem any such machine by
correcting the violation of this division which led to such seizure. Any
amusement devices which are so seized and which are not redeemed within the
ten-day period described in this division (B)(2) shall become the property of
the city. Costs for transportation and storage charges will be billed to the
owner of any amusement devices seized and must be paid before the release of
the devices from city storage. The city will be held harmless for any damage
occurring during the act of confiscation, transportation, and storage of each
device.
   (C)   Violations of §
111.77, Prohibited Conduct shall follow the penalty schedule below:
      (1)   First offense. The licensee or his or her representative shall be
informed of the noise ordinance and corrective measures to achieve compliance.
This shall constitute an official warning and should be accomplished in writing
if possible.
      (2)   Second offense. A citation shall be issued to the licensee or his
or her representative in the amount of $250.
      (3)   Third offense. A citation shall be issued to the licensee or his or
her representative in the amount of $500.
      (4)   Fourth and subsequent offenses. A citation shall be issued to the
licensee or his or her representative in the amount of $1,000.
(Ord. passed 3-7-95; Am. Ord. passed 10-4-05; Am. Ord. passed 6-6-06)
CHAPTER 112: EMPLOYMENT OFFICES
Section
   
112.01   License required
   
112.02   Information contained on license
   
112.03   Consent required for transfer of license to other building
§ 112.01 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall establish within the city an intelligence office for the
purpose of obtaining or giving information concerning places of employment for
servants or other laborers, or for the purpose of procuring or giving
information concerning such person for or to employers, or for the purpose of
giving information concerning employment in business, unless a license therefor
has been granted by the office of the City Clerk.
(Ord. passed 3-7-95)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 112.02 INFORMATION CONTAINED ON LICENSE.
   Licenses granted to keepers of intelligence offices shall set forth the name
of the person licensed, the nature of the business and the building in which it
is carried on and prescribe the rates to be charged.
(Ord. passed 3-7-95)
§ 112.03 CONSENT REQUIRED FOR TRANSFER OF LICENSE TO OTHER BUILDING.
   No license issued to a keeper of an intelligence office shall be valid in a
building or place other than that designated in the license, unless consent to
removal is granted by the office of the City Clerk.
(Ord. passed 3-7-95)
Penalty, see § 10.99
CHAPTER 113: [RESERVED]
CHAPTER 114: SECONDHAND AND JUNK DEALERS
Section
   
114.01   License required; application, fee, and revocation
   
114.02   Purchases from minors
   
114.03   Records and inspections
   
114.04   Exclusions
§ 114.01 LICENSE REQUIRED; APPLICATION, FEE, AND REVOCATION.
   (A)   No person, firm, or corporation shall engage in the business of junk
dealers, junk collector, pawnbroker, pawnshop or secondhand dealer, auctioneer,
or auction house as defined by §
110.01 of this title unless licensed therefor by the City Clerk.
   (B)   Applications for such licenses shall be made to the City Clerk, upon
blanks furnished by him for that purpose and shall be submitted by him to the
Chief of Police who may cause an investigation to be made of the fitness of the
applicant to engage in the business of a junk dealer, junk collector,
pawnbroker, pawnshop or secondhand dealer, auctioneer, or auction house, and
report his findings to the City Clerk before such license is acted upon and the
following fee shall be paid to the City Clerk:
      (1)   If the applicant has a fixed place of business within the city, the
fee shall be as provided for under §
110.20 of this title.
      (2)   If an applicant for an auctioneer or auction house license does not
have a fixed place of business within the city, the fee shall be $50 per annum.
      (3)   If an applicant for a secondhand dealer license does not have a
fixed place of business within the city, the fee shall be $100 per day.
   (C)   Such license shall expire on April 30 each year, unless sooner revoked
or expired, and shall neither be assigned nor transferred, but it may be
revoked at any time by the Committee on Administration after notice and hearing
for just cause. No junk collector shall call out, or shout any words to
indicate his business in any street, lane, or alley within the city limits. No
rags or junk of any kind or description shall be sorted within the sanitary
limits of the city, by any person, firm, or corporation, without first securing
a permit from the Board of Health of the city.
   (D)   Prior to issuance of a license, a criminal record check may be
completed upon every owner, manager, and/or employee of a pawnbroker, pawnshop
or secondhand dealer. The applicant shall be required to provide a certified
copy of a complete criminal record of each individual with the license
application. The certified copy shall be obtained from the Criminal Records
Division of the State Police, Department of Safety of the State of New
Hampshire, and/or from the appropriate out-of-state agency or agencies if not a
resident of New Hampshire for the ten years preceding the application. No
license shall be issued to any firm, corporation, owner, or person, to include
employees, directly or indirectly involved in the purchase of secondhand
articles, who or which has been previously convicted within the preceding ten
years of any theft related offenses to include but not be limited to: theft,
burglary, receiving stolen property, or fraud in this state or any state or
territory of the United States.
   (E)   Every pawnshop, pawnbroker or secondhand dealer that purchases an item
in which a transaction record must be prepared pursuant to §
114.03 shall pay to the City of Manchester a fee of $1 per transaction due in
full the second Tuesday of every month, for the preceding month.
   (F)   Exclusions. Any person, firm, partnership or corporation whose
business is the retail buying, selling, buy-back, exchanging, dealing in or
dealing with furs, fur coats, books, magazines, used furniture, used clothing,
or use motor vehicles/motorcycles by legally recognized vehicle dealerships,
shall be exempt from the requirements of divisions (D) and (E) above.
(Ord. passed 3-7-95; Am. Ord. passed 6-5-12; Am. Ord. passed 2-4-20)
Penalty, see § 10.99
Cross-reference:
   
Business license fees, see § 110.20
§ 114.02 PURCHASES FROM MINORS.
   No junk dealer, junk collector, secondhand dealer, or auctioneer, or auction
house shall directly or indirectly, either purchase or receive by way of barter
or exchange, any of the articles aforesaid, of a minor, under the age of 18
years, knowing or having reason to believe him to be such; except when the
minor shall be accompanied by a parent or legal guardian who shall sign the
transaction record in person before the dealer or collector.
(Ord. passed 3-7-95; Am. Ord. passed 6-5-12)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 114.03 RECORDS AND INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   Every pawnshop, pawnbroker or secondhand dealer, upon the acquisition
or sale of any article enumerated in §
110.01 of this title, shall prepare transaction records electronically as
directed by the Chief of Police or his designee, and submit said form
electronically, detailing the proven identity of the seller including his name,
date of birth, address, type of identification and identification number if
there is one. A digital photo of said person shall accompany the electronic
filing of the transaction. Only government issued forms of identification will
be accepted. No transaction shall occur if the identity of the seller cannot be
proven. The record of the transaction shall also contain the month, day, and
year when the transaction occurred as well as a full, accurate, and detailed
description of each article purchased including brand name and serial number,
if any, with the price paid therefor, and cause the record to be signed by the
seller in person along with a digital color photo of the property pursuant to
the following requirements:
      (1)   Individually identifiable articles. Articles that are individually
identifiable by a serial number or other applied numbers, letters, characters
or markings or other unique features that serve to distinguish it from any
other similar article and can be used to establish ownership.
         (a)   Each individually identifiable article brought in to a
pawnbroker or secondhand dealer for sale, barter, trade, pledge or pawn during
a single transaction shall be itemized separately. Articles shall not be
grouped together (i.e., five gold monogrammed rings), but must provide a
complete and thorough description of each item to include the following:
            1.   Type of article;
            2.   Brand name/make/manufacturer (if applicable);
            3.   Model number (if applicable);
            4.   Serial number (if applicable);
            5.   Color/finish;
            6.   Any other identifying marks, writing, engraving, etc.
         (b)   A digital photograph(s) shall be taken of each individually
identifiable article, sufficiently detailed to allow reasonable identification
of the article. The digital photograph(s) shall capture any identifying
numbers, marks, writing, engraving, etc., or any other distinguishing
characteristics.
      (2)   Non-individually identifiable articles. Articles that cannot be
distinguished from any other similar articles may be described in groups of
similar types of articles, but only within the same transaction.
         (a)   Non-individually identifiable articles brought in to a
pawnbroker or secondhand dealer for sale, barter, trade, pledge or pawn during
a single transaction may be grouped and shall include reasonable descriptions
of the number and types of items within each group to enable the Police
Department to determine if they may have been stolen during a particular crime.
(For example, the licensee receives a video game controller, five video game
discs, and numerous items of jewelry. The licensee would have to individually
itemize and photograph the video game controller as outlined in division (A)(1)
above, as it would be a serially-numbered item. The remaining items shall not
be listed as “miscellaneous video games and jewelry.” Instead, the licensee
shall describe them as follows: “five video game discs to include the following
titles...” and “miscellaneous jewelry to include two yellow gold necklaces, one
silver necklace, two pairs of silver earrings, one women’s yellow gold ring,
one women’s white gold diamond ring and two silver bracelets.”)
         (b)   A digital photograph(s) shall be taken of each group of similar
types of articles within the same transaction. The articles may be photographed
together as a group but each individual article shall be visible in the
photograph. (For example, given the circumstances outlined in division (A)(2)
(a) above, the five video game discs would be photographed together as a group,
side-by-side, and the jewelry items would be photographed together as a group
with each item laid out so as to be individually viewable.)
   (B)   When filed electronically, a copy of the record shall be forwarded to
the Police Department or authorized data storage site as soon as possible, but
no later than 24 hours after completion of the transaction. The dealer shall
retain a copy of the record at his local place of business for one year from
the date of transaction which, along with any article therein listed, may be
inspected by any duly authorized police officer. No article so purchased shall
be sold, changed, altered in its appearance or otherwise within 30 days after
the purchase thereof, except with the written consent of the Chief of Police or
his designee. All items purchased or pawned shall remain on the premises during
the waiting period. Every pawnshop, or secondhand dealer, auctioneer, or
auction house, upon file sale of a secondhand article enumerated in §
110.01 of this title, shall prepare and maintain at his local place of
business, a record of the sale detailing the proven identity of the buyer
including his name, date of birth, address, and type of identification. The
record shall also contain a description of the article sold including brand
name and serial number, if any, and the price paid therefor. The record shall
be available at the local place of business for inspection by any duly
authorized police officer for one year from the date of transaction.
   (C)   Every junk dealer, upon the acquisition of any item enumerated in §
110.01 of this title, shall prepare transaction records electronically as
directed by the Chief of Police or his designee. When filed electronically, a
copy of the record shall be forwarded to the Police Department or authorized
data storage site as soon as possible, but no later than 24 hours after
completion of the transaction. The electronic record shall detail the proven
identity of the seller including his name, date of birth, address, type of
identification, and identification number if there is one. Only government
issued forms of identification will be accepted. If the identity of the seller
cannot be proven, no transaction may occur. Furthermore, a digital photo of
said person shall accompany the electronic filing of the transaction. The
owner, corporation, or company shall maintain at his local place of business, a
record of such transaction detailing the proven identity of the seller. The
record shall also include a full, accurate, and detailed description of the
item, including brand name and serial number, if any, along with a color
digital photo of item(s) pursuant to the following photographing requirements:
      (1)   Articles that cannot be distinguished from any other similar
articles may be described in groups of similar types of articles, but only
within the same transaction by the same customer. Licensees/owners/employees
shall provide reasonable descriptions of the number, weight and/or types of
items within each group to enable the Police Department to determine if they
may have been stolen during a particular crime.
      (2)   A digital photograph(s) shall be taken of each group of articles,
provided however, that similar types of articles contained within some type of
container does not have to be photographed individually. A color digital
photograph of the container and a reasonable representation of its contents
will be sufficient.
   (D)   All electronic records submitted by junk dealers and/or scrap yards
shall also include a complete and accurate description of any vehicle used by
the seller, to include the year, make, model, color, registration number and
state, to be included with the electronic filing of the transaction. The record
shall also include the day, month, and year when the transaction occurred. The
record shall be available at the local place of business for inspection by any
authorized police officer for one year from the date of transaction.
   (E)   Every junk dealer and/or scrap yard that purchases items in which a
transaction record must be prepared pursuant to §
114.03 shall pay to the city an annual fee of $3,500 due in full on April 30th
of each calendar year. Licensees whose initial application for a business
license is received by the City Clerk, after May 1 of the year, or who renews a
license in effect during the calendar year following enactment of this chapter
shall be subject to all annual license fees on a promotion schedule in the
manner set forth in §
110.21.
   (F)   Exclusions.
      (1)   Any person, firm, partnership or corporation whose business is the
retail buying, selling, buy-back, exchanging, consignment, dealing in or
dealing with antiques, furs, fur coats, books, magazines, vinyl records,
cassette tapes, VHS tapes, BetaMax tapes, compact discs (CDs), DVDs,
LaserDiscs, VideoDiscs, BIu-Ray Discs, comics, used furniture, used clothing,
or used motor vehicles/motorcycles by legally recognized vehicle dealerships,
shall be exempt from the requirements of §
114.03.
      (2)   Any person, organization, partnership, or corporation whose
business is the retail selling of wireless service plans and related equipment
shall be exempt from the requirements of §
114.03 if the business participates in recognized device recovery programs.
      (3)   Any person, organization, partnership, or corporation engaged in
the sale or exchange of tickets for entertainment, sporting, political or other
special events shall be exempt from the requirements of §
114.03.
      (4)   Mail-order transactions or retail stores that exchange or provide
cash or credit for returned articles shall be exempt from the requirements of §
114.03.
      (5)   Religious activities by an organization that would otherwise
qualify for a tax exemption under the provisions of R.S.A. 72:23, III shall be
exempt from the requirements of §
114.03.
      (6)   School events that have been authorized under rules and regulations
as otherwise set forth in R.S.A. Title XV shall be exempt from the requirements
of §
114.03
      (7)   Any federal licensed firearms dealer shall be exempt from the
requirements of §
114.03.
      (8)   Coins or stamps sold/purchased in bulk may be resold to individuals
or wholesalers without record, provided that the sale/purchase occurs after the
30-day hold period and the photographing and recording requirements of §
114.03 have been met.
      (9)   Junk dealers and/or scrap yards shall be exempt from any hold
period requirement in §
114.03.
(Ord. passed 3-7-95; Am. Ord. passed 6-5-12; Am. Ord. passed 10-6-15; Am. Ord.
passed 2-4-20) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 114.04 EXCLUSIONS.
   Specifically excluded from the provisions of this chapter are the following:
   (A)   Purchases from private residences by citizens not engaged in a
secondhand dealer type business.
   (B)   An organization that purchases secondhand goods, whether directly or
indirectly, from a not-for-profit organization and does not purchase any
secondhand goods from the general public.
(Ord. passed 3-7-95; Am. Ord. passed 12-20-11; Am. Ord. passed 6-5-12)
CHAPTER 115: SOLICITATIONS, SALES, PEDDLERS, AND FAIRS
Section
General Provisions
   
115.01   Definitions
   
115.02   Submission of fees
Solicitation for Charities
   
115.10   Permit required
   
115.11   Raffle permit required
Peddlers
   
115.40   License required; application
   
115.41   Application and license fee
   
115.42   Exemptions
   
115.43   Traffic regulations
   
115.44   Prohibited conduct
   
115.45   Fraud; revocation of license
   
115.46   Temporary suspension for street closings
Civic Center Peddlers
   
115.50   License required; application
   
115.51   Application and license fee
   
115.52   Placement and issuance
   
115.53   Prohibited conduct
   
115.54   Fraud; revocation of license
   
115.55   Temporary suspension for street closings
Fairs
   
115.60   License required; application
   
115.61   Prohibited conduct
   
115.62   Revocation of fair license
   
115.63   Peddler's license not required
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 115.01 DEFINITIONS.
      For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CIVIC CENTER ZONE. The westerly side of Elm Street, on the sidewalk, from
Pleasant Street to the Center of NH exit and the easterly side of Elm Street,
on the sidewalk, from Central Street to Merrimack Street. The westerly side of
the zone includes a 30-foot setback from the corner of Elm Street and the
Center of NH exit, northerly, and a 90-foot setback from the corner of Elm
Street and Pleasant Street, southerly. This prevents impairing driver vision
(in accordance with § 8.22(E) of the Zoning Ordinance) as well as interfering
with Manchester transit loading and unloading. The easterly side of the zone
also includes a 30-foot setback from the corner of Elm Street and Central
Street, northerly, and a 90-foot setback from the corner of Elm Street and
Merrimack Street, southerly. The Office of the City Clerk shall not issue more
than a pre-determined number of licenses designated for the Civic Center Zone.
The Office of the City Clerk may use discretion as to the total number of
licenses issued for the Civic Center Zone should it be determined that this
amount disrupts pedestrian traffic patterns, vehicular traffic flow, or
reasonable peddler activity.
   DISQUALIFYING CRIMINAL CONVICTION. Any felony convictions, any conviction
involving harassment, violence, theft, fraud, loitering, prowling, or
endangering the welfare of a child or incompetent or any criminal conviction
involving a child or incompetent.
   FAIR. A show in which ten or more persons display merchandise, articles,
services, or things for sale or solicit orders and as a separate transaction
deliveries are made to purchasers, from a booth, stand, rack, showcase, bench,
push-cart or a designated area.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Any vehicle, used for displaying, storing, or transporting of
articles offered for sale by a peddler, which is required to be licensed and
registered by the State Department of Motor Vehicles.
   PEDDLER. A person as defined in R.S.A. 320.1 and R.S.A. 321.1, except as may
be excluded by
§ 110.08 of this title, and shall include any person, whether a resident of the
city or not, traveling by foot, wagon, motor vehicle, or any other type of
conveyance, from place to place, from house to house, or from street to street,
carrying, conveying, or transporting goods, wares, merchandise, meats, fish,
vegetables, fruits, flowers, plants, garden truck, farm products or provisions,
offering and exposing the same for sale from a wagon, stand, motor vehicle,
railroad car, or other vehicle or conveyance, and includes one who while
traveling from place to place solicits orders and as a separate transaction
deliveries are made to purchasers. The word PEDDLER shall include one who
travels from place to place offering to perform personal services for household
repairs or improvements, or solicits or induces any person to sign any
contracts relating to household repairs and improvements, including contracts
for the replacement or installation of siding on any residence or building; or
one who keeps a regular place of business, open during regular business hours
at the same location, but who offers for sale or sells and delivers, personally
or through his agents, at a place other than his regular place of business,
goods, wares, or merchandise. The word PEDDLER shall include HAWKER, VENDOR,
HUCKSTER, and ITINERANT VENDOR. The word PEDDLER shall not include those
persons who are on residential premises at the prior invitation of the owner or
legal occupant or direct sellers as defined by Sec. 3508 of the U.S. Internal
Revenue Code.
   PUBLIC ASSEMBLY BUILDINGS. As defined in the International Building Code,
2000, §303.1(A-4) through 303.1(A-5).
   PUBLIC PROPERTY. Any city-owned or controlled property including but not
limited to streets, sidewalks, municipal parking areas, and municipal parks.
   STAND. Any table, showcase, bench, rack, pushcart, wagon, or any other
wheeled vehicle or device which may be moved without the assistance of a motor
vehicle and which is not required to be licensed and registered by the State
Department of Motor Vehicles, used for displaying, storing, or transporting
articles offered by sale by a peddler.
(Ord. passed 3-7-95; Am. Ord. passed 11-7-01; Am. Ord. passed 10-4-05; Am. Ord.
passed 7-6-10; Am. Ord. passed 4-18-17)
§ 115.02 SUBMISSION OF FEES.
   Fees for permits, applications, and licenses shall be submitted with the
applications under this chapter and shall be considered nonrefundable.
(Ord. passed 3-7-95)
SOLICITATION FOR CHARITIES
§ 115.10 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person shall solicit financial aid or assistance from the public
offering in return therefor any emblem, tag, flower or like symbol; solicit
funds for charitable purpose; or sell tags, flowers, or other objects for
charitable purposes unless a permit for such activity is obtained from the
office of the City Clerk.
   (B)   Tag day permits shall be issued only to organizations which have a
principal location in the city, shall be for a two-day period only, and shall
be issued only twice a year to each organization unless further issuance is
permitted by the Committee on Administration of the Board of Mayor and
Aldermen.
   (C)   Applications for permits under this section shall be made to the City
Clerk upon a form to be determined by the City Clerk.
(Ord. passed 3-7-95)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 115.11 RAFFLE PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   The authority for the issuance of raffle permits granted under R.S.A.
287-A to the Mayor and Aldermen is hereby delegated to the City Clerk.
   (B)   No person, organization, corporation, or other entity shall conduct a
raffle in the city without having first obtained a permit from the City Clerk.
   (C)   All raffle permits shall be issued by the City Clerk in accordance
with the provisions of R.S.A. 287-A, as it is now written or may hereafter be
amended.
   (D)   Applications for raffle permits shall be submitted to the City Clerk
on forms to be determined by the City Clerk.
(Ord. passed 3-7-95)
Penalty, see § 10.99
PEDDLERS
§ 115.40 LICENSE REQUIRED; APPLICATION.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to engage in
the business of a peddler within the city without first having secured a
license therefor. The license shall be an annual license expiring on April 30
of each year. Each license issued pursuant to this subchapter shall be
conspicuously displayed. The City Clerk may issue a temporary license for
peddlers, following the same procedure as for the issuance of an annual
license.
   (B)   Application for a peddler's license shall be made to the City Clerk
upon a form to be determined by the City Clerk. The application shall include:
      (1)   The name, home and business address of the applicant, and the name
and the address of the owner, if other than the applicant, of the business and
of any stand or motor vehicle to be used in the operation of the business.
      (2)   Two recent passport photographs of the applicant, or photographs of
such size as previously approved by the City Clerk.
      (3)   A complete certified criminal record of the applicant obtained from
the Criminal Records Division, State Police, Department of Safety, State of New
Hampshire, and/or from the appropriate out-of state agency or agencies if not a
resident of the state for the five years preceding the application.
      (4)   A description of the type of food, beverage, merchandise, or
service to be sold, and in the case of products of farm or orchard, whether
produced or grown by the applicant.
      (5)   A description and photograph of any stand or motor vehicle to be
used in the operation of the business, including the license and registration
number of any motor vehicle used in the operation of the business.
      (6)   A license from the City Health Department for any peddler who will
sell any food or beverages.
      (7)   (a)   A certificate of insurance that the applicant has been issued
an insurance policy by an insurance company licensed to do business in the
state, protecting the licensee and the city from all claims for damages to
property and bodily injury, including death which may arise from operations
under or in connection with the license. Such insurance shall provide combined
primary and excess coverage which meet a $500,000 minimum limit; such policy
shall provide for automobile liability insurance for owned, nonowned and hire
vehicles as applicable; and such policy shall provide that the policy shall not
terminate or be cancelled prior to the expiration date except with 30 days'
advance written notice to the city.
         (b)   Exceptions to certificates of insurance may be considered on a
case by case basis by the City Clerk with consultation of the risk manager to
modify guidelines to meet the exposures presented in a specific activity.
      (8)   A description of the proposed location of the business together
with the written permission of the abutting landowner and/or tenant and a
certificate from the Planning and Community Development Department that a
location is consistent with the Zoning Ordinance. The abutter's written
permission for use of a location shall be kept current and submitted at the
beginning of each licensing year. If the location is in or adjacent to a public
area with no private abutting landowner and/or tenant, an applicant must obtain
written permission from the appropriate municipal department or public agency.
Authorization to operate at that location may be subject to conditions
requested by the municipal department or public agency at the time approval is
granted or at any time during the licensing period. Peddlers who have been
licensed during the licensing year immediately preceding an application for a
specific location shall be given first consideration for licensure at that
location provided all other requirements under this division are met and that
the license is applied for prior to June 1 of the license year. After June 1,
the City Clerk may issue a license for the location to the first applicant who
requests that site and who meets the licensing requirements.
      (9)   Peddlers from motor vehicles shall describe, if less than the
entire city, the general area in which the business will be operated.
      (10)   Hours of operation.
      (11)   Whether or not the applicant has previously held a peddler's
license.
      (12)    Proof that the applicant holds a hawker, peddler, or itinerant
vendor's license from the state where applicable.
   (C)   Standards for denial. In addition to the application requirements set
forth in this section, a license to operate as a peddler shall be denied to the
following persons:
      (1)   An applicant who has received a disqualifying criminal conviction
or has been imprisoned at any time for a disqualifying criminal conviction
during the five years preceding the application.
      (2)   An applicant who is required to register as a sexual offender or as
an offender against children under R.S.A. 651-B:6.
      (3)   An applicant who is denied a peddler license under the standards of
this section, or who has reason to believe that he or she may be denied a
peddler license under these standards, may file a written request for a review
of the application before the Committee on Administration. The Committee on
Administration will approve or disapprove the fitness of the applicant for the
license. The Committee on Administration may require the submission of
qualifying evidence to make an assessment, including character references and/
or evaluation by a qualified professional, and may set such conditions, review
procedures, or monitoring activities as it deems appropriate as a condition of
licensure.
(Ord. passed 3-7-95; Am. Ord. passed 9-5-95; Am. Ord. passed 6-4-96; Am. Ord.
passed 11-7-01; Am. Ord. passed 10-4-05; Am. Ord. passed 2-7-09)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 115.41 APPLICATION AND LICENSE FEE.
   Each application for annual license shall be submitted with a fee of $150,
cash, money order, or bank check. Each application for a temporary license
shall be submitted with a fee of $25, cash, money order, or bank check. The fee
for the initial license shall be the application fee.
(Ord. passed 3-7-95; Am. Ord. passed 11-7-01)
Cross-reference:
   
Business license fees, see § 110.20
§ 115.42 EXEMPTIONS.
   The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to the following:
   (A)   Sales made to dealers by commercial travelers or selling agents.
   (B)   Any nonprofit corporation, community chest, fund, or foundation
organized and operated exclusively for religious, charitable, scientific,
literary, or educational purposes when no part of the entity's earnings benefit
any private shareholder or individual unless such person is selling food or
beverages from a motor vehicle or stand for immediate consumption.
(Ord. passed 3-7-95; Am. Ord. passed 11-7-01)
Cross-reference:
   
Exemption for person displaying merchandise at a licensed fair, see § 115.63
§ 115.43 TRAFFIC REGULATIONS.
   Peddling from a motor vehicle is subject to any and all restrictions
contained in the traffic regulations of the city except that peddling from a
motor vehicle is prohibited where parking is controlled by parking meters or
Pay & Display meters.
(Ord. passed 3-7-95; Am. Ord. passed 11-7-01; Am. Ord. passed 7-6-10)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 115.44 PROHIBITED CONDUCT.
   A peddler shall not:
   (A)   Operate his business on any street, sidewalk, park, parkway or in any
other public place unless his peddler's license specifies that peddling in such
public place is permitted thereunder.
   (B)   Vend within 600 feet of the grounds of any elementary or secondary
school between one hour prior to the start of the school and one hour after
dismissal at the end of the school day.
   (C)   Vend within 1,000 feet of any hospital.
   (D)   Vend within 1,000 feet of the same street of any public assembly
unless his peddler's license specifies that peddling in such place is permitted
thereunder.
   (E)   Leave any motor vehicle or stand unattended.
   (F)   Store, park, or leave any stand overnight on any street or sidewalk or
park any motor vehicle other than in a lawful parking place, in conformance
with city and state parking regulations.
   (G)   Sell food or beverages for immediate consumption unless he has
available for public use his own or a public litter receptacle which is
available for his patron's use.
   (H)   Leave any location without first picking up, removing, and disposing
of all trash or refuse remaining from sales made by him.
   (I)   Allow any items relating to the operation of the business to be placed
anywhere other than in, on, or under the stand or motor vehicle.
   (J)   Set up, maintain, or permit the use of any table, crate, carton, rack,
sign, or any other device to increase the selling or display capacity of his
stand or motor vehicle, where such items have not been described on his
application.
   (K)   Solicit or conduct business with persons in motor vehicles.
   (L)   Sell any other than that which he is licensed to vend.
   (M)   Sound or permit the sounding of any device which produces a loud and
raucous noise, or use or operate any loud speaker, public address system, radio
sound amplifier or similar device to attract the attention of the public.
   (N)   Operate without the insurance coverage specified in this subchapter.
   (O)   Sell food or beverages without a valid and current Health Department
permit to operate a food establishment.
   (P)   Vend without a fire extinguisher of a type approved by the Fire Chief
or his designee if the vendor utilizes heat generation equipment.
   (Q)   Operate at any time other than the hours of 9:00 a.m. to 2:00 a.m.
unless part of a special permitted activity or the license so specifies.
   (R)   Vend within 50 feet of any building or storefront housing a business
selling the same or similar food, merchandise, or product except during special
one-day events or while such business is closed.
   (S)   Vend in the area around the Civic Center bounded by Pine Street from
the corners of Manchester Street and Valley Street, Valley Street from the
corners of Pine Street and Elm Street, Elm Street from the corners of Valley
Street and West Auburn Street, West Auburn Street from the corners of Elm
Street and Canal Street, Canal Street from the corners of West Auburn Street
and Market Street, Market Street from the corners of Canal Street and Franklin
Street, Franklin Street from the corners of Market Street and West Merrimack
Street, West Merrimack Street from the corners of Franklin Street and Elm
Street, Elm Street from the corners of West Merrimack Street and Manchester
Street, Manchester Street from the corners of Elm Street and Pine Street,
unless the applicant proposes to vend items on private property by written
permission and with applicable municipal approvals as outlined in §
115.40(B)(8), the applicant proposes to vend items adjacent to a business they
currently own within this area, part of a special permitted activity or the
license so specifies.
   (T)   Engage in any loud argument, fight, or other disturbances; harassed,
threatened or assaulted another person, intentionally damaged, destroyed or
threatened to damage or destroy any property.
   (U)   Operate without properly displaying peddlers license.
(Ord. passed 3-7-95; Am. Ord. passed 11-7-01; Am. Ord. passed 10-4-05; Am. Ord.
passed 7-6-10; Am. Ord. passed 10-6-15) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 115.45 FRAUD; REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   (A)   Any licensed peddler who shall be guilty of any fraud, cheating or
misrepresentation, whether through himself or through an employee, while acting
as peddler in the city, or who shall sell any goods, merchandise, service, or
wares other than those specified in the application for a license shall be
deemed guilty of a violation of this subchapter.
   (B)   Any person violating any provisions of this subchapter shall have his
license revoked. Upon request of the City Clerk the licensee shall surrender
his license. Upon conviction of violations under this section, no license shall
be issued to such person for a period of three years unless permission is
granted by the Committee on Administration.
   (C)   Any peddler having his license revoked may request in writing
reconsideration by the Committee on Administration.
(Ord. passed 3-7-95; Am. Ord. passed 11-7-01)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 115.46 TEMPORARY SUSPENSION FOR STREET CLOSINGS.
   An official temporary encumbrance or closure of a street or sidewalk by the
city for purposes of maintenance or reconstruction shall cause the suspension
of all licenses to operate thereon.
(Ord. passed 3-7-95; Am. Ord. passed 11-7-01)
CIVIC CENTER PEDDLERS
§ 115.50 LICENSE REQUIRED; APPLICATION.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to engage in
the business of a Civic Center peddler within the city without first having
secured a license therefor. The license shall be an annual license expiring on
April 30 of each year. Each license issued pursuant to this subchapter shall be
conspicuously displayed. The City Clerk may issue a temporary license for
peddlers, following the same procedure as for the issuance of an annual
license.
   (B)   Application for a peddler's license shall be made to the City Clerk
upon a form to be determined by the City Clerk. The application shall include:
      (1)   The name, home and business address of the applicant, and the name
and the address of the owner, if other than the applicant, of the business and
of any stand or motor vehicle to be used in the operation of the business.
      (2)   A description of the type of food, beverage, merchandise, or
service to be sold, and in the case of products of farm or orchard, whether
produced or grown by the applicant.
      (3)   A description and photograph of any stand to be used in the
operation of the business.
      (4)   A license from the City Health Department for any peddler who will
sell any food or beverages.
      (5)   (a)   A certificate of insurance that the applicant has been issued
an insurance policy by an insurance company licensed to do business in the
state, protecting the licensee and the city from all claims for damages to
property and bodily injury, including death which may arise from operations
under or in connection with the license. Such insurance shall provide combined
primary and excess coverage which meet a $500,000 minimum limit; such policy
shall provide for automobile liability insurance for owned, non-owned, and hire
vehicles as applicable; and such policy shall provide that the policy shall not
terminate or be cancelled prior to the expiration date except with 30 days
advance written notice to the city.
         (b)   Exceptions to certificates of insurance may be considered on a
case by case basis by the City Clerk with consultation of the risk manager to
modify guidelines to meet the exposures presented in a specific activity.
      (6)   Authorization to operate within the Civic Center Zone may be
subject to conditions requested by a municipal department or public agency at
the time approval is granted or at any time during the licensing period.
Peddlers who have been licensed during the licensing year immediately preceding
an application for a specific location shall be given first consideration for
licensure at that location provided all other requirements under this division
are met and that the license is applied for prior to June 1 of the license
year. After June 1, the City Clerk may issue a license for the location to the
first applicant who requests that site and who meets the licensing
requirements.
      (7)   Hours of operation.
      (8)   Whether or not the applicant has previously held a peddler's
license.
      (9)   Proof that the applicant holds a hawker, peddler, or itinerant
vendor's license from the state where applicable.
(Ord. passed 11-7-01)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 115.51 APPLICATION AND LICENSE FEE.
   Each application for annual Civic Center peddler license shall be submitted
with a fee of $400, cash, money order, or bank check. Each application for a
temporary license shall be submitted with a fee of $75, cash, money order, or
bank check. The fee for the initial license shall be the application fee.
(Ord. passed 11-7-01)
Cross-reference:
   Business license fees, see
§ 110.20
§ 115.52 PLACEMENT AND ISSUANCE.
   Civic Center peddlers will be allotted placement upon the sidewalk, not to
exceed a ten square foot area. Peddlers will be placed on the westerly portion
of the Civic Center Zone until all spots are issued before placement is granted
for the portion of the zone. The Office of the City Clerk shall determine the
total number of licenses issued for the Civic Center Zone during a given
licensing period. Licenses are granted on a first come first serve basis. Only
two annual peddler licenses for the Civic Center Zone may be issued to the same
person in a single license year.
(Ord. passed 11-7-01)
Cross-reference:
   Civic Center Zone defined, see
§ 115.01
§ 115.53 PROHIBITED CONDUCT.
   A peddler shall not:
   (A)   Leave any stand unattended.
   (B)   Store, park, or leave any stand overnight on any street or sidewalk,
park any motor vehicle other than in a lawful parking place, in conformance
with city and state parking regulations.
   (C)   Sell food or beverages for immediate consumption unless he has
available for public use his own or a public litter receptacle which is
available for his patron's use.
   (D)   Leave any location without first picking up, removing, and disposing
of all trash or refuse remaining from sales made by him.
   (E)   Allow any items relating to the operation of the business to be placed
anywhere other than in, on, or under the stand or motor vehicle.
   (F)   Set up, maintain, or permit the use of any table, crate, carton, rack,
sign, or any other device to increase the selling or display capacity of his
stand or motor vehicle, where such items have not been described on his
application.
   (G)   Solicit or conduct business with persons in motor vehicles.
   (H)   Sell any item other than that which he is licensed to vend.
   (I)   Sound or permit the sounding of any device which produces a loud and
raucous noise, or use or operate any loud speaker, public address system, radio
sound amplifier or similar device to attract the attention of the public.
   (J)   Operate without the insurance coverage specified in this subchapter.
   (K)   Sell food or beverages without a valid and current Health Department
permit to operate a food establishment.
   (L)   Vend without a fire extinguisher of a type approved by the Fire Chief
or his designee if the vendor utilizes heat generation equipment.
   (M)   Operate at any time other than the hours of 9:00 a.m. to 2:00 a.m.
unless part of a special permitted activity or the license so specifies.
(Ord. passed 11-7-01; Am. Ord. passed 10-6-15) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 115.54 FRAUD; REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   (A)   Any licensed peddler who shall be guilty of any fraud, cheating or
misrepresentation, whether through himself or through an employee, while acting
as peddler in the city, or who shall sell any goods, merchandise, service, or
wares other than those specified in the application for a license shall be
deemed guilty of a violation of this subchapter.
   (B)   Any person violating any provisions of this subchapter shall have his
license revoked. Upon request of the City Clerk the licensee shall surrender
his license. Upon conviction of violations under this section, no license shall
be issued to such person for a period of three years unless permission is
granted by the Committee on Administration.
   (C)   Any peddler having his license revoked may request in writing
reconsideration by the Committee on Administration.
(Ord. passed 11-7-01)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 115.55 TEMPORARY SUSPENSION FOR STREET CLOSINGS.
   An official temporary encumbrance or closure of a street or sidewalk by the
city for purposes of maintenance or reconstruction shall cause the suspension
of all licenses to operate thereon.
(Ord. passed 11-7-01)
FAIRS
§ 115.60 LICENSE REQUIRED; APPLICATION.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to promote a
fair in which any merchandise, article, or thing is displayed for sale by
peddlers/vendors without first having secured a license therefor.
   (B)   Application for a fair license shall be made to the City Clerk upon a
form to be determined by the City Clerk. The application shall include:
      (1)   The name, home and business address, and telephone number of the
applicant.
      (2)   A description of the general purpose of the fair or activities of
the fair.
      (3)   A description of the location of the fair.
      (4)   A license from the City Health Department for any person who will
sell any food or beverages.
      (5)   Hours of operation of the fair.
      (6)   A list of all persons who shall be allowed to display any
merchandise, article, or thing at the fair.
      (7)   (a)   A certificate of insurance that the applicant has been issued
an insurance policy by an insurance company licensed to do business in the
state, protecting the licensee and the city from all claims for damages to
property and bodily injury, including death which may arise from operations
under or in connection with the license. Such insurance shall provide combined
primary and excess coverage which meet a $500,000 minimum limit; such policy
shall provide for automobile liability insurance for owned, nonowned, and hire
vehicles as applicable; and such policy shall provide that the policy shall not
terminate or be cancelled prior to the expiration date except with 30 days'
advance written notice to the city.
         (b)   Exceptions to certificates of insurance may be considered on a
case by case basis by the City Clerk with consultation of the risk manager to
modify guidelines to meet the exposures presented in a specific activity.
(Ord. passed 3-7-95; Am. Ord. passed 9-5-95)
Penalty, see § 10.99
Cross-reference:
   
Business license fees, see § 110.20
§ 115.61 PROHIBITED CONDUCT.
   A holder of a fair license shall not:
   (A)   Allow the sale of any food or beverages without first having obtained
the necessary permit from the City Health Department.
   (B)   Allow any person to display any merchandise, article, or thing for
sale without first having obtained any and all required licenses from the
state.
   (C)   Allow the sale of any food or beverages for immediate consumption in
an outdoor area without having available for public use adequate litter
receptacles available for patron use.
(Ord. passed 3-7-95)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 115.62 REVOCATION OF FAIR LICENSE.
   In addition to any penalty imposed, the Committee on Administration of the
Board of Mayor and Aldermen may revoke such fair license for any violations of
this subchapter or of any city ordinance or state statute pertaining to the
conduct of such business.
(Ord. passed 3-7-95)
§ 115.63 PEDDLER'S LICENSE NOT REQUIRED.
   Any authorized person displaying merchandise, articles, or things at a duly
licensed fair shall not be required to hold a separate peddler's license.
(Ord. passed 3-7-95)
CHAPTER 116: [RESERVED]
(Previous chapter repealed on 1-19-99)
CHAPTER 117: FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS
Section
General Provisions
   
117.01   Definitions
   
117.02   Approval of plans required for building permit
   
117.03   Sales of food by firms outside city
Permits and Inspections
   
117.15   Permit required
   
117.16   Compliance with chapter required for permit
   
117.17   Application
   
117.18   Issuance of permit
   
117.19   Permit fee
   
117.20   Expiration and renewal of permit
   
117.21   Permit for temporary establishment
   
117.22   Permit to be posted
   
117.23   Transfer of permit prohibited
   
117.24   Suspension of permit; reinstatement
   
117.25   Revocation of permit
   
117.26   Hearings for suspension or revocation
   
117.27   Inspection required
   
117.28   Access; examination of records
   
117.29   Report; rating score
   
117.30   Correction of violations
   
117.31   Service of notice
   
117.32   Procedure when infection is suspected
Cross-reference:
   
Health and sanitation, see Ch. 91
Statutory reference:
   Authority of city to regulate food and food establishments, see R.S.A. 47:17
(IV)
   Sanitary production and distribution of food, see R.S.A. Ch. 143
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 117.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   FOOD-SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT. Any fixed or mobile restaurant; cafeteria;
coffee shop; cocktail lounge; catering kitchen; sidewalk cafe; commissary;
grille, luncheonette; short-order cafe; sandwich shop; soda fountain; tea-room;
drive-in; nightclub; roadside stand; industrial feeding establishment; private,
public, or nonprofit organization or institution serving the public; or similar
place in which food or drink is prepared for sale for food service on the
premises or elsewhere; and any other eating or drinking establishment where
food is served or provided for the public with or without charge. A FOOD-
SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT also means a grocery store; meat market; bakery or any
establishment where food is stored, manufactured, and/or processed, or
packaged.
   HEALTH AUTHORITY. The Health Officer of the city or his designated
representatives.
   SANITARY FOOD CODE. The New Hampshire Rules for the Sanitary Production and
Distribution of Food, part He-P 2301, He-P 2303 through He-P 2326, He-P 2329,
and He-P 2331 as in effect on December 1, 2010. Copies of the Sanitary Food
Code are available at the Office of the City Clerk and the Manchester Health
Department.
('71 Code, § 10-1) (Ord. passed 6-5-79; Am. Ord. passed 6-2-87; Am. Ord. passed
9-4-01; Am. Ord. passed 1-4-11)
§ 117.02 APPROVAL OF PLANS REQUIRED FOR BUILDING PERMIT.
   When a food-service establishment is hereafter constructed or extensively
remodeled, or when an existing structure is converted for use as a food-service
establishment, properly prepared plans and specifications for such
construction, remodeling, or alteration, showing layout, arrangement, and
construction materials of work areas, and the location, size, and type of fixed
equipment and facilities shall be submitted to the Health Authority for
approval before such work is begun. No building permit shall be issued by the
Building Inspector until such approval has been given by the Health Authority.
('71 Code, § 10-2) (Ord. passed 4-15-69 ; Am. Ord. passed 9-4-01 )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 117.03 SALES OF FOOD BY FIRMS OUTSIDE CITY.
   Food from food-service establishments outside the jurisdiction of the Health
Authority of the city may be sold within the city if such food-service
establishments conform to the provisions of this chapter or to substantially
equivalent provisions. To determine the extent of compliance with such
provisions, the Health Authority may accept reports from responsible
authorities in other jurisdictions where such food-service establishments are
located.
('71 Code, § 10-3) (Ord. passed 4-15-69 ; Am. Ord. passed 9-4-01 )
PERMITS AND INSPECTIONS
§ 117.15 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person who does not possess a valid permit
issued to him by the Health Authority to operate a food-service establishment
within the city or in a police jurisdiction.
('71 Code, § 10-14) (Ord. passed 4-15-69 ; Am. Ord. passed 9-4-01 )
Penalty, see § 10.99
Statutory reference:
   Authority of city to enter restaurants for inspection, see R.S.A. 47:17 (IV)
§ 117.16 COMPLIANCE WITH CHAPTER REQUIRED FOR PERMIT.
   Only a person who complies with the requirements of this chapter shall be
entitled to receive and retain a permit issued to him by the Health Authority.
('71 Code, § 10-15) (Ord. passed 4-15-69 ; Am. Ord. passed 9-4-01 )
§ 117.17 APPLICATION.
   Any person desiring to operate a food-service establishment shall make
written application for a permit on a form provided by the Health Authority.
('71 Code, § 10-16) (Ord. passed 4-15-69 ; Am. Ord. passed 9-4-01 )
§ 117.18 ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.
   Upon receipt of an application and the designated license fee, and after
inspection reveals that the applicable requirements of this subchapter have
been met, a permit shall be issued to the applicant by the Health Authority.
('71 Code, § 10-17) (Ord. passed 4-15-69 ; Am. Ord. passed 9-4-01 )
§ 117.19 PERMIT FEE.
   The fee for any permit application pursuant to this subchapter shall be in
accordance with the following schedule:
Class Description of Establishment Fee
Class       Description of Establishment                        Fee
Class I     Food-service establishments having a seating        $550
            capacity of 100 persons or greater; supermarkets
Class I-A   Supermarket with bulk foods, salad bar, and/or food $1,000
            buffet
            Food-service establishments having a seating
            capacity of greater than 25 but less than 100
Class II    persons; bakeries; warehouses; distributors;        $330
            nursing homes; commissaries; food processors,
            markets with less than two prep areas
            Markets selling only prepackaged food products;
Class III-A mobile food operations; food service operations     $200
            having a seating capacity of 25 persons or less;
            child day care facilities
            Clubs incorporated under the laws of the State or
Class III-B which are affiliated with any national fraternal    $110
            organization for the same members and bona fide
            guests of liquor
Class IV    Temporary food-service establishments:              $15/day/v endor
            Non-profit organizations not holding a liquor
Class V-A   permit and not serving meals on a daily basis;      No fee
            parochial schools
Class V-B   Government facilities, public schools               No fee
 
('71 Code, § 10-18) (Ord. passed 6-5-79; Am. Ord. passed 6-19-84; Am. Ord.
passed 6-2-87; Am. Ord. passed 6-5-90; Am. Ord. passed 6-4-96; Am. Ord. passed
9-4-01; Am. Ord. passed 11-14-06; Am. Ord. passed 7-5-11)
§ 117.20 EXPIRATION AND RENEWAL OF PERMIT.
   Except as otherwise stipulated in this chapter, any permit issued pursuant
to this section shall be valid for a one-year period and shall expire on the
last day of the month in which it was first issued. There shall be a $10 late
application fee for any permit renewal application received more than ten days
after its expiration.
('71 Code, § 10-19) (Ord. passed 4-15-69; Am. Ord. passed 6-19-84; Am. Ord.
passed 6-2-87 ; Am. Ord. passed 9-4-01 )
§ 117.21 PERMIT FOR TEMPORARY ESTABLISHMENT.
   Any permits for temporary food-service establishments shall be issued for a
period of time not to exceed 14 days.
('71 Code, § 10-20) (Ord. passed 4-15-69 ; Am. Ord. passed 9-4-01 )
§ 117.22 PERMIT TO BE POSTED.
   Any permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be posted in every food-
service establishment. Mobile caterers, canteen trucks, and other readily
moveable food establishments shall be clearly identified by establishment name
and permit number plainly displayed on at least two sides of the vehicle.
('71 Code, § 10-21) (Ord. passed 4-15-69; Am. Ord. passed 6-19-84)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 117.23 TRANSFER OF PERMIT PROHIBITED.
   Any permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall not be transferable from
one person to another person; or from one place to another place; or from one
vehicle to another vehicle.
('71 Code, § 10-22) (Ord. passed 4-15-69; Am. Ord. passed 6-2-87 ; Am. Ord.
passed 9-4-01 )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 117.24 SUSPENSION OF PERMIT; REINSTATEMENT.
   (A)   Any permit issued pursuant to this subchapter may be suspended by the
Health Authority for failure of the holder to comply with the requirements of
this chapter.
   (B)   Whenever a permit holder or operator has failed to comply with any
notice under the provisions of this chapter, the permit holder or operator
shall be notified in writing that the permit is, upon service of the notice,
immediately suspended and that an opportunity for a hearing will be provided if
a written request for a hearing is filed with the Health Authority by the
permit holder.
   (C)   Notwithstanding the other provisions of this chapter, whenever the
Health Authority finds unsanitary or other conditions in the operation of a
food-service establishment which, in his judgment, constitute a substantial
hazard to the public health, he may issue a written notice to the permit holder
or operator citing such condition, the corrective action to be taken, and
specifying the time period within which such action shall be taken. If it is
deemed necessary, the Health Officer may order that the permit be immediately
suspended and all food-service operations will be immediately discontinued. Any
person to whom such an order is issued shall comply immediately therewith, but
upon written petition to the Health Authority, shall be afforded a hearing as
soon as possible.
   (D)   Any person whose permit has been suspended may, at any time, make
application for a reinspection for the purpose of reinstatement of the permit
accompanied by a reinspection fee which shall be equal to cost of the annual
permit. Within five days following receipt of a written request, including a
statement signed by the applicant that in his opinion the conditions causing
suspension of the permit have been corrected, the Health Authority shall make a
reinspection. If the applicant is complying with the requirements of this
chapter, the permit shall be reinstated.
('71 Code, § 10-23) (Ord. passed 4-15-69; Am. Ord. passed 3-1-83 ; Am. Ord.
passed 9-4-01 )
§ 117.25 REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   For serious or repeated violations of any of the requirements of this
chapter, or for interference with the Health Authority in the performance of
his duties, any permit issued pursuant to this subchapter may be permanently
revoked after an opportunity for a hearing has been provided by the Health
Authority. Prior to such action, the Health Authority shall notify the permit
holder in writing, stating the reasons for which the permit is subject to
revocation and advising that the permit shall be permanently revoked at the end
of five days following service of such notice, unless a request for a hearing
is filed with the Health Authority, by the permit holder, within such five-day
period. A permit may be suspended for cause pending its revocation or a hearing
relative thereto.
('71 Code, § 10-24) (Ord. passed 4-15-69 ; Am. Ord. passed 9-4-01 )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 117.26 HEARINGS FOR SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.
   The hearings provided for in
§§ 117.24 and
117.25 shall be conducted by the Board of Health at a time and place designated
by it. Based upon the record of such hearing, the Board of Health shall make a
finding and shall sustain, modify, or rescind any official notice or order
considered in the hearing. A written report of the hearing decision shall be
furnished to the permit holder by the Board of Health.
('71 Code, § 10-25) (Ord. passed 4-15-69 ; Am. Ord. passed 9-4-01 )
§ 117.27 INSPECTION REQUIRED.
   At least once every six months, the Health Authority shall inspect each
food-service establishment located in the city, or its police jurisdiction, and
shall make as many additional inspections and reinspections as are necessary
for the enforcement of this chapter. To assist the Health Department in making
inspections, mobile caterers, canteen trucks, and other readily moveable food
establishments shall submit accurate route schedules identifying location and
time of stops. Non-mobile food service establishments shall submit normal days
and times of operation on forms provided by the Health Authority.
('71 Code, § 10-26) (Ord. passed 4-15-69; Am. Ord. passed 6-19-84 ; Am. Ord.
passed 9-4-01 )
§ 117.28 ACCESS; EXAMINATION OF RECORDS.
   The Health Authority, after proper identification, shall be permitted to
enter, at any reasonable time, any food-service establishment within the city,
or its police jurisdiction, for the purpose of making inspections to determine
compliance with this chapter. He shall be permitted to examine the records of
the establishment to obtain pertinent information pertaining to food and
supplies purchased, received, or used, and persons employed.
('71 Code, § 10-27) (Ord. passed 4-15-69 ; Am. Ord. passed 9-4-01 )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 117.29 REPORT; RATING SCORE.
   Whenever the Health Authority makes an inspection of a food-service
establishment, he shall record his findings on an inspection report form
provided for this purpose, and shall furnish the original of such inspection
report form to the permit holder or person in charge at the conclusion of the
inspection. Such form shall summarize the requirements of the New Hampshire
Rules for the Sanitary Production and Distribution of Food and shall set forth
a weighted point value for each requirement. Inspection remarks shall be
written to reference, by section number, and shall state the correction to be
made. The rating score of the establishment shall be the total of the weighted
point values for all violations subtracted from 100. The completed inspection
report form is a public document that shall be made available for public
disclosure to any person who requests it according to law.
('71 Code, § 10-28) (Ord. passed 6-5-79 ; Am. Ord. passed 9-4-01 )
§ 117.30 CORRECTION OF VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   The completed inspection report form shall specify a reasonable period
of time for the correction of the violations found; and correction of the
violations shall be accomplished within the period specified, in accordance
with the following provisions:
      (1)   If an imminent health hazard exists, such as lack of hot water,
loss of power, fire, flood, complete lack of refrigeration or sewage backup
into the establishment, the establishment shall immediately cease food service
operations and notify the Health Authority. Operations shall not be resumed
until authorized by the Health Authority.
      (2)   All violations of four- or five-point weighted items shall be
corrected as soon as possible, but in any event, within ten days following
inspection. A follow-up inspection shall be conducted to confirm correction.
      (3)   All one- or two-point weighted items shall be corrected as soon as
possible, but in any event, by the time of the next routine inspection.
      (4)   When the rating score of the establishment is less than 60, the
establishment shall initiate corrective action on all identified violations
within 48 hours. One or more reinspections will be conducted at reasonable time
intervals to assure correction.
      (5)   In the case of temporary food service establishments, all
violations shall be corrected within 24 hours. If violations are not corrected
within 24 hours, the establishment shall immediately cease food service
operations until authorized to resume by the Health Authority.
   (B)   The inspection report shall state that failure to comply with any time
limits for corrections may result in suspension of the permit to operate. An
opportunity for appeal from the inspection findings and time limitations will
be provided if a written request for a hearing is filed with the regulatory
authority within ten days following cessation of operation. If a request for a
hearing is received, a hearing shall be held within 20 days of receipt of that
request.
   (C)   Whenever a food-service establishment is required under the provisions
of this section to cease operations, it shall not resume operations until such
time as a reinspection determines that conditions responsible for the order to
cease operations no longer exist. Opportunity for reinspection shall be offered
within a reasonable time.
('71 Code, § 10-29) (Ord. passed 6-5-79; Am. Ord. passed 9-4-01)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 117.31 SERVICE OF NOTICE.
   All notices provided for under
§ 117.30 shall be deemed to have been properly served when the original of the
inspection report form or other notice has been delivered personally to the
permit holder or person in charge, or such notice has been sent by registered
or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of the
permit holder. A copy of such notice shall be filed with the records of the
Health Authority.
('71 Code, § 10-30) (Ord. passed 4-15-69; Am. Ord. passed 9-4-01)
§ 117.32 PROCEDURE WHEN INFECTION IS SUSPECTED.
   When the Health Authority has reasonable cause to suspect possible disease
transmission by an employee of a food-service establishment, it may secure a
morbidity history of the suspected employee or make any other investigation as
indicated and shall take appropriate action. The Health Authority may require
any or all of the following measures:
   (A)   The immediate exclusion of the employee from employment in all food-
service establishments.
   (B)   The immediate closing of the food-service establishment concerned
until, in the opinion of the Health Authority, no further danger of disease
outbreak exists.
   (C)   Restriction of the employee's service to some area of the
establishment where there would be no danger of transmitting disease.
   (D)   Adequate medical and laboratory examination of the employee and of
other employees and of his and their body discharges. ('71 Code, § 10-31) (Ord.
passed 6-5-79)
CHAPTER 118: VEHICLES FOR HIRE
Section
General Provisions
   
118.01   Definitions
License Provisions
   
118.10   Business license
   
118.11   Minimum requirements
   
118.12   Taxicab driver's license
   
118.13   Application fees
   
118.14   Independent contractors; application; fee
   
118.15   License fees
   
118.16   Suspension or revocation of license
   
118.17   Nontransferability
   
118.18   Special requirements and fees
Drug and Alcohol Policy
   
118.20   Purpose
   
118.21   Prohibited conduct
   
118.22   Types of testing
   
118.23   Substances for which to be tested
   
118.24   Refusal to test
   
118.25   Substance abuse evaluation; return to duty; follow up testing
   
118.26   Laboratory procedures; retest
   
118.27   Disciplinary action
   
118.28   Confidentiality
   
118.29   Substance abuse testing account
Operational Requirements
   
118.30   Taximeter required; exceptions
   
118.31   Taximeters to be tested and approved
   
118.32   Operation of taximeters
   
118.33   Rates for fares established
   
118.34   Discount fares
   
118.35   Receipt to be provided
   
118.36   Rate cards
   
118.37   Records requirements
   
118.38   Consent of first passenger needed for carrying others
   
118.39   Condition and appearance of vehicles
   
118.40   Soliciting customers
   
118.41   Lost articles
   
118.42   Prohibited conduct
 
   
118.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 118.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DISQUALIFYING CRIMINAL CONVICTION.
Any felony convictions, any conviction involving a controlled substance or
violence, theft, or endangering the welfare of a child or incompetent.
   DISQUALIFYING MOTOR VEHICLE CONVICTIONS. Certification as a habitual
offender by the Division of Motor Vehicles of the Department of Safety,
conviction for operating after certification as a habitual offender, reckless
driving, disobeying an officer, and/or driving while under the influence of
drugs or liquor, aggravated driving while intoxicated, or similar out-of-state
offenses.
   INDEPENDENT CONTRACTOR. Any person, firm, corporation, or association
registered as a business with the Secretary of State, State of New Hampshire,
and who enters into a contract, lease, or agreement with a taxicab business to
provide service or benefit to that taxicab business. The definition of
INDEPENDENT CONTRACTOR shall include the definitions and protections as
provided for under R.S.A. 275, Payment of Wages; R.S.A. 275-E, Whistleblowers'
Protection Act; and R.S.A. 281-A, Workers' Compensation Law; all rules,
regulations, standards and interpretations as set forth by the New Hampshire
Department of Labor; and all applicable rulings by the court system of the
state.
   MEDALLION. A single metal plate issued by the City Clerk to identify that
the motor vehicle is a taxicab licensed to operate in the city of Manchester.
   REVOCATION. The permanent loss of a license to operate a taxicab business or
drive a taxicab in the city.
   SUSPENSION. The temporary loss of a license to operate a taxicab business or
drive a taxicab in the city.
   TAXICAB. Any motor vehicle, having a manufacturers rated capacity of not
more than seven passengers, used in the call and demand transportation of
passengers from within the limits of the city to a destination inside or
outside of the city, for compensation to or from points chosen or designated by
the passengers and not operated on a fixed schedule, between fixed termini, or
any such vehicle leased or rented, or held for leasing or renting, with or
without driver or operator. This definition shall not include: a motor vehicle
subject to regulation by the Public Utilities Commission of the state;
sightseeing buses or limousines designed to carry eight persons or more from a
fixed place to places of interest about the city; or motor vehicles collecting
fares by tickets or coupons sold for interstate transportation.
   TAXICAB BUSINESS or TAXICAB COMPANY. Any person, firm, corporation, or
association engaged in the business of transporting passengers in a taxicab
from one destination to another for a fee. A taxicab company may provide its
own dispatching service or lease such service. A taxicab company may lease its
vehicles to independent contractors and/or employ its own drivers.
   TAXICAB DISPATCH COMPANY. Any person, firm, corporation, or association
engaged in the business of providing dispatch service for taxicabs for the
purpose of transporting passengers from one destination to another for a fee.
   TAXICAB DRIVER. Any individual who shall drive a taxicab.
(Ord. passed 4-4-95; Am. Ord. passed 10-3-00)
LICENSE PROVISIONS
§ 118.10 BUSINESS LICENSE.
   (A)   License required. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or
corporation to engage in the business of operating a taxicab company or taxicab
dispatch company in the city without first having secured a license therefor.
   (B)   Application. Applications for a license to engage in the business of
operating a taxicab company or taxicab dispatch company shall be made to the
City Clerk upon a form to be determined by the City Clerk. The application
shall include:
      (1)   The name, home address, home phone number, business address and
business phone number of the applicant.
      (2)   Trade name under which the applicant proposes to do business.
      (3)   A description, including the motor vehicle license plate and
vehicle registration number, of the motor vehicles to be used in the operation
of the business.
      (4)   A certificate of insurance that the applicant has been issued an
insurance policy by an insurance company licensed to do business in the state,
protecting the licensee from all claims for damages to property and bodily
injury, including death which may arise from operations under or in connection
with the license; such insurance shall provide that the policy shall not
terminate or be cancelled prior to the expiration date except with 30 days
advance written notice to the city; such policy shall provide combined primary
and excess coverage which meet a $500,000 minimum limit. A taxicab business
licensed on the date on which this section shall take effect shall adjust its
insurance coverage no later than the next anniversary date of that policy.
      (5)   A written statement from the insurance company which issued the
certificate of insurance for the applicant citing the maximum number of
taxicabs which may be in use for passenger service under the provisions of the
insurance policy, and the number of taxicabs listed on the certificate of
insurance for use as replacement vehicles.
      (6)   A description of the proposed location of the business and dispatch
service. The business location and dispatch service location must be consistent
with the Zoning Code,
Chapter 155 of this code of ordinances. The business must be located within the
city. The City Clerk must be notified, in writing, at least seven days prior to
a change of business or dispatch service location elsewhere within the city
limits. A move of the business location outside of the city shall result in a
revocation of the taxicab business license and shall require that the taxicab
comply file a new application for a taxicab business license under the fee
structure and requirements included in this subchapter.
      (7)   A description of the facility to be used for the maintenance,
repair, and inspection of taxicabs. Said facility must be at least 500 square
feet in area, may be located at another site within a reasonable distance from
that listed as the business location, or may be another separate business
entity within a reasonable distance from the business location of the taxicab
company and designated by the taxicab company as the facility that will be used
for the maintenance, repair, and inspection of its taxicabs.
      (8)   A statement indicating whether the applicant proposes to hire
drivers as employees, to lease its vehicles or services to self-employed
independent contractors or both.
      (9)   Proof that the company has been issued a Worker's Compensation
policy, if required, by an insurance company licensed to do business in the
state.
   (C)   The City Clerk shall issue an original or renewed taxicab business
license after receipt of the application and a full review by appropriate
personnel.
(Ord. passed 4-4-95; Am. Ord. passed 10-3-00)
Penalty, see § 118.99
§ 118.11 MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   An applicant for a taxicab company business license must meet the
following minimum requirements:
      (1)   Taxicabs shall be equipped with two-way communication equipment and
have an arrangement for calling for prompt assistance in the event of a
breakdown en route.
      (2)   The taxicab company shall publish hours of dispatch service in all
display advertising.
      (3)   The taxicab company shall have a published business telephone
number.
   (B)   In addition to those standards set forth in this chapter, a taxicab
business license shall be denied to the following persons:
      (1)   To a corporation which is not licensed to do business in the state.
      (2)   To an applicant other than the registered owner or lessee of the
vehicles.
      (3)   To a corporation if any principal officer thereof or any person
having actual ownership interest therein has a disqualifying criminal
conviction.
      (4)   To an applicant, other than a corporation, if such applicant or any
person having an actual ownership interest or management authority therein has
a disqualifying criminal conviction.
      (5)   To any applicant whose taxicab business license, taxicab dispatch
company license, or Airport Access Permit has been previously revoked or
suspended. Exception: An applicant whose license has been revoked merely for
failing to renew in a timely manner may be considered for licensure.
   (C)   Every vehicle used as a taxicab shall be of the closed type, having at
least two doors for direct and unimpeded access to the passenger area behind
the driver's seat. The doors shall be so constructed so that they will remain
securely fastened during normal operation, while the taxicab is in motion, but
may be readily opened by a passenger in case of emergency.
(Ord. passed 4-4-95; Am. Ord. passed 10-3-00)
Penalty, see § 118.99
§ 118.12 TAXICAB DRIVER'S LICENSE.
   (A)   License required. No person shall drive a taxicab unless he shall have
secured a license therefor as herein provided.
   (B)   Application. Applications for a license to drive a taxicab shall be
made to the City Clerk upon a form to be determined by the City Clerk. The
application shall include:
      (1)   The name, age, home address, social security number, and telephone
number of the applicant.
      (2)   Statement of whether applicant is employed by a licensed taxicab
company, leases a vehicle or services from a taxicab company, or is in any
manner affiliated with one or more taxicab companies as an independent
contractor.
      (3)   Proof of possession of a valid New Hampshire driver's license and a
complete motor vehicle record for the five years preceding the application from
the Motor Vehicle Records Division, State Police, Department of Safety, State
of New Hampshire, and/or from the appropriate out-of-state agency or agencies
if not a resident of New Hampshire during the five years preceding the
application.
      (4)   A statement signed by the applicant that his physical and mental
health is clear of any incident or history which might demonstrate an inability
to safely operate a taxicab.
      (5)   A complete criminal record of the applicant obtained from the
Criminal Records Division, State Police, Department of Safety, State of New
Hampshire, and/or from the appropriate out-of state agency or agencies if not a
resident of New Hampshire for the years preceding the application.
      (6)   Two recent passport photographs of the applicant, or photographs of
such size as previously approved by the City Clerk.
      (7)   Any other information reasonably required by the Board of Mayor and
Aldermen.
      (8)   The results of a drug screening urine test for potential drug use,
conducted in accordance with
§ 118.22(A), as evidence that he/she does not use illegal drugs.
   (C)   Standards for denial. In addition to the application requirements set
forth in this section, a license to drive a taxicab shall be denied to the
following persons:
      (1)   An applicant who has not attained the age of 18 years.
      (2)   An applicant who has received a disqualifying criminal conviction,
or who has been imprisoned at any time during the period for a disqualifying
criminal conviction, provided that the conviction was for an offense which
rationally related to the purpose of licensing taxicab drivers.
      (3)   An applicant who has received a disqualifying motor vehicle
conviction, or whose privilege to operate a motor vehicle in any jurisdiction
has been revoked and/or suspended at any time during the five years preceding
the application for any reason.
      (4)   An applicant who is denied a taxicab drivers license under the
standards of this section, or who has reason to believe that he/she may be
denied a taxicab drivers license under these standards, may file a written
request for a review of the application before the Committee on Administration.
The Committee on Administration will approve or disapprove the fitness of the
applicant for a taxicab driver's license. The Committee on Administration may
require the submission of qualifying evidence to make an assessment, including
character references and/or evaluation by a qualified professional, and may set
such conditions, review procedures, or monitoring activities as it deems
appropriate as a condition of licensure.
      (5)   Driver must present an appearance which is not offensive to the
public.
      (6)   An applicant who is under suspension or revocation from activities
conducted at the Manchester Airport. Exception: An applicant whose license has
been revoked merely for failing to renew in a timely manner may be considered
for licensure.
      (7)   Conviction of multiple motor vehicle violations of such a nature
and/or number during the five years preceding the application as to indicate a
habitual or frequent disregard for traffic laws, for the safety of others using
the roads, or for the safety of his or her fares.
      (8)   An applicant who is required to register as a sexual offender or as
an offender against children under R.S.A. 651-B:6.
   (D)   Driver must present an appearance which is not offensive to the
public.
   (E)   The City Clerk shall make and keep a written record of every decision
to deny an application for a taxicab business license for a period of one year.
   (F)   The City Clerk shall issue an original or renewed license after
receipt of application or renewal documentation and upon full review by
appropriate personnel.
   (G)   During each licensing year, the office of the City Clerk shall
coordinate random drug tests of licensed taxicab drivers and licensed
independent contractors, in accordance with the provisions of
§ 118.22(B).
(Ord. passed 4-4-95; Am. Ord. passed 2-4-97; Am. Ord. passed 4-7-98; Am. Ord.
passed 10-3-00; Am. Ord. passed 8-6-02)
Penalty, see § 118.99
§ 118.13 APPLICATION FEES.
   (A)   Each application for a license to operate a taxicab company must be
submitted with a fee based on the square footage formula outlined in
§ 110.20 of this title. A taxicab company located outside of the city shall pay
an annual license fee of $100. The fee will be refunded if the license is not
granted. If the license is granted, the application fee shall serve as the fee
for the initial license.
   (B)   Each application for a license to drive a taxicab must be submitted
with a fee of $80. The fee will be refunded if the license is not granted. If
the license is granted, the application fee shall serve as the fee for the
initial license.
(Ord. passed 4-4-95; Am. Ord. passed 4-7-98)
§ 118.14 INDEPENDENT CONTRACTORS; APPLICATION FEE.
   (A)   Upon entering into all agreement with a taxicab business, an
independent contractor shall file notice with the City Clerk, in writing, of
such agreement. Copies of any signed lease, contract, or other form of
agreement shall accompany the notice. Amendments, renewals, or changes to the
lease, contract, or agreement shall be submitted to the office of the City
Clerk as they occur.
   (B)   An independent contractor who owns his own taxicab shall designate the
facility to be used for the maintenance, repair, and inspection of that taxicab
as provided for under
§ 118.10(B)(6) of this subchapter and shall not be required by the taxicab
business he is associated with to use the taxicab business' designated
facility. The owner of a taxicab shall be responsible for fulfilling the
vehicle inspection and cleanliness requirements of this chapter.
   (C)   The owner of a taxicab shall be responsible for paying the costs of
insurance required under
§ 118.10(B)(4) of this subchapter.
   (D)   The owner of a taxicab shall be responsible for paying the taxicab
vehicle fee required under
§ 118.15(A)(1) of this subchapter.
   (E)   Applications for a license to operate as a taxicab independent
contractor shall include all information requested of a taxicab business as
provided for under
§ 118.10 of this subchapter, all information requested of a taxicab driver as
requested under
§ 118.12 of this subchapter, and any other information reasonably required by
the Board of Mayor and Aldermen or Taxicab Committee which may include a review
of applicant's criminal, motor vehicle, or financial records, to the extent
necessary and appropriate. In addition, an application for a license to operate
as an independent contractor shall be accompanied by a Workers' Compensation
Certificate of insurance for the independent contractor and his employees.
   (F)   Each application for a license to operate as an independent contractor
must be submitted with a fee of $160. The fee will be refunded if the license
is not granted. If the license is granted, the application fee shall serve as
the fee for the initial license.
(Ord. passed 4-4-95; Am. Ord. passed 4-7-98)
Penalty, see § 118.99
§ 118.15 LICENSE FEES.
   (A)   (1)   An applicant approved to operate a taxicab business or taxicab
dispatch company shall pay an annual fee per vehicle used in the operation of
the business based on the following schedule:
 
Vehicle license fee
Up to ten vehicles  $400/vehicle
11-25 vehicles      $350/vehicle
26-50 vehicles      $300/vehicle
51 vehicles or more $250/vehicle
 
Vehicle licenses shall expire annually on April 30. A taxicab business or
taxicab dispatch company may keep a reasonable number of backup vehicles to be
used as substitutions for its licensed vehicles. Annual fees need not be paid
for these backup vehicles, but the vehicle identification numbers must be on
file with the City Clerk. License renewals shall occur annually between April 1
and April 30 of each year, and the taxicab business or taxicab dispatch company
shall note any changes to its original application that may have occurred.
Licenses not renewed after May 10 shall be revoked, and a new application
process as provided for in this subchapter shall be required if the taxicab
business or taxicab dispatch company chooses to renew its operation.
      (2)   Licensees whose initial application for a taxicab vehicle license
is received by the City Clerk after May 1 of the year, or who renews a license
in effect during the calendar year following enactment of this title shall be
subject to all annual license fees on a proration schedule as follows:
      Business         Applicable
      Start Date         Licensing Rate
      May 1 - July 31         100%
      August 1 - October 31         75%
      November 1 - January 31      50%
      February 1 - April 30         25%
      (3)   In the event that it becomes necessary to transfer or re-issue a
taxicab driver's license or taxicab vehicle license during the licensing
period, the licensee shall pay a fee of $10.00 for each license issued. All
such licenses shall still expire on April 30 of each year.
   (B)   (1)   Any applicant approved as a taxicab driver must pay an annual
fee of $80. Each license to drive a taxicab shall expire on April 30 of each
year. Renewal of each license must be requested at least 30 days prior to
license expiration. Licenses not renewed after May 10 shall be revoked. A
request for an annual license renewal shall be accompanied by a record of
criminal and motor vehicle convictions that may have occurred during the
preceding 12 months and the licensee shall note any changes on his original
application that may have occurred.
      (2)   The City Clerk shall deliver to the licensee an identification
card, an approximate size of four inches by six inches, setting forth the
number and terms of the license, a photograph, the name and personal
description of the licensee, including age, height, weight, complexion, color
of hair, and color of eyes. The licensee shall, when driving or in charge of a
taxicab, display the card conspicuously in a holder in his taxicab. The
licensee shall show the card whenever so requested by a representative of the
City Clerk's office, any passenger, or any law enforcement officer.
   (C)   An applicant approved as a taxicab dispatch company or taxicab
business and located within the city shall pay an annual license fee based on
the square footage formula outlined in
§ 110.20 of this title. A taxicab dispatch company or taxicab business located
outside of the city shall pay an annual license fee of $100. License renewals
shall occur annually between April 1 and April 30 of each year, and the taxicab
dispatch company or taxicab business shall note any changes to its original
application that may have occurred. Licenses not renewed after May 10 shall be
revoked, and a new application process as provided for in this subchapter shall
be required if the taxicab dispatch company or taxicab business chooses to
renew its operation.
   (D)   An applicant approved as an independent contractor shall pay an annual
license fee of $180. License renewals shall occur annually between April 1 and
April 30 of each year, and the independent contractor shall note any changes to
his original application that may have occurred. Licenses not renewed after May
10 shall be revoked, and a new application process as provided for in this
subchapter shall be required if the independent contractor chooses to renew his
operation.
(Ord. passed 3-7-95; Am. Ord. passed 4-4-95; Am. Ord. passed 4-7-98; Am. Ord.
passed 10-3-00; Am. Ord. passed 5-3-16) Penalty, see §
118.99
§ 118.16 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   (A)   The Committee on Administration shall have the responsibility of
establishing the procedure for screening applicants for licenses issued under
this subchapter, for assigning additional penalties for noncompliance with this
subchapter or of any city ordinances or state statutes regulating the conduct
of such business, and for the suspension, revocation, revision, or
reinstatement of such licenses as provided for by this chapter.
   (B)   No taxicab driver's license shall be effective for the purposes of
this subchapter during any period in which the operator's motor vehicle license
is suspended or revoked, or following a positive drug test as provided for
under
§ 118.12(G) of this chapter until such license is reinstated by the Committee
on Administration; and no taxicab vehicle license shall be effective for the
purposes of this subchapter during any period in which the owner's insurance
coverage, as required under
§ 118.10 of this chapter, is no longer in effect or does not meet the coverage
requirements of this chapter. Restoration of this suspended license under this
section may not be made by the City Clerk until the circumstances which led to
the suspension have been corrected.
   (C)   The City Clerk may suspend or revoke any license granted under the
provisions of this subchapter after three violations or for cause. The City
Clerk shall make reasonable attempts to notify the licensee in writing of his
decision using the licensing information available to him. The licensee shall
make a written request for such a hearing within ten days of the date of the
notice of the City Clerk's decision. The City Clerk shall schedule a hearing
within ten days of the licensee's request, notifying the licensee of the date.
Save where the underlying circumstances of the suspension or revocation
represent an immediate danger to the lives, health, or safety of the citizens
of Manchester, the action shall be stayed pending a reasonable opportunity for
the licensee to be heard before the Committee on Administration. In the event
the action is not stayed, a hearing before the Committee shall be scheduled,
upon request, as soon as practicable. The Committee on Administration may
restore the license, sustain the suspension or revocation, or otherwise set
such conditions on the license as it deems appropriate. The licensee will be
notified of the decision of the Committee which shall be final. If the licensee
fails to request a hearing within the allowed time-frame, the City Clerk's
suspension or revocation shall be allowed to take effect, however the licensee
may request the hearing at a later time.
   (D)   A license may be suspended or revoked upon a finding that the licensee
has:
      (1)   Falsified any record, document, or information required to be kept
or submitted by this subchapter or failure to supply information asked or
required of the applicant.
      (2)   Driven or authorized any person to drive a taxicab which was not
equipped and in safe condition as required by the laws of the state or the
provisions of this chapter.
      (3)   Used, or authorized to be used, a trade name, color scheme, or
other identification upon a taxicab or in any advertising or public listing,
which was likely to be confused with the registered trade name, scheme, or
identification of another licensee or which tended to deceive or mislead the
public as to the type of service offered.
      (4)   Carried any passenger to his destination by a route that was not
the safest and most direct, unless the customer specifically authorized the
deviation or alternate route.
      (5)   Refused to accept as a passenger any person who requested
transportation when the taxicab was not already carrying a passenger, unless
the person created a hazard to the driver's safety or was unable to pay the
fare.
      (6)   Activated the taximeter when the taxicab was not employed or failed
to activate the meter at the beginning of each trip, unless the transportation
was provided pursuant to a written contract or as otherwise provided for in
this chapter.
      (7)   Drove or authorized a driver to drive a taxicab who does not have a
valid taxicab driver's license.
      (8)   Declined to provide service to a neighborhood of the city, unless
the operator provided a sound basis therefor, or refused to respond to a call
from a dispatcher because of the location of the pickup, unless the operator
provided a sound basis therefor.
      (9)   Violated any provision of this chapter.
      (10)    Engaged in any loud argument, fight, or other disturbances;
harassed, threatened or assaulted another person; intentionally damaged,
destroyed or threatened to damage or destroy any property; or in any other
manner engaged in conduct detrimental to the safe and efficient transportation
of passengers.
(Ord. passed 4-4-95; Am. Ord. passed 10-3-00)
Penalty, see § 118.99
§ 118.17 NONTRANSFERABILITY.
   (A)   Licenses granted under this subchapter shall remain the property of
the city and are to be returned to the City Clerk's office during a period of
suspension, after revocation, if the taxicab company ceases to operate, or if
the taxicab driver shall cease to work as a taxicab driver for a period of 60
consecutive days.
   (B)   No taxicab business license or taxicab dispatch company license held
by a corporation, association, partnership, individual, or other entity, shall
be transferred to another except in accordance with the following procedure:
      (1)   Notice of the proposed transfer shall be delivered to the Taxicab
Committee through the City Clerk's office at least 30 days prior to the date of
the transfer.
      (2)   The notice of the proposed transfer shall include a new taxicab
company business license application, with the initial fee, as outlined in
§§ 118.10 and
118.13 of this subchapter. Approval of the proposed transfer of the license is
contingent upon approval of the application by the party or parties who wish to
hold the business license. The Committee on Administration will approve or
disapprove the fitness of the proposed transferees as license holders within 21
days after receipt of notice of the proposed transfer and report its findings
to the City Clerk who shall notify the taxicab company that requested the
proposed transfer and the applicant of the committee's decision.
      (3)   Any business license transferred other than in accordance with this
section shall be void and the business license shall at once be surrendered to
the City Clerk.
   (C)   No taxicab vehicle license shall be displayed on any vehicle other
than as outlined in
§ 118.15 of this subchapter.
   (D)   No taxicab driver's license shall be transferred to another
individual.
(Ord. passed 4-4-95)
Penalty, see § 118.99
§ 118.18 SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS AND FEES.
   (A)   Taxicabs licensed in other cities or towns may drop off fares in the
city if such fares were picked up in another city or town, but only taxicabs
licensed by the city may pick up passengers within the limits of the city.
   (B)   (1)   A taxicab company located outside the limits of the city may
apply for a business license to engage in the business of operating in the city
and thereby meet the licensing requirements authorizing the company to pick up
passengers within the city limits. The taxicab company shall file an
application as provided for in this subchapter and shall meet the requirements
therein, except for
§ 118.10(B)(6) of this subchapter, location of the business within city limits.
      (2)   Apportioned license fees. Any applicant which does not have its
business office located in the city, and for which only a portion of the
business is conducted in the city, shall pay the full application fee for a
license to operate a taxicab company as outlined in
§ 118.10 of this subchapter, and the taxicab business shall pay an apportioned
vehicle license fee, which total amount shall not be less than 25% of the
vehicle license fee outlined in
§ 118.15 of this subchapter, to be determined as follows:
         (a)   If 25% of the business or less involves the pickup of passengers
within the city limits, the fee shall be 25% of the license fee imposed by this
subchapter.
         (b)   If more than 25%, up to and including 50% of the business
involves the pickup of passengers within the city limits, the fee shall be 50%
of the license fee imposed by this subchapter.
         (c)   If more than 50%, up to and including 75% of the business
involves the pickup of passengers within the city limits, the fee shall be 75%
of the license fee imposed by this subchapter.
         (d)   If more than 75% of the business involves the pickup of
passengers within the city limits, the license fee shall be the entire fee
imposed per vehicle by this subchapter.
         (e)   The application for the taxicab business license shall be
accompanied by documentation, such as dispatch records and drivers' logs, which
establishes to the satisfaction of the City Clerk that the applicant qualifies
for apportionment of the license fees as set forth in this section. If such
documentation is not provided which establishes that the fees should be
apportioned to the satisfaction of the City Clerk, the fee shall be the entire
unapportioned fee imposed by this subchapter.
         (f)   The taxicab company shall be required to base its request for
apportionment of fees on its entire annual pickup and drop off history but may
elect to designate and license only a specific number of vehicles which will be
licensed to pickup passengers in the city limits.
   (C)   The taxicab company, its vehicles, and drivers shall comply with all
provisions provided for in this chapter.
   (D)   Drivers of vehicles licensed under this section shall secure a license
from the city as provided for in this subchapter and conform to all
requirements and fees as provided for herein.
(Ord. passed 4-4-95)
Penalty, see § 118.99
DRUG AND ALCOHOL POLICY
§ 118.20 PURPOSE.
   (A)   It is the policy of the city that its licensed drivers of taxicabs
(hereinafter, the licensees) be free of substance abuse. The abuse of alcohol
or the use of illegal drugs reduces awareness and increases the potential for
accidents. Substance abuse thereby increases both the risk of injury to fares
and citizens of the city and the risk of damage to public and private property.
   (B)   It is the policy of the city that the use or possession of alcoholic
beverages or illegal drugs by taxicab licensees while on duty is prohibited.
Licensees shall not report for duty under the influence of alcoholic beverages
or with sufficient amounts of illegal drugs in their system so as to give rise
to a positive drug test or impair their job performance. For purposes of this
policy, the term ILLEGAL DRUG means any intoxicant, any narcotic, marijuana, or
any controlled drug, save medication prescribed for a licensee by a licensed
physician, presuming the use of such is consistent with the prescription and
with the operation of a motor vehicle. Violations of this policy shall result
in disciplinary action, including immediate suspension of the vehicle license.
(Ord. passed 4-7-98)
§ 118.21 PROHIBITED CONDUCT.
   A licensee is expected to report for duty in an appropriate mental and
physical condition for work. Accordingly, a licensee shall not:
   (A)   Work or report to work under the influence of alcohol or illegal
drugs. A licensee shall be deemed under the influence of alcohol if he/she has
an alcohol concentration of 0.04 or more or is impaired to any degree as a
result of the consumption or use of alcohol. A licensee shall be deemed under
the influence of illegal drugs if he/she has sufficient quantities of
controlled drugs in his/her system to give rise to a positive finding on a drug
test or is impaired to any degree as a result of the consumption, inhalation,
or injection of alcohol, drug, or any other intoxicating substance, or any
combination thereof;
   (B)   Consume alcohol or possess an open container while on duty;
   (C)   Engage in any drug-related conduct prohibited under state or federal
law; or
   (D)   Engage in any other manner of conduct involving alcohol, drugs or any
other intoxicating substance which adversely affects his/her job performance or
is detrimental to the safety of his/her fares and the public.
(Ord. passed 4-7-98)
Penalty, see § 118.99
§ 118.22 TYPES OF TESTING.
   (A)   Pre-licensing. All applicants for licensure must submit to a urine
drug test as evidence that he/she does not use illegal drugs. The test shall be
conducted by a local physician, lab or hospital in accordance with Substance
Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (hereinafter, SAMSHA)
standards. The applicant shall complete the test at a time and place specified
by the office of the City Clerk.
   (B)   Random. The city also conducts random drug and alcohol testing. All
licensees will be included in a random selection system. The random selection
system shall provide an equal chance for each licensee to be selected for each
random test. Accordingly, a particular licensee may be selected for successive
tests or may not be selected at all during the licensing year. Random tests
shall be reasonably spread throughout the year. The city shall annually test a
minimum of 50% of its licensees for drugs and a minimum of 25% of its licensees
for alcohol. Upon notification of selection, a licensee shall complete the test
at a time and place specified by the office of the City Clerk. The test shall
be conducted by a local physician, lab or hospital in accordance with SAMSHA
standards. All random drug and alcohol tests shall be paid for by the city;
however, any other costs associated with a second analysis of the licensee’s
specimen, counseling, treatment, rehabilitation or other medical follow-up
shall be paid for by the licensee.
(Ord. passed 4-7-98)
Penalty, see § 118.99
§ 118.23 SUBSTANCES FOR WHICH TO BE TESTED.
   Any applicant who tests positive for the presence of any of the drugs set
forth herein shall be deemed unsuitable for licensure. Any licensee who tests
positive for any of the substances set forth herein shall be deemed unsuitable
for continued licensure and shall be subject to the provisions of
§ 118.28. The substances for which the city may test are as follows:
   (A)   Alcohol
   (B)   Amphetamines
   (C)   Cocaine
   (D)   Marijuana
   (E)   Opiates
   (F)   Phencyclidine (PCP)
   The city reserves the right to expand the scope of substances for which it
will test at any time.
(Ord. passed 4-7-98)
Penalty, see § 118.99
§ 118.24 REFUSAL TO TEST.
   Any person licensed to drive a taxicab by the city shall be deemed to have
given consent to the drug and alcohol tests employed by the city under this
chapter. Accordingly, refusal to submit to any drug and alcohol test
established herein shall be grounds to suspend a license. Any conduct intended
to obstruct or unreasonably delay the proper administration of a test shall be
deemed a refusal to submit to the test. In the event that a licensee cannot
provide a sufficient urine or breath specimen, the city may direct the
individual to a physician for purposes of evaluation. If the physician cannot
find a legitimate medical explanation for the licensee’s inability to provide a
sufficient urine or breath specimen, the licensee shall be deemed to have
refused to submit to the test.
(Ord. passed 4-7-98)
Penalty, see § 118.99
§ 118.25 SUBSTANCE ABUSE EVALUATION; RETURN TO DUTY; FOLLOW-UP TESTING.
   (A)   Any licensee who engages in prohibited conduct shall be provided with
the name, address and telephone numbers of a qualified substance abuse
professional (SAP). In order to requalify for a license, the licensee shall be
evaluated by the SAP, submit to any treatment the SAP prescribes, and
successfully complete a return to duty and/or alcohol test. The licensee shall
also be subject to follow-up testing. Follow-up testing is separate from and in
addition to any pre-licensing or random testing procedures. The schedule for
follow-up testing shall be unannounced and in accordance with instructions of
the SAP. Follow-up testing may continue for a period of up to 12 months
following the licensee’s return to duty. Follow-up testing shall consist of no
fewer than six tests. The cost of any SAP evaluation, prescribed treatment,
return to duty and follow-up testing shall be paid by the licensee.
   (B)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit or in any way
affect the authority of the Committee on Administration to prescribe the period
of suspension or revocation it deems appropriate under
§ 118.16.
(Ord. passed 4-7-98)
Penalty, see § 118.99
§ 118.26 LABORATORY PROCEDURES; RETEST.
   (A)   All specimens collected under this chapter will be submitted to a
laboratory certified by SAMSHA. All specimens initially testing positive will
be confirmed by a subsequent confirmation test before the laboratory reports a
result as positive. The laboratory shall report all positive laboratory test
results to the Medical Review Officer. The licensee or applicant shall also be
notified of any positive laboratory test results and have an opportunity to
explain to the Medical Review Officer such result. In the event the Medical
Review Officer determines there is no legitimate basis for the licensee’s
objection, the test will stand as reported. In the event the Medical Review
Officer determines there is an explanation for the positive test result other
than the use or abuse of illegal drugs or alcohol, the test result shall be
reported back as negative.
   (B)   A licensee or applicant whose test results are positive may, at his/
her own expense, request a retest of the original sample. Such a request shall
be made within 72 hours of the licensee or applicant being notified of the
original test results; otherwise, any right to a retest shall be deemed waived.
The retest shall be performed by a SAMSHA certified lab. In the event the
retest demonstrates a negative result, the licensee will be reimbursed for the
cost of the retest.
(Ord. passed 4-7-98)
Penalty, see § 118.99
§ 118.27 DISCIPLINARY ACTION.
   (A)   In addition to any other penalty permitted under this chapter, a
licensee shall be subject to immediate suspension in accordance with the
procedures established in
§ 118.16 if he/she:
      (1)   Engages in prohibited conduct as set forth in
§ 118.21;
      (2)   Refuses to submit to any drug and alcohol test which the city may
administer under this chapter; or
      (3)   Fails to comply with provisions of
§ 118.25.
   (B)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, any licensee
having an alcohol concentration between .02 to .039 shall immediately be
suspended for a period of ten days. If the licensee has any subsequent
violation of any alcohol prohibition, he/she shall be required to comply with
the provisions of
§ 118.25 in order to requalify for licensing.
(Ord. passed 4-7-98)
Penalty, see § 118.99
§ 118.28 CONFIDENTIALITY.
   Individual test results and rehabilitation records, if any, for applicants
and licensees shall only be used to determine adherence to this chapter and in
defense of any administrative or judicial action initiated by the licensee
against the city. Unless release is required under R.S.A. 91-A or by a valid
subpoena, the test results and rehabilitation records shall otherwise be kept
strictly confidential and released only upon the written consent of the person
who submitted to the test. However, any individual who has submitted to drug
testing in compliance with this chapter is entitled to access to his/her
records related to such testing upon written request as long as such is
available.
(Ord. passed 4-7-98)
Penalty, see § 118.99
§ 118.29 SUBSTANCE ABUSE TESTING ACCOUNT.
   There is established a special account to be known as the Substance Abuse
Testing Account. Such account shall consist of any money appropriated or
received for the purposes of this chapter and from revenues derived from a
portion of the licenses fees assessed under
§§ 118.13(B),
118.14(F) and
118.15(B) and (D) as follows: $65 for each application under
§§ 118.13(B) and
118.14(F), and $35 for each license issued under
§ 118.15(B) and (D). Such monies shall be used by the City Clerk to cover costs
associated with testing conducted under § 118.22. The account shall be
nonlapsing and continually appropriated to the City Clerk for the purposes of
this chapter.
(Ord. passed 4-7-98)
OPERATIONAL REQUIREMENTS
§ 118.30 TAXIMETER REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   Every taxicab in the city shall be equipped with a mechanical
instrument or device commonly called a taximeter, approved by the Sealer of
Weights and Measures, by which the charge for hire of such taxicab is
mechanically calculated and on which such charge is shown by clear and distinct
figures under adequate light.
   (B)   Cars for hire used for conveying passengers for attendance at
marriages, funerals, christenings, or for use in ceremonial parades need not be
equipped with a taximeter.
(Ord. passed 4-4-95)
Penalty, see § 118.99
§ 118.31 TAXIMETERS TO BE TESTED AND APPROVED.
   All taximeters shall be tested and approved by the Sealer of Weights and
Measures, or by an independent specialist designated as an agent for the Sealer
of Weights and Measures. Testing will be done during the month of April, or
such other date as may be required by the state, of each year, when tires are
replaced on a taxicab, or at any other time required by the Sealer of Weights
and Measures.
(Ord. passed 4-4-95)
Penalty, see § 118.99
§ 118.32 OPERATION OF TAXIMETERS.
   Every taximeter shall only be operated with the flag on mileage position
while conveying a passenger or passengers and only on time position when the
taxicab is standing or waiting in accordance with the provisions of this
subchapter. No taximeter shall be changed from mileage to time operation while
standing at traffic-control signals, or during delay caused by congested
traffic conditions.
(Ord. passed 4-4-95)
Penalty, see § 118.99
§ 118.33 RATES FOR FARES ESTABLISHED.
   No owner or driver of a taxicab shall charge any passenger or passengers any
rate for service within the limits of the city other than is provided for in
this section or as allowed by §
118.34 of this subchapter.
   (A)   Metered fares. For the first one-sixth mile or fraction thereof for
one passenger, $4; and for each one-sixth mile or fraction thereof thereafter,
$.50; and for each additional passenger, $.25.
   (B)   Flat rate taxi fares. Notwithstanding division (A) of this section, if
a trip begins or ends within the city and the other point of destination is the
Manchester Airport, the taxi flat rate fare schedule in effect and issued by
the airport authority shall apply. Each taxicab shall maintain a copy of that
fare schedule and zone maps in the vehicle and make them available for a
passenger's inspection upon request.
   (C)   For waiting time after the cab has arrived at a place of call or while
standing at the direction of the passenger, $.25 for each minute or fraction
thereof.
   (D)   No charge shall be made for waiting in advance of the time at which
the cab is wanted as given in the call nor for delay due to inefficiency of the
taxicab or its operation nor for mileage or time other than proceeding in the
in most direct way to the destination.
   (E)   Hand luggage shall be carried free.
(Ord. passed 4-4-95; Am. Ord. passed 10-3-00; Am. Ord. passed 12-1-09; Am. Ord.
passed 5-17-22) Penalty, see §
118.99
§ 118.34 DISCOUNT FARES.
   (A)   A taxicab company may file a request to offer discounts on fares with
the City Clerk which will be reviewed by the Committee on Administration within
30 days of the filing or receipt of the request. The Committee on
Administration review and decision to approve or deny such request shall be
final, but the taxicab company may refile the same request for further review
six months from the date of denial or may submit a revised request to offer
discounts at any time as a first-time filing.
   (B)   Requests for discounts on fares shall set forth the conditions that
must be met to qualify for the discount including, but not limited to,
identification of the targeted market (example: senior citizens, students, and
the like), identification of the time period discounts shall be offered
(example: “night owl rate” from 12:00 a.m. through 5:00 a.m.), and the intended
length of time the discount fares will be available to the public (example: six
months).
   (C)   All requests for discounts on fares shall be expressed as a percentage
discount, dollar-off discount, or shall be offered in the form of a coupon book
or trip tickets.
   (D)   Notice of any lesser rates being offered by the taxicab company shall
be displayed in clear and legible letters immediately adjacent to the city rate
card required in
§ 118.36 of this subchapter.
   (E)   The Committee on Administration may recommend amendments, alterations,
or changes to any request filed by a taxicab company and approve such request
on condition that the terms of such amendments, alterations, or changes are
agreed to and met by the taxicab company.
   (F)   Notwithstanding the above, a taxicab company may offer reduced fares
for regularly scheduled passengers provided that all such fares recorded in the
driver's log are clearly noted as such.
(Ord. passed 4-4-95)
Penalty, see § 118.99
§ 118.35 RECEIPT TO BE PROVIDED.
   Taxicab drivers shall provide customers with a receipt, when requested. The
receipt shall include the following information in legible form: name of the
vehicle driver; the taxi driver's license number; the date, time, and place of
origin and departure; miles and time travelled; and the total fare paid or
charged.
(Ord. passed 4-4-95)
Penalty, see § 118.99
§ 118.36 RATE CARDS.
   Upon the issuance of a license for a taxicab business, the licensee shall
receive from the City Clerk a card for each vehicle approved for use in the
business upon which the established rates shall be plainly printed. Each rate
card issued shall be conspicuously displayed in every taxicab so that it call
be seen by a passenger in either day or night.
(Ord. passed 4-4-95)
Penalty, see § 118.99
§ 118.37 RECORDS REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Each duly licensed taxicab company or taxicab dispatch company shall
be required to keep a log detailing all requests for services as received and
shall contain not less than the following information: date and time received,
address of caller, destination, cab to which call was assigned, and the fare
charged therefor. The log shall be maintained in order by date at the principal
place of business of each duly licensed taxicab company for the current
calendar year and for the calendar year immediately preceding the current
calendar year and shall be made available upon request, for review by any law
enforcement agency or by the office of the City Clerk. A taxicab dispatch
company shall maintain such records in such a manner that the activity of
separate taxicab companies and/or leased vehicles is clearly identified.
   (B)   Every vehicle owner shall provide for each of his licensed taxicabs a
suitable log book in which shall be kept the name of the operator, the date,
time, origin, and destination, and amount of each fare. If a trip is made
pursuant to a contract as may be allowed by this subchapter, the log shall show
the fare charged and the identification of the contract under which the
transportation was provided. The log book shall be kept available for
inspection by members of the Police Department and the office of the City
Clerk, and shall be preserved for at least one year from the date of the last
entry at the address for which the vehicle license is issued.
   (C)   A taxicab company or taxicab dispatch company shall notify the City
Clerk within three working days of receipt of any knowledge that a taxicab
driver associated with this taxicab business has had his motor vehicle
operator's license suspended or revoked by the state. Similarly, if the City
Clerk shall be made aware that a taxicab driver has had his motor vehicle
operator's license suspended or revoked, he shall notify the taxicab business
or taxicab dispatch company which he is associated with, as may reasonably be
determined by the licensing documentation, of the suspension of the licensee's
taxicab driver's license by the city.
   (D)   Every vehicle owner and vehicle driver shall maintain within every
vehicle, proof of insurance covering the vehicle with such policy limits and
coverage as established by
§ 118.10(B)(4) and clearly identifying the vehicle(s) covered.
(Ord. passed 4-4-95; Am. Ord. passed 10-3-00)
Penalty, see § 118.99
§ 118.38 CONSENT OF FIRST PASSENGER NEEDED FOR CARRYING OTHERS.
   (A)   No operator of a taxicab shall carry any person other than the
passenger first employing his cab without the consent of the first passenger.
   (B)   Any taxicab agent at any bus, railroad, airport, or other terminal or
station, before directing a second passenger to a taxicab employed, shall ask
the person first employing the taxicab if he consents to another passenger or
passengers.
(Ord. passed 4-4-95)
Penalty, see § 118.99
§ 118.39 CONDITION AND APPEARANCE OF VEHICLES.
   (A)   It shall be the responsibility of the owner of each taxicab company
and the lessees of the taxicabs to keep the vehicles in operable condition
according to the State Motor Vehicle Inspection Laws. In addition to the annual
inspection required by the state, a midyear, second inspection of taxicabs is
to be made in the sixth month following the required state inspection. All
inspections are to be done at New Hampshire registered inspection stations and
shall include all the physical properties of each taxicab and the adherence to
the rules of this section. A checklist will be supplied to the inspection
station by the office of the City Clerk upon notice given to the City Clerk as
to the date, time, and place that the inspection will occur. The office of the
City Clerk may assign a representative or designate a police officer to ensure
that the inspection is completed at a New Hampshire certified motor vehicle
inspections station. No taxicab can be operated on or after the twenty-fifth of
the midyear inspection month unless the City Clerk has received an approved
inspection form completed by the station inspector.
   (B)   The City Clerk shall be notified of any physical damage to a taxicab
reported to the vehicle owner's insurer, within 48 hours of such damage. Such
notification may be a copy of any written report submitted to the insurance
company. The City Clerk may order a special inspection of the damaged vehicle
at a New Hampshire registered inspection station.
   (C)   The interior of all taxicabs shall be thoroughly cleaned at least once
each week, shall be clean and sanitary at all times, and shall be suitable for
the occupancy and safety of passengers.
   (D)   All drivers shall be courteous to the public, clean and neat in
appearance, shall not use tobacco in any form while transporting passengers,
shall not drink intoxicating liquors during their hours of employment, shall
operate their vehicles at a reasonable rate of speed and shall obey the laws of
the road and all traffic regulations.
   (E)   Vehicles will be subject to random inspections. Owners will be given
no more than three working days to correct deficiencies and may be ordered to
take vehicles out of service until such deficiencies are corrected.
   (F)   Every taxicab licensed under the provisions of this chapter shall have
displayed near the outside of each forward door or of each rear door, the name
or the trade name of the taxicab company or taxicab dispatch company holding
the vehicle license, in clearly visible letters of a minimum three inches in
height.
   (G)   Every owner of a taxicab which is temporarily removed from passenger
service shall clearly identify such vehicle as being “out of service” via an
exterior light, if so equipped, or by placing a placard in the vehicle's rear
window identifying the vehicle as being out of service. The placard shall be
placed in such a way so as to be visible from the rear but not so it is in
conflict with state motor vehicle regulations.
   (H)   Every vehicle used as a taxicab shall be mid-size or larger and not be
more than ten years old by model year.
   (I)   The City Clerk shall issue the taxicab business or taxicab dispatch
company a medallion to display on each vehicle licensed under
§ 118.15(A)(1) of this chapter. This plate shall bear an identification number,
assigned by the city for each licensed taxicab and must be displayed on the
rear thereof, plainly visible to the public. This plate shall be firmly
fastened to the body of the vehicle in such a manner that it will not easily
become detached, and under no conditions shall the plate be attached to the
state registration plate or the bumper of the taxicab. Under no circumstances
shall a vehicle be permitted to operate as a taxicab without a valid medallion
properly attached to the vehicle. The number of plates issued to a taxicab
company or a taxicab dispatch company shall not exceed the maximum number of
vehicles which are insured for passenger service under
§ 118.10(B)(5) of this chapter. Out-of-service vehicles shall be identified as
provided for under
§ 118.39(G) of this section. However, a taxicab business or taxicab dispatch
company may transfer the plate to another of its taxicab vehicles which are
licensed under
§ 118.15(A)(1) of this chapter as backup or replacement vehicles so that those
vehicles may be used in the transportation of passengers. The replacement fee
for any medallion is $15.00.
   (J)   Taxicabs shall be at all times clean and in good repair inside and
out. “Clean and in good repair” shall mean and include, without limitation, the
following:
      (1)   No tears in carpeting;
      (2)   No rusted dents or dents with jagged edges;
      (3)   No tears in seat upholstery;
      (4)   No loose trash or large amounts of dirt or sand in the interior
passenger area, whether or not the area is currently occupied by a passenger;
      (5)   No loose trim or body work;
      (6)   No cracks in windshield or windows; and
      (7)   Seat belts for all passenger seats visible and in working order.
   (K)   Each vehicle owner may equip his or her licensed primary and back-up
vehicles with a protective partition of a type approved by the Office of the
City Clerk dividing the driver's and passenger's seats. When installed in a
vehicle this partition shall be enclosed in an adequate frame and constructed
of material with a minimum thickness of one-half inch and of such other
specifications required by the Office of the City Clerk. The partition must be
stationary and may contain an appropriate opening, not more than six inches by
six inches, for the payment of fares. Partitions shall be constructed in such a
manner as to accommodate the official rate card (approximately five inches by
eight inches) and taxicab driver's license (four inches by six inches) which
shall be displayed in clear view of the passenger and secured from the driver's
side of the partition. The partition and attached rate card and driver's
license shall not obstruct the driver's rear vision or the passenger's view of
the taximeter. The official rate card and taxicab driver’s license shall be
prominently displayed at all times and in full view of any passengers in
vehicles with or without an installed protective partition.
(Ord. passed 4-4-95; Am. Ord. passed 10-3-00; Am. Ord. passed 5-3-16; Am. Ord.
passed 1-5-21) Penalty, see §
118.99
§ 118.40 SOLICITING CUSTOMERS.
   Taxicab drivers shall solicit customers only while in the driver's seat of
the taxicab.
(Ord. passed 4-4-95)
Penalty, see § 118.99
§ 118.41 LOST ARTICLES.
   Taxicab drivers must check vehicles at the end of each shift for articles of
value left behind by customers. When possible, the taxicab company shall notify
the passenger within 24 hours that his or her articles were left behind. The
Police Department shall also be provided with a description of such articles
within 24 hours unless reclaimed by customers prior to that time, and the
taxicab company shall retain lost articles for a period of 60 days from the
date of notice to the Police Department before disposing of the articles.
(Ord. passed 4-4-95)
Penalty, see § 118.99
§ 118.42 PROHIBITED CONDUCT.
   The holder of a license to engage in the business of operating a taxicab
business or taxicab dispatch company and the holder of a license to drive a
taxicab shall not:
   (A)   Operate or allow the operation of a taxicab in which the taxicab
driver's license is not displayed.
   (B)   Operate or allow the operation of a taxicab in violation of any of the
provisions of the highway laws of the state or of the ordinances of the city
regulating traffic.
   (C)   Operate or allow the operation of a taxicab in which the appropriate
rate card is not displayed.
   (D)   Demand any fare in an amount in excess of or below the established
rates.
   (E)   Use a scanning device, radio, or any instrument to intercept calls of
other cab companies.
   (F)   Fail to maintain a log detailing all requests for services as required
in such a manner that the activities of a particular company and/or leased
vehicle cannot be properly identified and reviewed by the office of the City
Clerk or a law enforcement officer.
   (G)   Operate or allow the operation of a taxicab in which any passenger is
riding adjacent to the driver, in a front seat of the vehicle, except when the
rear seat is fully occupied, when training licensed drivers, or when
transporting elderly or disabled persons who cannot readily enter the rear
compartment of the taxicab.
(Ord. passed 4-4-95; Am. Ord. passed 10-3-00)
Penalty, see § 118.99
§ 118.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Each act of violation and every day upon which any such violation
shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. The city may enjoin or abate
any violation of this chapter by appropriate action. In addition to the penalty
set forth in
§ 10.99 of this code of ordinances, if the court finds for the city, the city
shall recover its costs of suit including reasonable experts fees, attorney
fees, and necessary investigative costs.
   (B)   The Police Department is hereby authorized to seize or immobilize any
taxicab located within the city operating without a valid taxicab vehicle
license. Upon such seizure or immobilization, the Police Department shall
notify the owner of the vehicle of such seizure, the reason therefor, and of
the place to which such vehicle has been removed or immobilized. The Police
Department shall order the holding of any such vehicle for a period of not less
than ten days from the date of the required notification to the owner. During
this period the owner may redeem any such vehicle by correcting the violation
of this chapter which led to such seizure or by providing satisfactory evidence
of his ability or intent to correct the violation. Any taxicab which is
impounded or immobilized and which is not redeemed within 30 days of the date
of notification as described in this section shall become the property of the
city. Cost for towing and storage charges will be billed to the owner of the
taxicab seized and must be paid before the release of the vehicle to the owner
who shall be responsible for removing the vehicle from storage. The city will
be held harmless for any damage occurring during the act of confiscation,
transportation, storage, and/or immobilization of each vehicle.
   (C)   If, in the judgment of a police officer, a taxicab is unsafe for
public transportation, due to a violation of R.S.A. Ch. 266, the officer may
order the vehicle to be taken off the road and confiscate and hold the vehicle
license and medallion, until the circumstances which led to the confiscation
are corrected.
(Ord. passed 4-4-95; Am. Ord. passed 10-3-00)
CHAPTER 119: TRANSPORTATION NETWORK SERVICES
Section
General Provisions
   
119.01   Definitions
   
119.02   License required
   
119.03   License fee and license term
   
119.04   License application
   
119.05   Qualifications for license
   
119.06   Investigation and issuance
   
119.07   Insurance required
   
119.08   Prohibited conduct
   
119.09   Vehicles ownership and standards
   
119.10   Distinctive trade dress
   
119.11   Commercial advertisements prohibited
   
119.12   Driver requirements
   
119.13   Drug and alcohol policy
   
119.14   Operating regulations
   
119.15   Service charges and fare rates
   
119.16   Records and reports
   
119.17   License suspension or revocation
   
119.18   Enforcement, rules and regulations
 
   
119.99   Violations and penalties
§ 119.01 DEFINITIONS.
   Whenever used in this chapter the following words shall mean:
   ACTIVE ON THE TNC DISPATCH SYSTEM. includes but is not limited to: when the
driver is logged onto the transportation network company (TNC) application
dispatch system showing that the driver is available to pick up passengers;
when a passenger is in the vehicle; or when the driver has accepted a ride
request and is en route to provide transportation services to a passenger.
   COMPENSATION. Remuneration or anything of economic value that is provided,
promised, or donated primarily in exchange for services rendered. This
includes, but is not limited to voluntary donations, fee-sharing between a
taxicab or transportation network company and an affiliated driver, and
passenger, advertisement of a taxicab service company or transportation network
company services.
   LICENSE. A transportation network company license.
   LICENSING OFFICIALS. The officials designated to supervise the licensing and
consumer services functions provided by this Chapter.
   LICENSEE OR TRANSPORTATION NETWORK LICENSEE. The holder of, or a person that
is required to hold, a transportation network company license issued pursuant
to this chapter.
   OPERATION OF A TRANSPORTATION NETWORK VEHICLE OR OPERATING A TRANSPORTATION
NETWORK VEHICLE. Offering, making available, or using a transportation network
vehicle to provide a transportation network service, including any time when a
driver is logged onto the transportation network provider's internet-enabled
application or digital platform showing that the driver is available to pick up
passengers; when a passenger is in the vehicle; when the provider's records
show that the vehicle is en route; or when the driver has accepted a ride
request and is in route to provide a transportation network service to a
passenger.
   PASSENGER. An individual being transported for compensation in an authorized
TNC vehicle.
   PLACE OF BUSINESS IN THE CITY OF MANCHESTER. A location within 12 miles of
Manchester City Hall where (1) the city may send, and the licensee shall
accept, notices of hearing or other notices from the city; and (2) a place
where records required by this chapter may be viewed and copied.
   PREARRANGED RIDE. A period of time that begins when a driver accepts a
requested ride through a digital network, continues while the driver transports
the rider in a personal vehicle, and ends when the rider departs from the
vehicle. Transportation network driver: An individual affiliated with a
transportation network company, authorized to transport passengers for
compensation using an authorized transportation network company vehicle.
   PREARRANGED TRANSPORTATION SERVICE. A transportation service that is offered
and accepted through a licensee's internet-enabled application or digital
platform before the transportation commences.
   RIDESHARE. The traveling of two or more persons by any mode of private
passenger vehicle, including, but not limited to, carpooling, vanpooling, or
bus pooling to any location incidental to another purpose of the driver for
which compensation is neither accepted, collected, encouraged, promoted, or
requested, and for which the primary purpose of the driver cannot be profit or
revenue based.
   TNC. Transportation Network Company.
   TRADE DRESS. The unique visual element associated with a transportation
network company that is attached to a vehicle affiliated with a TNC so the
public and passengers can identify the vehicle as being associated with that
particular TNC. Trade dresses are mandatory and must be approved by the
licensing official.
   TRANSPORTATION NETWORK COMPANY (TNC). A person or entities affiliated with
TNC drivers that provide transportation application services via one unique
transportation application system to connect TNC endorsed drivers with
passengers for the transport of passengers for compensation and meeting the
licensing requirements of §
119.20 and any other requirements under this chapter.
   TRANSPORTATION NETWORK COMPANY (TNC) ENDORSED DRIVER. A for-hire driver
affiliated with and accepting trips requested through a licensed transportation
network company, while operating a personal vehicle he or she owns with a TNC
vehicle endorsement. A TNC endorsed driver is someone who has been screened and
approved by a licensed TNC and meets the requirements of this chapter.
   TRANSPORTATION NETWORK COMPANY (TNC) REPRESENTATIVE. The person or persons
that a transportation network company has authorized to:
      (1)   File applications, rates and charges on behalf of the TNC;
      (2)   Receive and accept all correspondence and notices from the city
pertaining to the TNC, or to affiliated drivers operating within the TNC; and
      (3)   Forward any correspondence, notices and/or legal process received
by the TNC and intended for an affiliated driver operating within the TNC.
   TRANSPORTATION NETWORK COMPANY (TNC) ENDORSED VEHICLE. A privately owned
vehicle endorsed by the affiliated TNC and authorized to provide for hire
services within their network. A TNC endorsed vehicle has been inspected, and
approved by a licensed TNC company representative, and meets the requirements
of this chapter.
   TRANSPORTATION NETWORK COMPANY (TNC) VEHICLE ENDORSEMENT. An endorsement for
a personal vehicle that allows a TNC endorsed driver to use the endorsed
vehicle to affiliate with a transportation network company to provide for-hire
transportation to passengers via a transportation application system. The
endorsement demonstrates that the vehicle has met the minimum operating
requirements as set forth in this chapter.
   TRANSPORTATION NETWORK SERVICE. A prearranged transportation service offered
or provided for compensation using an internet-enabled application or digital
platform to connect potential passengers with transportation network drivers.
   WHEELCHAIR ACCESSIBLE TRANSPORTATION NETWORK VEHICLE. A transportation
network vehicle that a person in a wheelchair may enter and exit independently
or with assistance while seated in a wheelchair. A wheelchair accessible
transportation network vehicle shall safely secure and restrain the wheelchair,
and shall comply with all applicable standards provided by law for wheelchair
accessible vehicles.
(Ord. passed 5-3-16)
§ 119.02 TRANSPORTATION NETWORK COMPANY LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person shall engage in a transportation network service in the city
without a transportation network company license issued pursuant to this
chapter.
   (B)   No vehicle shall be used as a transportation network vehicle in the
city except by an endorsed driver affiliated with a transportation network
company licensed pursuant to this chapter. Said vehicle shall at all times be
in compliance with this chapter when it is being used by a driver active on the
TNC network.
   (C)   A transportation network vehicle operated by a driver affiliated with
a TNC not licensed by the City of Manchester may come into the city to
discharge passengers whose trip originated outside of the city.
(Ord. passed 5-3-16)
§ 119.03 TRANSPORTATION NETWORK COMPANY LICENSE FEE AND LICENSE TERM.
   (A)   (1)   Each application for a license to operate a TNC must be
submitted with a fee based on the following schedule:
         (a)   License fee for up to ten vehicles: $400/vehicle;
         (b)   License fee for 11 - 25 vehicles: $350/vehicle;
         (c)   License fee for 26 - 50 vehicles: $300/vehicle; and
         (d)   License fee for 51 vehicles or more: $250/vehicle.
      (2)   The fee will be refunded if the license is not granted. The license
fee shall be paid as a precondition to issuance or renewal of the license.
   (B)   A TNC license shall expire annually on April 30. License renewals
shall occur annually between April 1 and April 30 of each year, and the TNC
shall note any changes to its original application that may have occurred.
Licenses not renewed after May 10 shall be revoked, and a new application
process as provided for in this subchapter shall be required if the TNC chooses
to renew its operation.
   (C)   Licensees whose initial application for a TNC is received by the City
Clerk after May 1 of the year, shall be subject to all annual license fees on a
proration schedule as follows:
 
Business start date           Applicable licensing rate
May 1 through July 31         100%
August 1 through October 31   75%
November 1 through January 31 50%
February 1 - April 30         25%
 
   (D)   Any person required to obtain a TNC license as provided pursuant to
this title who fails to obtain or renew the appropriate license on or before
the date as specified herein shall be considered delinquent and subject to a
delinquency penalty of 10% for the first 30 days of delinquency plus an
additional 10% for the next 30 days. The City Clerk shall be authorized to
cancel the TNC license of any inactive licensee if the business has neither
filed a license renewal nor remitted to the city the license fee imposed by
this title for a period of 60 days. The non-licensed status may be removed by
payment of an annual license fee in the amount of 150% of the annual TNC
license fee imposed under §
119.30 of this code.
   (E)   A TNC license is non-transferable.
   (F)   No TNC license for any succeeding, current, or unexpired license
period shall knowingly be issued to any person who at the time of making
application or renewal thereof is indebted to the city for any unpaid municipal
permit or fee.
   (G)   No portion of any license fee paid pursuant to this chapter shall be
rebated, unless it clearly appears that such fee was collected by, or
calculated by mistake or error, and before making such rebate of such fees, all
amounts due and payable under proper fees and permits are deducted from the
amount previously paid or are paid by the licensee.
(Ord. passed 5-3-16)
§ 119.04 TRANSPORTATION NETWORK COMPANY LICENSE APPLICATION.
   Application for the issuance or renewal of a transportation network company
license shall be made in writing to the City Clerk on a form provided by the
City Clerk and signed and sworn to by the applicant or, if the applicant is a
corporation, limited liability company, or partnership, by its authorized
agent. Each application, in addition to any other information that the City
Clerk may reasonably require in connection with issuance or renewal of a
license, shall contain at a minimum:
   (A)   If the license applicant is an individual:
      (1)   The individual's full name, social security number, residence
address, business address, business e-mail address and business telephone
number; and
      (2)   Proof that the applicant is at least 18 years of age.
   (B)   If the license applicant is a corporation:
      (1)   The corporate name, business address and telephone number of the
applicant;
      (2)   The date and state of incorporation;
      (3)   The full names, titles, date of birth, residence addresses, e-mail
addresses and residence telephone numbers of its corporate officers, and of
those stockholders who own 25% or more of its voting shares, and of its
authorized agent;
      (4)   Proof that all corporate officers are at least 18 years of age; and
      (5)   Proof that the corporation is in good standing under the laws of
the State of New Hampshire.
   (C)   If the license applicant is a partnership or limited liability
company:
      (1)   The name, business address or principal office address and
telephone number of the applicant;
      (2)   The full names, date of birth, residence addresses, e-mail
addresses and residence telephone numbers of the three members who own the
highest percentage interests in such partnership or limited liability company;
      (3)   The general partner of a partnership;
      (4)   The managing member of a limited liability company;
      (5)   The applicant's authorized agent;
      (6)   Any other member who owns a 25% or more interest therein;
      (7)   The full name, address, e-mail address and telephone number of a
person authorized to receive notices issued pursuant to this chapter; and
      (8)   Proof that all persons, partners, managers, managing members and
members, as applicable, are at least 18 years of age.
(Ord. passed 5-3-16)
§ 119.05 TRANSPORTATION NETWORK COMPANY LICENSE, QUALIFICATIONS FOR LICENSE.
   In order to qualify for a transportation network company license, whether
upon initial application or upon application for renewal of a license:
   (A)   An applicant shall be in compliance with all applicable municipal
rules, regulations, and ordinances including, but not limited to, those issued
by the Planning and Community Development, Zoning, Health, Police and Fire
Departments and the applicable statutes, rules and regulations of the state or
its agencies;
   (B)   An applicant shall have a place of business where records required by
this chapter may be readily viewed and copied;
   (C)   With respect to any corporate or limited liability company applicant,
the company shall be organized, registered, or qualified to do business under
the laws of the State of New Hampshire;
   (D)   The applicant(s) shall be the true beneficial owner(s) of the TNC
business to be licensed. The full legal names and addresses of all persons
holding a 25% or greater beneficial interest in the business shall be provided
on the application.
   (E)   The applicant's ability to provide lawful, safe, suitable and
comfortable service and the applicant's ability to engage qualified
transportation network company drivers and eligible transportation network
company vehicles; and
   (F)   The applicant's ability to maintain mandated insurance for the payment
of personal injury, death, property damage, and other claims associated with
the operation of a TNC.
(Ord. passed 5-3-16)
§ 119.06 TRANSPORTATION NETWORK COMPANY LICENSE, INVESTIGATION AND ISSUANCE.
   Upon receipt of an application for the issuance or renewal of a
transportation network company license, the City Clerk and the Chief of Police
may investigate the application for compliance with all applicable provisions
of this chapter, including but not limited to, the applicant's compliance or
ability to comply with the license qualification requirements specified in this
chapter.
(Ord. passed 5-3-16)
§ 119.07 TRANSPORTATION NETWORK COMPANY LICENSE, INSURANCE REQUIRED.
   (A)   Every licensee and transportation network driver shall comply with all
applicable insurance requirements mandated by federal, State of New Hampshire,
and city laws and/or ordinances.
   (B)   A TNC shall file with the City Clerk documentation evidencing that the
TNC or the driver has secured primary liability insurance coverage for the
driver for incidents involving the driver during a prearranged ride. Coverage
for incidents involving a driver during a prearranged ride must be in the
amount of at least $1,000,000 per occurrence. The insurance policy must provide
coverage at all times the driver is engaged in a prearranged ride.
   (C)   For the period of time when a driver is logged into a transportation
network company's digital network but is not engaged in a prearranged ride, the
following insurance requirements apply:
      (1)   A TNC or a driver shall maintain a primary automobile insurance
policy that recognizes that the driver is a transportation network company
driver and covers the driver's provision of TNC services while the driver is
logged into the transportation network company's digital network;
      (2)   Meets at least the minimum coverage of at least fifty thousand
dollars ($50,000.00) to any one person in any one accident, $100,000 to all
persons in any one accident, and for property damage arising out of the use of
the motor vehicle to a limit, exclusive of interest and costs, of $50,000.00 in
any one accident; and, is one of the following:
         (a)   An insurance rider to, or endorsement of, the driver's personal
automobile insurance policy that contains coverage equal to or greater than
those specified in §
119.70(C)(2) of this chapter;
         (b)   A commercial liability insurance policy purchased by the
transportation network company that provides primary coverage for the period of
time in which a driver is logged into the digital network;
         (c)   If a TNC purchases an insurance policy under subsection (b) it
shall provide documentation to the licensing official evidencing that the TNC
has secured the policy;
         (d)   Nothing in this section requires a personal automobile insurance
policy to provide coverage for the period of time in which a driver is logged
into a transportation network company's digital network;
         (e)   No transportation network provider license shall be issued
unless the applicant first provides certified copies of the insurance policies
required in this section to the City Clerk; and
         (f)   Any TNC driver shall provide to any authorized law enforcement
officer or official city inspector, in addition to any applicable insurance,
proof of the insurance policies required by this section.
(Ord. passed 5-3-16)
§ 119.08 TRANSPORTATION NETWORK COMPANY, PROHIBITED CONDUCT.
   The holder of a license to engage in the business of operating a
transportation network company shall not:
   (A)   Allow for the operation of any transportation network vehicle without
first paying the applicable application fee in §
119.30 of this code.
   (B)   Allow a driver to operate a vehicle without a valid license issued by
the City Clerk while active on the TNC dispatch system.
   (C)   Allow for a lapse in any insurance coverage requirements required in §
119.70.
   (D)   Allow a TNC endorsed driver to violate the operating regulations as
identified in §
119.130 or any other section of this chapter.
   (E)   Fail to comply with the provisions within this title or all other
applicable municipal rules, regulations, and ordinances including, but not
limited to, those issued by the Planning and Community Development, Zoning,
Health, Police and Fire Departments and the applicable statutes, rules and
regulations of the state or its agencies
(Ord. passed 5-3-16)
§ 119.09 TRANSPORTATION NETWORK VEHICLES OWNERSHIP AND STANDARDS.
   No licensee shall own, provide financing for the obtaining, leasing, or
ownership of, or have a beneficial interest in transportation network vehicles
unless approved by the City Clerk. All vehicles engaged in the provision of
transportation network services must be lawfully inspected for vehicle safety
in accordance with the laws of the Slate of New Hampshire.
(Ord. passed 5-3-16)
§ 119.10 TRANSPORTATION NETWORK VEHICLES, DISTINCTIVE TRADE DRESS.
   A transportation network company vehicle shall display, as approved by the
City Clerk, a consistent and distinctive signage or emblem at all times while
the driver is active on the TNC dispatch system. The distinctive signage or
emblem shall be sufficiently large and color contrasted:
   (A)   As to be readable during daylight hours at a distance of at least 50
feet; and
   (B)   Reflective, illuminated or otherwise patently visible so as to be seen
in darkness, and to identify that a particular vehicle is associated with a
particular licensee.
   (C)   Acceptable forms of distinctive signage include, but are not limited
to, symbols or signs on vehicle doors, roofs, or grilles. Magnetic or other
removable distinctive signage is acceptable. Licensees shall file an
illustration of their distinctive trade dress with the City Clerk.
(Ord. passed 5-3-16)
§ 119.11 TRANSPORTATION NETWORK VEHICLES, COMMERCIAL ADVERTISEMENTS PROHIBITED.
   No commercial advertisements, or lighting not installed by the original
equipment manufacturer, shall be displayed on the exterior of any
transportation network vehicle unless it is a component of the approved trade
dress.
(Ord. passed 5-3-16)
§ 119.12 TRANSPORTATION NETWORK COMPANY DRIVER REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   License required. Any person operating a vehicle engaged in providing
transportation network services in the city must first obtain a license to be
issued by the City Clerk.
   (B)   Application. Applications for a license to drive a vehicle engaged in
providing transportation network services shall be made to the City Clerk upon
a form to be determined by the City Clerk. The application shall include:
      (1)   The name, age, home address, social security number, and telephone
number of the applicant.
      (2)   Statement of whether applicant is employed by a licensed TNC,
leases a vehicle or services from a TNC, or is in any manner affiliated with
one or more transportation network companies as an independent contractor.
      (3)   Proof of possession of a valid New Hampshire driver's license and a
complete motor vehicle record for the five years preceding the application from
the Motor Vehicle Records Division, State Police, Department of Safety, State
of New Hampshire, and/or from the appropriate out-of-state agency or agencies
if not a resident of New Hampshire during the five years preceding the
application.
      (4)   A statement signed by the applicant that his physical and mental
health is clear of any incident or history which might demonstrate an inability
to safely operate a vehicle providing transportation network services.
      (5)   A complete criminal record of the applicant obtained from the
Criminal Records Division, State Police, Department of Safety, State of New
Hampshire, and/or from the appropriate out-of state agency or agencies if not a
resident of New Hampshire for the years preceding the application.
      (6)   Two recent passport photographs of the applicant or photographs of
such size as previously approved by the City Clerk.
      (7)   Any other information reasonably required by the Board of Mayor and
Aldermen.
      (8)   The results of a drug screening urine test for potential drug use,
conducted in accordance with §
118.22(A) of this code, as evidence that he/she does not use illegal drugs.
   (C)   Standards for denial. In addition to the application requirements set
forth in this section, a license to drive a vehicle providing transportation
network services shall be denied to the following persons:
      (1)   An applicant who has not attained the age of 18 years.
      (2)   An applicant who has received a disqualifying criminal conviction
as defined in §
118.01 of this code, or who has been imprisoned at any time during the period
for a disqualifying criminal conviction, provided that the conviction was for
an offense which rationally related to the purpose of licensing drivers
providing transportation network services.
      (3)   An applicant who has received a disqualifying motor vehicle
conviction as defined in §
118.01 of this code, or whose privilege to operate a motor vehicle in any
jurisdiction has been revoked and/or suspended at any time during the five
years preceding the application for any reason.
      (4)   An applicant who is denied a transportation network service driver
license under the standards of this section, or who has reason to believe that
he/she maybe denied a transportation network service driver license under these
standards, may file a written request for a review of the application before
the Committee on Administration. The Committee on Administration will approve
or disapprove the fitness of the applicant for a transportation network service
driver license. The Committee on Administration may require the submission of
qualifying evidence to make an assessment, including character references and/
or evaluation by a qualified professional, and may set such conditions, review
procedures, or monitoring activities as it deems appropriate as a condition of
licensure.
      (5)   Driver must present an appearance which is not offensive to the
public.
      (6)   An applicant who is under suspension or revocation from activities
conducted at the Manchester Airport or as a taxicab driver in the city of
Manchester. Exception: An applicant whose license has been revoked merely for
failing to renew in a timely manner may be considered for licensure.
      (7)   Conviction of multiple motor vehicle violations of such a nature
and/or number during the five years preceding the application as to indicate a
habitual or frequent disregard for traffic laws, for the safety of others using
the roads, or for the safety of his or her fares.
      (8)   An applicant who is required to register as a sexual offender or as
an offender against children under NH R.S.A. 651-B:6.
      (9)   The City Clerk shall make and keep a written record of every
decision to deny an application for a TNC vehicle driver license for a period
of one year.
      (10)   The City Clerk shall issue an original or renewed license after
receipt of application or renewal documentation and upon full review by
appropriate personnel.
      (11)   During each licensing year, the office of the City Clerk shall
coordinate random drug tests of drivers licensed to provide transportation
network services and licensed independent contractors, in accordance with the
provisions of §
118.22(B) of this code.
   (D)   Each application for a license to drive a vehicle engaged in providing
transportation network services must be submitted with a fee of $80. The fee
will be refunded if the license is not granted. If the license is granted, the
application fee shall serve as the fee for the initial license and expire
annually on April 30.
(Ord. passed 5-3-16)
§ 119.13 TRANSPORTATION NETWORK DRIVER, DRUG AND ALCOHOL POLICY.
   (A)   It is the policy of the city that transportation network drivers be
free of substance abuse. The abuse of alcohol or the use of illegal drugs
reduces awareness and increases the potential for accidents. Substance abuse
thereby increases both the risk of injury to fares and citizens of the city and
the risk of damage to public and private property. This policy will be
administered to all transportation network drivers by the City Clerk or
designees of the City Clerk in accordance with the drug and alcohol policy
identified in §§
118.20 -
118.29.
   (B)   All TNC licensees shall include on its website, mobile application,
and riders' receipts, a notice or information on the licensee's zero-tolerance
policy for intoxicating substances and the methods to report a transportation
network company driver whom the rider reasonably suspects was under the
influence of drugs or alcohol during the ride. The website and mobile
application shall include a phone number or mobile application call function
and email address to report the zero-tolerance complaint.
   (C)   All TNC licensees shall ensure compliance with this policy of its
drivers who are active on the TNC dispatch system at any given time.
(Ord. passed 5-3-16)
§ 119.14 OPERATING REGULATIONS.
   In addition to all other applicable requirements provided by law or this
title, it shall be unlawful for any transportation network driver to:
   (A)   Pick up or discharge a passenger on designated taxicab stands, no
stopping or standing zones, or other restricted areas;
   (B)   Solicit potential passengers by words or gestures for immediate
patronage of a transportation network vehicle by a transportation network
driver upon the public way attempting to direct people to a transportation
network vehicle that is parked, stopped, standing or moving upon the public
way;
   (C)   Accept or respond to passengers' or potential passengers' requests for
service via traditional street hail, including hand gestures and verbal
statements;
   (D)   Unlawfully park on any public way for a time longer than is reasonably
necessary to accept passengers in answer to a prearranged transportation
service and no passenger shall be accepted;
   (E)   Provide false information to or refuse to obey or to comply with any
lawful order or direction of the licensing official or any police officer, or
traffic-control officer, nor shall any licensee use profane language or
otherwise interfere with such officials while in the performance of their
duties;
   (F)   Take a circuitous route to a destination, or any route other than the
most direct route, without the express consent of the passenger;
   (G)   Drop a passenger at a location other than the location requested
unless prohibited by law;
   (H)   Refuse to convey an orderly passenger;
   (I)   Disable, eliminate or otherwise prevent access to the TNC mobile
application by the licensing official or designees of the licensing official
for purposes of enforcing this chapter; and
   (J)   Notify other drivers that a potential customer is or may be a City
Clerk or designee, or in any way otherwise interfere with or obstruct
enforcement of this title by the City Clerk.
(Ord. passed 5-3-16)
§ 119.15 SERVICE CHARGES AND FARE RATES.
   (A)   There shall be no regulation of fares. However, prior to the
initiation of any transportation service being provided to any individual, the
operator of the transportation service vehicle and the passenger engaging such
services shall reach agreement as to the amount which will be paid by the
passenger to the operator for the transportation service.
   (B)   Any disputes which may arise with regard to the fare for any
transportation service may be brought to the Committee on Administration for
resolution. Any determination made by the Committee on Administration shall be
final and binding on all parties.
(Ord. passed 5-3-16)
§ 119.16 RECORDS AND REPORTS.
   (A)   Every licensee shall keep accurate books and records of account of the
licensee's operations at the licensee's place of business in the city for a
minimum of three years. Such records shall be submitted for inspection upon the
request of the licensing official.
   (B)   Each licensee shall provide the following data to licensing officials,
at such times and in a format and manner prescribed by the licensing official:
      (1)   The number and percentage of the licensee's customers within the
city who requested wheelchair accessible vehicles, and how often the licensee
referred such customers to another service provider;
      (2)   The number of rides requested and accepted by the licensee's
drivers within each zip code within the city; and the number of rides that were
requested but not accepted by the licensee within each zip code; Data provided
pursuant to this subsection shall be deemed to be not public data to the extent
permissible under NH RSA91:A;
      (3)   Information on any of the licensee's drivers who were alleged to
have committed a violation of this chapter or their terms of service or who
have been suspended or banned from driving for the licensee, including any
zero-tolerance complaints and the outcome of the investigation into those
complaints;
      (4)   The average and mean number of hours and miles each of the TNC
endorsed drivers spent driving for the licensee; and
      (5)   The licensee must provide upon the request of the City Clerk, Chief
of Police, or their designees, factual information regarding the licensee's
drivers and vehicles so as to determine whether or not a particular TNC driver
was active on the TNC dispatch system application, in route to a passenger
location, or engaged with a passenger at a specific time and date. Such
information shall be provided within eight hours of the request unless
otherwise required by the licensing official.
(Ord. passed 5-3-16)
§ 119.17 LICENSE SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.
   (A)   The City Clerk may seek all applicable penalties, including but not
limited to fines, license conditions, license suspension, denial, and license
revocation in addition to restitution or other equitable relief against any
licensee that violates this chapter or any rules or regulations adopted
pursuant to this chapter. Before any condition, suspension, revocation, or fine
is imposed, or equitable relief is ordered, the licensee shall be notified of
the specific charges against them and of their right to a hearing before the
Committee on Administration.
   (B)   Any person whose transportation network company license is revoked or
denied under this chapter shall be ineligible to receive another transportation
network company license under the same or a different name for a period of five
years following revocation or denial.
   (C)   In addition to the powers authorized in this section, the Committee on
Administration may suspend, revoke or non-renew a TNC license or transportation
network driver license in accordance with other applicable sections of the
Manchester Code of Ordinances.
(Ord. passed 5-3-16)
§ 119.18 ENFORCEMENT, RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Upon request, a driver shall display to law enforcement personnel or
the City Clerk, or other person authorized to enforce this chapter, a physical
or electronic record of a ride in progress sufficient to establish that it was
a prearranged transportation service. To the extent that trip records are
contained on electronic devices, drivers are not required to relinquish custody
of the devices in order to make the required display.
   (B)   If a passenger files a complaint against a licensee or driver with the
city, in addition to all other powers and remedies provided under this Code,
the licensing official or authorized staff shall have the right to inspect the
licensee's records as necessary to investigate and resolve the complaint to the
same extent the licensing official and law enforcement personnel are permitted
to inspect all other public passenger vehicles.
   (C)   The City Clerk is authorized to enforce this chapter, and to adopt
rules and regulations for the proper administration and enforcement of this
chapter.
   (D)   Any fees imposed pursuant to rules authorized by this chapter shall be
reasonably related to the city's cost of administration and enforcement, and
shall be effective upon approval of the license fee schedule.
(Ord. passed 5-3-16)
§ 119.99 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
   (A)   Each act of violation and every day upon which any such violation
shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. The city may enjoin or abate
any violation of this chapter by appropriate action. In addition to the penalty
set forth in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances, if the court finds for the city, the city
shall recover its costs of suit including reasonable experts fees, attorney
fees, and necessary investigative costs.
   (B)   The Police Department is hereby authorized to seize or immobilize any
vehicle providing transportation network services located within the city
operating without a valid TNC or transportation network driver license. Upon
such seizure or immobilization, the Police Department shall notify the owner of
the vehicle of such seizure, the reason therefore, and of the place to which
such vehicle has been removed or immobilized. The Police Department shall order
the holding of any such vehicle for a period of not less than ten days from the
date of the required notification to the owner. During this period the owner
may redeem any such vehicle by correcting the violation of this chapter which
led to such seizure or by providing satisfactory evidence of his ability or
intent to correct the violation. Any vehicle providing transportation network
services which is impounded or immobilized and which is not redeemed within 30
days of the date of notification as described in this section shall become the
property of the city. Cost for towing and storage charges will be billed to the
owner of the vehicle seized and must be paid before the release of the vehicle
to the owner who shall be responsible for removing the vehicle from storage.
The city will be held harmless for any damage occurring during the act of
confiscation, transportation, storage, and/or immobilization of each vehicle.
   (C)   If, in the judgment of a police officer, a vehicle providing
transportation network services is unsafe for public transportation, due to a
violation of NH R.S.A. Ch. 266, the officer may order the vehicle to be taken
off the road and confiscate and hold the vehicle license, until the
circumstances which led to the confiscation are collected.
(Ord. passed 5-3-16)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
            Chapter
               
130.     GENERAL OFFENSES
CHAPTER 130: GENERAL OFFENSES
Section
General Provisions
   
130.01   Public lounging or sleeping
   
130.02   Obstructing passageways
   
130.03   Curfew for children
   
130.04   Abandoned iceboxes
   
130.05   Joggers on city streets; visibility
   
130.06   Indecent exposure while swimming
   
130.07   Obscenity
   
130.08   Strikebreaking
   
130.09   Radio or television interference
   
130.10   [Reserved]
   
130.11   Nudity in places selling alcoholic beverages
   
130.12   Exotic/unusual entertainment in places selling alcoholic beverages
   
130.13   Camping in public places
   
130.14   [Reserved]
   
130.15   Fires and cooking on city property
Disturbing Public Peace and Safety
   
130.20   Conduct in public places
   
130.21   False fire alarms
   
130.22   Causing brawl prohibited
   
130.23   Discharging firearms
   
130.24   Public drinking and open containers
Offenses Against Property
   
130.35   Injuring property
   
130.36   Injuring plants
   
130.37   Robbing gardens or orchards
   
130.38   Climbing fences prohibited
   
130.39   Playgrounds; hours for use; damaging equipment
   
130.40   Trespassing on public school buildings and grounds
   
130.41   Dangerous weapons in public school buildings and on public school
grounds
   
130.42   Establishing public housing drug free zones
Synthetic Cannabinoids
   
130.50   Purpose and intent
   
130.51   Prohibited activities
   
130.52   Definitions
   
130.53   Exceptions
   
130.54   Violations and penalties
   
130.55   Validity and applicability
 
   
130.99   Penalty
Note:
   Former §§ 130.50 - 130.57, Littering, repealed by Ord. passed 4-16-02
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 130.01 PUBLIC LOUNGING OR SLEEPING.
   (A)   No person shall lounge or sleep in or upon any of the commons or
squares of the city. ('71 Code, § 17-4)
   (B)   No person or persons shall sit, stand, or lounge in or about the doors
or passageways to any store, office, shop, dwelling house, or other tenement
except the owners or tenants thereof, after having been requested by the owner
or occupant, or any police officer or watchman, to depart therefrom.
('71 Code, § 17-6)
Cross reference:
   
Citation penalties, see § 38.06
§ 130.02 OBSTRUCTING PASSAGEWAYS.
   Three or more persons shall not stand in a group, or near each other, on any
foot or sidewalk, so as to obstruct a free passage for foot passengers, and any
person or persons obstructing the foot or sidewalks shall move on immediately
after a request made by any police officer or watchman.
('71 Code, § 17-5)
§ 130.03 CURFEW FOR CHILDREN.
   (A)   Established; exceptions. It shall be unlawful for any minor under the
age of 18 years to be upon any public street, or in any public place, between
the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. of the following day, official city time,
unless accompanied by a parent, guardian, or custodian; accompanied by an adult
specified by a parent, guardian, or custodian; carrying out an errand or other
lawful activity as directed by a parent, guardian, or custodian; or who is
participating in, going to, or returning from lawful employment, a lawful
athletic, education, entertainment, religious or social event, or interstate
travel.
   (B)   Responsibility of parents. It shall be unlawful for the parent,
guardian, or custodian having the care and custody of a minor under the age of
18 years to knowingly permit such minor to be upon any public street, or in any
public place, between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. of the following day
except as provided for under
§ 130.03(A).
   (C)   Violations. Each violation of the provisions of this section shall
constitute a separate offense. For the first violation of this section by any
child, he shall be taken to his home by the officers, and the parents or
guardian shall be notified of the penalty for any subsequent violation.
('71 Code, § 17-12) (Ord. passed 11-19-57; Am. Ord. passed 8-5-97)
Penalty, see § 130.99
Statutory reference:
   State curfew regulations, see R.S.A. 31:43 et seq.
§ 130.04 ABANDONED ICEBOXES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to leave outside of any building,
dwelling, dump, vacant land, or in any other place accessible to children, any
abandoned, unattended, or discarded icebox, refrigerator, or any other
container of any kind which has a snap-lock or other device thereon, without
first removing the said snap-lock or doors from said icebox, refrigerator, or
container.
('71 Code, § 17-14) (Ord. passed 12-1-53)
Cross reference:
   
Citation penalties, see § 38.06
§ 130.05 JOGGERS ON CITY STREETS; VISIBILITY.
   No person shall jog or run on any city street without wearing appropriately
colored clothing, such as orange, so as to be clearly visible to motorists
during daylight hours. No person shall jog or run on any city street without
wearing appropriately luminescent clothing, such as a safety vest, running
suit, or reflective tape so as to be clearly visible to motorists during
nighttime hours and at dawn or dusk.
('71 Code, § 17-16) (Ord. passed 8-5-86)
Penalty, see § 130.99
§ 130.06 INDECENT EXPOSURE WHILE SWIMMING.
   No person shall, within the view of any dwelling house or of any public road
or street, in the daytime, bathe or swim in such a manner whereby he exposes
his person indecently.
('71 Code, § 17-17) (Ord. passed 9-7-54)
Statutory reference:
   Indecent exposure, see R.S.A. 645:1
Cross reference:
   
Citation penalties, see § 38.06
§ 130.07 OBSCENITY.
   No person shall sing or repeat, or cause to be sung or repeated, any lewd,
obscene, or profane song or word; nor write or mark in any manner any obscene
or profane word, or obscene or lascivious figure or representation, on any
structure.
('71 Code, § 17-18)
Penalty, see § 130.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see R.S.A. 570:3
   Authority of city to restrain and punish obscenity, see R.S.A. 47:17 (XIII)
   Obscene matter, see R.S.A. Ch. 650
§ 130.08 STRIKEBREAKING.
   It shall be unlawful within the city for any person not directly involved in
a labor strike or lockout to recruit any person or persons for employment, or
to secure or offer to secure for any person or persons any employment, when the
purpose of such recruiting, securing or offering to secure employment, is to
have such persons take the place in employment of employees in an industry
where a labor strike or a lockout exists.
('71 Code, § 17-19) (Ord. passed 2-6-62)
Penalty, see § 130.99
§ 130.09 RADIO OR TELEVISION INTERFERENCE.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly or wantonly use or operate or cause to be
operated, any machine, device, apparatus or instrument of any kind whatsoever
within the city between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 12:00 midnight, the
operation of which shall cause reasonably preventable electrical interference
with radio or television reception, within the city limits; provided, however,
that x-ray pictures, examinations, or treatments may be made at any time if the
machines or apparatus used therefor are properly equipped to avoid all
unnecessary or reasonably preventable interference with radio reception and are
not negligently operated.
   (B)   This section shall not be held or construed to embrace or cover the
regulation of any transmitting, broadcasting, or receiving instrument,
apparatus, or device used or useful in interstate commerce or the operation of
which instrument, apparatus or device is licensed, or authorized by or under
the provisions of any act of the Congress of the United States.
('71 Code, § 17-20)
Penalty, see § 130.99
§ 130.10 [RESERVED].
   (Previous section repealed 7-20-04)
§ 130.11 NUDITY IN PLACES SELLING ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES.
   (A)   Purpose and intent. It is declared to be the purpose and intent of
this section to protect the public health, safety, welfare and morals of the
community, to promote the stability of property values, and impose restrictions
upon those activities which pander to gross sexuality in a manner that would
detract from the neighborhood, adversely affect the property values, increase
crime and violence, and be repugnant to the morals of the community. In
recognition of the protections afforded to citizens under the First and
Fourteenth Amendments, it is not the intent of this section to inhibit freedom
of speech or the press, but rather to deter those of low morals from imposing
their lack of morals upon the rest of the community; and further recognizing
that those parts of a community, which become centers of loose moral conduct,
frequently become places of rowdiness, criminality, and indecent behavior. It
is further the belief that just as advertising is designed to stimulate one's
appetite for desiring goods or a service, an over-abundance of preoccupation
with sexual displays or material arouses the appetites of those so preoccupied
and encourages violations of the criminal statutes involving sexual offenses
and is contrary to the health, safety and welfare of the community.
   (B)   Prohibition. No person shall appear in a state of nudity in any place
that sells or offers to sell alcoholic beverages within the city.
   (C)   Definition. For the purpose of this section, the following definition
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
   NUDITY. The showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, or
buttocks with less than fully opaque covering, the showing of the female breast
with less than fully opaque covering or any part of the nipples, or the showing
of the male genitals in a discernibly turgid state.
(Ord. passed 12-3-96)
Penalty, see § 130.99 
§ 130.12 EXOTIC/UNUSUAL ENTERTAINMENT IN PLACES SELLING ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES.
   (A)   Purpose and intent. It is declared to be the purpose and intent of
this section to protect the public health, safety, welfare and morals of the
community, to promote the stability of property values, and impose restrictions
upon those activities which pander to gross sexuality in a manner that would
detract from the neighborhood, adversely affect the property values, increase
crime and violence, and be repugnant to the morals of the community. In
recognition of the protections afforded to citizens under the First and
Fourteenth Amendments, it is not the intent of this section to inhibit freedom
of speech or the press, but rather to deter those of low morals from imposing
their lack of morals upon the rest of the community; and further recognizing
that those parts of a community, which become centers of loose moral conduct,
frequently become places of rowdiness, criminality, and indecent behavior. It
is further the belief that, just as advertising is designed to stimulate one's
appetite for desiring goods or a service, an over-abundance of preoccupation
with sexual displays or material arouses the appetites of those so preoccupied
and encourages violations of the criminal statutes involving sexual offenses
and is contrary to the health, safety and welfare of the community.
   (B)   Prohibition.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any business entity that sells alcoholic
beverages to the general public to offer or allow exotic/unusual entertainment
without first having received written approval from the Chief of Police or his
designee.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage or participate in any
exotic/unusual entertainment in any location where alcoholic beverages are
served to the general public unless that business entity has first received
written approval from the Chief of Police or his designee.
   (C)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
   BUSINESS ENTITY. Any and all persons, natural and artificial, including any
individual, firm, corporation or association serving alcohol to the general
public pursuant to a license issued by the New Hampshire Liquor Commission.
   EXOTIC/UNUSUAL ENTERTAINMENT. This shall mean and include but not be limited
to male and female exotic dances, contests involving audience participation
such as swimsuit contests, wet tee shirt contests, hot legs contests, best body
contests, hard body contests, tattoo contests, and toga parties.
(Ord. passed 12-3-96)
Penalty, see § 130.99
§ 130.13 CAMPING IN PUBLIC PLACES.
   (A)   Prohibitions.  It shall be unlawful for any person to use or cause to
be used any of the streets, sidewalks, square or any other public place,
excepting parks as governed by Chapter 96, as a camping place absent prior
written permission from the Board of Mayor and Aldermen or its designee. As
used in this section, the term CAMP or CAMPING shall mean the use of public
property as a temporary or permanent place of dwelling, lodging or residence,
or as a living accommodation at any time as defined on the date of offense by
the official government record, or as a sojourn that has not been authorized by
the Board of Mayor and Aldermen or its designee. Indicia of camping may
include, but are not limited to, any one or more of the following: storage of
personal belongings; using tents, tarps or other temporary structures for
sleeping or storage of personal belongings; hanging clothes line; carrying on
cooking activities or making any fire in an unauthorized area; or any of such
activities in combination with either sleeping or making preparations to sleep
(including but not limited to the laying down of cots, cushions, sheets,
blankets, sleeping bags or other bedding for the purpose of sleeping).
   (B)   Exceptions. This section does not affect any other provision of the
City of Manchester Code of Ordinances.
   (C)   Penalty. Any person who violates this provision shall be subject to a
fine of up to $250.
(Ord. passed 1-19-21; Am. Ord. passed 5-4-21; Am. Ord. passed 7- 2-24)
§ 130.14 [RESERVED].
§ 130.15 FIRES AND COOKING ON CITY PROPERTY.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      CITY. The City of Manchester, NH.
      CODE. The City of Manchester, NH Code of Ordinances.
      COOKING FIRE. Any ignited heat source for cooking, including but not
limited to, barbecue, brazier, torch, grill, propane or gas grill, hibachi,
pellet stove, fire pit, spit, smoker or similar heating or cooking device being
used for heating, smoking or cooking of food.
      DEEP-PIT BARBECUE. The method and any constructed item for barbecue
cooking meat below the surface of the earth.
      FIRE. Its ordinary definition but shall not include candle flames,
lighter flames, match flames, cigarette flames, cigar flames, or pipe flames.
   (B)   Prohibitions. It shall be unlawful for any person to start, ignite,
kindle, cook with any fire, cooking fire, or deep-pit barbecue on any property
owned or operated by the city without express written permission of the Board
of the Mayor and Aldermen or its designee. Any person permitted under this
provision shall keep a copy of said written authorization available for
immediate inspection by any agent of the city and shall provide a copy of said
written authorization upon the request of any agent of the city. Any permitted
fire, cooking fire, or deep pit barbecue shall be constantly attended by the
authorized person or that person's agent.
   (C)   Exceptions. No person shall be cited for a violation of this provision
if the person is an employee, volunteer, or official of the City of Manchester
acting in their official capacity and performing their official duty or acting
at the request of a Department Head or elected city official. No employee,
owner, patron, or operator of any person, business, or entity holding a current
and valid permit or license under any other provision of the code shall be
cited for violating this provision where their actions are part of the license
holder's regular course of business and this fact was known to the city at the
time the license or permit was issued.
   (D)   Authorization. Any authorization granted by the Board of Mayor and
Aldermen or its designee shall be in writing, shall specify the duration of
said permission, and the specific area where the fire, cookfire, or deep-pit
barbecue may be located. The Board of Mayor and Aldermen or its designee may
attach any other conditions to an authorization that the Board of Mayor and
Aldermen or its designee may deem to be appropriate or prudent for the safety
and well-being of the city, including but not limited to requiring insurance as
set forth in § 115.60 of the Code of Ordinances and dictating the manner of
storage and location of any fuel for the permitted fire, cooking fire, or deep-
pit barbecue.
   (E)   Penalty. Any person who violates this provision shall be fined under
the provisions of §
10.99 (a fine up to $1,000).
(Ord. passed 11-10-20)
DISTURBING PUBLIC PEACE AND SAFETY
§ 130.20 CONDUCT IN PUBLIC PLACES.
   No person shall in any street, lane, alley, or public place, be guilty of
any rude, indecent, or disorderly conduct; or shall insult or wantonly impede
any person passing thereon; or shall throw any stones, brick, snowballs, or
dirt; or play at ball or at any game in which any ball is used; or fly any kite
in any street, lane, or public square in the compact part of the city.
('71 Code, § 17-2)
Statutory reference:
   For similar state law provisions, see R.S.A. 570:1
Cross reference:
   
Citation penalties, see § 38.06
§ 130.21 FALSE FIRE ALARMS.
   No person shall knowingly raise or repeat any false cry of fire within the
city.
('71 Code, § 17-1)
Statutory reference:
   False fire alarms, see R.S.A. 644:3 and 644:3a
§ 130.22 CAUSING BRAWL PROHIBITED.
   No person shall make any brawl or tumult in the city.
('71 Code, § 17-3)
Penalty, see § 130.99
§ 130.23 DISCHARGING FIREARMS.
      No person shall, within the compact part of the city, fire or discharge
any cannon, gun, pistol, or other firearm.
('71 Code, § 17-15)
Cross reference:
   
Citation penalties, see § 38.06
§ 130.24 PUBLIC DRINKING AND OPEN CONTAINERS.
   (A)   No person shall drink any liquor or alcoholic beverages at any time
within the limits of any public way, sidewalk or public school buildings and
grounds.
   (B)   No person shall carry, transport, or possess any liquor or alcoholic
beverage at any time within the limits of any public way, sidewalk or public
school buildings and grounds except in its original container with the seal
unbroken.
   (C)   Exemption. This section shall not apply to the area of a sidewalk
encumbered in accordance with §
97.34(B) of this code.
('71 Code, § 17-22) (Ord. passed 8-5-75; Am. Ord. passed 10-11-77; Am. Ord.
passed 9-1-87; Am. Ord. passed 6-5-00; Am. Ord. passed 10-1-19)
Cross reference:
   
Citation penalties, see § 38.06
OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
§ 130.35 INJURING PROPERTY.
   No person shall wantonly injure or deface any building, fence, wall, post,
signboard, sign, lamppost, or lamp or lantern thereon.
('71 Code, § 17-7)
Statutory reference:
   Defacing property, see R.S.A. 634:2
§ 130.36 INJURING PLANTS.
   (A)   No person shall wantonly injure any trees, shrubs, or bushes growing
in any garden, field, or yard. ('71 Code, § 17-8)
   (B)   No person shall wantonly or wilfully destroy shrubbery, pull up, bend
or mar growing trees or otherwise injure or cause to be injured any shrubs,
flowers, or trees on city property or maintained by the city, or shall wantonly
or willfully damage or deface any other property of the city or of any
department thereof. ('71 Code, § 17-9)
Penalty, see § 130.99
Statutory reference:
   Injuring gardens, see R.S.A. 635:2
   Injuring city trees, see R.S.A. 634:2
Cross reference:
   
Citation penalties, see § 38.06
§ 130.37 ROBBING GARDENS OR ORCHARDS.
   No person shall rob any garden or field of fruit or vegetables.
('71 Code, § 17-10)
Penalty, see § 130.99
§ 130.38 CLIMBING FENCES PROHIBITED.
   No person shall, without lawful permission, climb on or over any fence of
any garden or yard.
('71 Code, § 17-11)
Statutory reference:
   For similar state law provisions, see R.S.A. 634:2
Cross reference:
   
Citation penalties, see § 38.06
§ 130.39 PLAYGROUNDS; HOURS FOR USE; DAMAGING EQUIPMENT.
   No person shall, between sunset on any given day and sunrise on the next
day, be permitted to enter on or trespass on that part of any public park,
common, school yard, or playground which is equipped with playground equipment
and used for playground purposes except as may be permitted by the Director of
Public Works or the Director's designee. No person shall be permitted to use
for any purpose whatsoever, playground equipment during the hours hereinbefore
stipulated except as may be permitted by the Director of Public Works or the
Director's designee. Any person who shall tamper with or wantonly injure,
damage or destroy any playground equipment, fencing, or structure shall be
liable upon conviction, for the damage caused thereto.
('71 Code, § 17-13) (Am. Ord. passed 10-18-55; Am. Ord. passed 12-7-21)
Penalty, see § 130.99
Cross reference:
   
Citation penalties, see § 38.06
§ 130.40 TRESPASSING ON PUBLIC SCHOOL BUILDINGS AND GROUNDS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to enter upon or
remain in public school buildings, including appurtenant buildings, or public
school grounds, including parking lots and recreational or athletic areas
between the hours of 7:30 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on any day when such school is in
session.
   (B)   Authorized persons shall include teachers and other employees of the
school, students of said school, their parents or guardians and those who are
present with the permission of the principal or person in charge. All others
including suspended students shall be deemed unauthorized persons unless they
are involved in school-related business. ('71 Code, § 17-23) (Ord. passed 11-
13-79; Am. Ord. passed 9-1-87)
   (C)   The Superintendent of schools is hereby authorized to adopt rules and
regulations governing the use of parking areas on public school premises. Signs
shall be maintained designating the provisions of such parking rules and
regulations in the area affected thereby. Any such sign located in a public
school parking area shall be presumed to have been installed by the official
act or lawful direction of the Superintendent unless the contrary shall be
established by lawful evidence. Cards, tags, or stickers may be issued to
facilitate enforcement as provided in such rules and regulations. ('71 Code, §
17-24) (Ord. passed 11-13-79)
Penalty, see § 130.99
Cross reference:
   
Citation penalties, see § 38.06
§ 130.41 DANGEROUS WEAPONS IN PUBLIC SCHOOL BUILDINGS AND ON PUBLIC SCHOOL
GROUNDS.
   (A)   No person shall carry or possess a dangerous weapon in any public
school building, including appurtenant buildings, or on any public school
grounds, including parking lots and recreational or any athletic areas used for
school athletics.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DANGEROUS WEAPON. Any firearm, knife, blackjack, slingshot, metallic
knuckles or other thing which is designed or intended to be used to produce
bodily injury.
(Ord. passed 1-19-99)
Penalty, see § 130.99
§ 130.42 ESTABLISHING PUBLIC HOUSING DRUG FREE ZONES.
   Pursuant to R.S.A. 31:41-e, there are hereby established drug free zones
within 1000 feet of each Manchester Housing and Redevelopment Authority public
housing property.
(Ord. passed 3-21-00)
SYNTHETIC CANNABINOIDS
§ 130.50 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   It has been determined that certain businesses and/or individuals within the
city are possessing and selling certain substances which when ingested produce
intoxicating effects similar to Tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) or marijuana. These
substances, which are described herein, are often used as an alternative
synthetic to marijuana and are potentially dangerous to users, society, and the
long term effects are not yet known. The effects of these substances are a
health concern to the citizens of the city. Not all of the
substances are categorized as illegal controlled substances under state or
federal law. By selling these "legal" substances for smoking and ingestion
under the guise of incense, the manufacturers avoid the United Sates Food and
Drug Administration process for study and approval of such prior to
distribution for consumption. In addition, by marketing such "incense" products
directed at the controlled drug subculture the manufacturers and sellers avoid
the Schedule I implications of the Controlled Substances Act. The City of
Manchester Board of Mayor and Aldermen recognizes that there is no legitimate
purpose of such chemicals contained therein.
(Ord. passed 10-7-14)
§ 130.51 PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, barter, give, publicly display
for sale or attempt to sell, or to possess or transport, any material,
compound, mixture or preparation which contains any quantity of synthetic
cannabinoids or their optical, positional and geometric isomers, salts and
salts of isomers whenever the existence of such isomers, salts and salts of
isomers is possible within the specific chemical designation as defined below
within the corporate limits of the City of Manchester, New Hampshire.
(Ord. passed 10-7-14)
§ 130.52 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following shall be defined as
follows:
   PERSON. An individual, corporation, limited liability company, partnership,
wholesaler, retailer, and any licensed or unlicensed business, including clerk,
manager, or owner of a business.
   SYNTHETIC CANNABINOID.
      (1)   Any substance within the following structural classes that displays
binding activity at the CB1 and/or CB2 cannabinoid receptor sites. Binding
activity may be documented in the following ways, including but not limited to:
         (a)   A patent or patent application or copy thereof that attests to
the binding activity of the substance in question; and/or
         (b)   An article or document or copy thereof from a peer-reviewed
scientific journal or equivalent publication that attests to the binding
activity of the substance in question.
      (2)   Any compound containing a 2-(3-hydroxycyclohexyl)phenol structure
with a substituent at the 5-position of the phenolic ring: whether or not
substituted on the cyclohexyl ring to any extent.
      (3)   Any compound containing a 1-(1-naphthylmethyl)indene ring system
with a substituent at the 3-position of the indene ring system: whether or not
further substituted on the indene ring to any extent, whether or not
substituted on the naphthyl ring to any extent.
      (4)   Any compound containing an indole ring system with a substituent on
the nitrogen atom and bearing an additional substituent at the 3-position of
the indole ring system, with a linkage connecting the ring system to the
substituent:
         (a)   Where the linkage connecting the indole ring system to the
substituent at its 3 position is any of the following:
            1.   Alkyl.
            2.    Carbonyl.
            3.   Ester.
            4.   Thione.
            5.    Thioester.
            6.   Amino.
            7.    Alkylamino.
            8.   Amido.
            9.    Alkylamido.
         (b)   Where the substituent at the 3 position of the indole ring
system is, disregarding the linkage, any of the following groups:
            1.    Naphthyl.
            2.    Quinolinyl.
            3.    Adamantyl.
            4.   Phenyl.
            5.    Cycloalkyl (limited to cyclopropyl, cyclobutyl, cyclopentyl,
or cyclohexyl).
            6.    Biphenyl.
            7.    Alkylamido (limited to ethylamido, propylamido, butanamido,
or pentanamido).
         (c)   Whether or not the substituent at the 3 position of the indole
ring system, disregarding the linkage, is further substituted to any extent.
         (d)   Whether or not further substituted on the indole ring system to
any extent.
      (5)   Any compound containing an indazole ring system with a substituent
at the 1-position nitrogen atom and bearing an additional substituent at the 3-
position of the indazole ring system, with a linkage connecting the ring system
to the substituent:
         (a)   Where the linkage connecting the indazole ring system to the
substituent at its 3 position is any of the following:
            1.   Alkyl.
            2.    Carbonyl.
            3.   Ester.
            4.   Thione.
            5.    Thioester.
            6.   Amino.
            7.    Alkylamino.
            8.   Amido.
            9.    Alkylamido.
         (b)   Where the substituent at the 3 position of the indazole ring
system is, disregarding the linkage, any of the following groups:
            1.    Naphthyl.
            2.    Quinolinyl.
            3.    Adamantyl.
            4.   Phenyl.
            5.    Cycloalkyl (limited to cyclopropyl, cyclobutyl, cyclopentyl,
or cyclohexyl).
            6.    Biphenyl.
            7.    Alkylamido (limited to ethylamido, propylamido, butanamido,
or pentanamido).
         (c)   Whether or not the substituent at the 3 position of the indazole
ring system, disregarding the linkage, is further substituted to any extent.
         (d)   Whether or not further substituted on the indazole ring system
to any extent.
      (6)   Any compound containing a pyrrole ring with a substituent on the
nitrogen atom and bearing an additional substituent at the 3-position of the
pyrrole ring, with a linkage connecting the ring to the substituent:
         (a)   Where the linkage connecting the pyrrole ring to the substituent
at its 3 position is any of the following:
            1.   Alkyl.
            2.    Carbonyl.
            3.   Ester.
            4.   Thione.
            5.    Thioester.
            6.   Amino.
            7.    Alkylamino.
            8.   Amido.
            9.    Alkylamido.
         (b)   Where the substituent at the 3 position of the pyrrole ring is,
disregarding the linkage, any of the following groups:
            1.    Naphthyi.
            2.    Quinolinyl.
            3.    Adamantyl.
            4.   Phenyl.
            5.    Cycloalkyl (limited to cyclopropyl, cyclobutyl, cyclopentyl,
or cyclohexyl).
            6.    Biphenyl.
            7.    Alkylamido (limited to ethylamido, propylamido, butanamido,
or pentanamido).
         (c)   Whether or not the substituent at the 3 position of the pyrrole
ring, disregarding the linkage, is further substituted to any extent.
         (d)   Whether or not further substituted on the pyrrole ring to any
extent.
      (7)   Any compound containing a pyrazole ring with a substituent at the
1-position nitrogen atom and bearing an additional substituent at the 3-
position of the pyrazole ring with a linkage connecting the ring to the
substituent:
         (a)   Where the linkage connecting the pyrazole ring to the
substituent at its 3 position is any of the following:
            1.   Alkyl.
            2.    Carbonyl.
            3.   Ester.
            4.   Thione.
            5.    Thioester.
            6.   Amino.
            7.    Alkylamino.
            8.   Amido.
            9.    Alkylamido.
         (b)   Where the substituent at the 3 position of the pyrazole ring is,
disregarding the linkage, any of the following groups:
            1.    Naphthyl.
            2.    Quinolinyl.
            3.    Adamantyl.
            4.   Phenyl.
            5.    Cycloalkyl (limited to cyclopropyl, cyclobutyl, cyclopentyl,
or cyclohexyl).
            6.    Biphenyl.
            7.    Alkylamido (limited to ethylamido, propylamido, butanamido,
or pentanamido).
         (c)   Whether or not the substituent at the 3 position of the pyrazole
ring, disregarding the linkage, is further substituted to any extent.
         (d)   Whether or not further substituted on the pyrazole ring to any
extent.
      (8)   Includes, but is not limited to, the following:
         (a)   QUCHIC/BB-22.
         (b)   QUPIC/PB-22.
         (c)   5-fluoro PB-22.
         (d)   STS-135.
         (e)    APICA/SDB-001.
         (f)   ADBICA.
         (g)    APINACA/AKB48.
         (h)   AB-FUBINACA.
         (i)   AB-PINACA.
         (j)   ADB-FUBINACA.
         (k)   AM-1248.
         (l)   AM-2233.
         (m)   AB-001.
         (n)   SDB-006.
         (o)   5-chloro UR-144.
      (9)   This definition shall not include:
         (a)    Endocannabinoids that are naturally found in the human body;
         (b)   Delta-9 Tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) or other marijuana-derived
cannabinoids, in the form of Marinol, Dronabinol, or another generic
pharmaceutical equivalent; so long as the medication has been issued as the
result of a valid prescription;
         (c)   Any other drugs that have cannabinoid receptor activity that are
currently FDA-approved for medical use; or
         (d)   Marijuana and extracts of marijuana, as these are already
controlled per NH R.S.A. 318:B.
(Ord. passed 10-7-14)
§ 130.53 EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   It is not an offense under this subchapter if the person was acting at
the direction of the City of Manchester Police Department and its officers, or
federal or state law enforcement, to enforce or ensure compliance with this law
prohibiting the sale of the aforementioned substances.
   (B)   If the State of New Hampshire enacts criminal penalties for the
possession, sale, transportation, or delivery of any chemical substance listed
in this subchapter, then upon the effective date of this control, this
subchapter shall no longer be deemed effective for that substance. However, a
violation of this article occurring prior to the effective date of such state
statute may be prosecuted after the effective date of state control.
(Ord. passed 10-7-14)
§ 130.54 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
   (A)   Any person found to be in violation of this subchapter will be
assessed a fine of $500. Each day a violation occurs will constitute a separate
offense.
   (B)   In addition to any penalty provided for in § 130.54(A), if any of the
aforementioned substances listed above are found in the possession of any
person, the substances will be forfeited by seizure by the City Police
Department or its officers and may be destroyed by such law enforcement
officials in a method consistent with law.
(Ord. passed 10-7-14)
§ 130.55 VALIDITY AND APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   If any provision of this subchapter shall be held to be invalid by a
court of competent jurisdiction, then such provision shall be considered
separately and apart from the remaining provisions of this subchapter, which
shall remain in full force and effect.
   (B)   All ordinances, resolutions, orders or parts thereof or in conflict
with this subchapter are hereby voided.
   (C)   This subchapter shall be in full force and effect immediately upon the
passage of the ordinance from which it derives.
(Ord. passed 10-7-14)
Note:
   Former §§ 130.50 - 130.57, Littering, repealed by Ord. passed 4-16-02
§ 130.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter for which
no penalty is otherwise provided shall be subject to a fine not exceeding the
maximum allowed by R.S.A. 47:17 or other law.
('71 Code, § 17-24) (Ord. passed 11-13-79; Am. Ord. passed 10-1-96)
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
            Chapter
               
149.   BUILDING DEPARTMENT
               
150.   HOUSING CODE
               
151.   BUILDING REGULATIONS
               
152.   PLANNING AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT
               
153.   SUBDIVISIONS
               
154.   AIRPORT ZONING
               
155.   ZONING CODE
CHAPTER 149: BUILDING DEPARTMENT
Section
   
149.00   Building Department
§ 149.00 BUILDING DEPARTMENT.
   (A)   The Building Department and its duties and responsibilities are hereby
transferred to the Planning and Community Development Department and shall be
known as the Building Regulations Division.
   (B)   The department head shall be the Director of Planning and Community
Development who shall be appointed as provided by
Charter § 3.03. The Director of Planning and Community Development shall also
be the Inspector of Buildings of the city.
   (C)   The Planning and Community Development Department is responsible for
the administration, interpretation and enforcement of all codes and regulations
pertaining to the Office of Inspectors of Buildings and the administration,
interpretation and enforcement of land use codes and regulations.
   (D)   (1)   The Planning and Community Development Department shall provide
staff support to the Zoning Board of Adjustment and shall administer the
processing of variances, special exceptions and administrative appeals under
the direction of the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
      (2)   The Planning and Community Development Department shall also
perform such other duties as are prescribed by federal, state and local law.
(Ord. passed 11-4-98; Am. Ord. passed 8-5-03; Am. Ord. passed 2-7-09)
CHAPTER 150: HOUSING CODE
Section
General Provisions
   
150.001   Short title
   
150.002   Definitions
   
150.003   Finding of fact
   
150.004   Exceptions to regulations
General Regulations
   
150.015   Overcrowding
   
150.016   Floor area computation
   
150.017   Waiver
   
150.018   Basement dwelling units
   
150.019   Prohibited uses
   
150.020   Ventilation
   
150.021   Accessory structures
   
150.022   Storage fuel tanks
   
150.023   Public nuisances
Minimum Standards
   
150.035   Applicability
   
150.036   Exterior structure
   
150.037   Foundations
   
150.038   Exterior walls
   
150.039   Roofs
   
150.040   Chimneys, flues, cleanout, and vents
   
150.041   Porches, stairs, and handrails
   
150.042   Doors and doorways
   
150.043   Hatchways
   
150.044   Windows
   
150.045   Screens and storm windows
   
150.046   Interior structure
   
150.047   Structural members
   
150.048   Dampness
   
150.049   Indoor stairs and handrails
   
150.050   Interior surfaces
   
150.051   Floor coverings
Maintenance of Premises
   
150.060   Sanitation
   
150.061   Sidewalks and other areas
   
150.062   Common areas; sanitation
   
150.063   Waste storage facilities
   
150.064   Waste storage
   
150.065   Sanitation; dwelling units
   
150.066   Plumbing fixtures
   
150.067   Insects, rodents, vermin an other pests
   
150.068   Responsibility for infestation control
   
150.069   Lead based paint
Required Facilities
   
150.080   Basic facilities required
   
150.081   Sanitary facilities
   
150.082   Water and sewer system
   
150.083   Water heating facilities
   
150.084   Plumbing fixtures; installation and connection
   
150.085   Heating facilities
   
150.086   Electrical service outlets
   
150.087   Common hallways and stairways
   
150.088   Facilities, equipment, and appliances
   
150.089   Exitways
   
150.090   Smoke detection devices
   
150.091   Posting of emergency contact information
Certificates of Compliance
   
150.100   Permit required
   
150.101   Application of subchapter; exception
   
150.102   Application for certificate
   
150.103   Interim rental permit
   
150.104   Inspection of premises
   
150.105   Reinspection where violations found
   
150.106   Certificates of compliance; term and renewal
   
150.107   Extension of term
   
150.108   Newly constructed rental property
   
150.109   Transfer of ownership
   
150.110   Transfer permits
   
150.111   Rental assistance
   
150.112   Public records
   
150.113   Special inspections
   
150.114   Fees; exemptions
Housing Council
   
150.125   [Reserved]
   
150.126   [Reserved]
   
150.127   [Reserved]
   
150.128   [Reserved]
   
150.129   [Reserved]
Administration and Enforcement
   
150.140   Inspection
   
150.141   Responsibility of persons
   
150.142   Notice of violation
   
150.143   Planning and Community Development Department; powers
   
150.144   Grounds for finding unfitness
   
150.145   Immunity of personnel
   
150.146   Complaint; notice; hearing
   
150.147   Department order after hearing
   
150.148   Appeals from Planning and Community Development Department orders
   
150.149   Court hearing
   
150.150   Court order
   
150.151   Lien
 
   
150.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 150.001 SHORT TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known and shall be cited as the “Housing Code of the
City of Manchester, New Hampshire.”
('71 Code, § 13-1) (Ord. passed 5-31-66)
§ 150.002 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   Construction and interpretation of certain words. Whenever the words
DWELLING, DWELLING UNIT, ROOMING UNIT, ROOMING HOUSE, or PREMISES, are used in
this chapter, they shall be constructed as though they were followed by the
words “or any part thereof.”
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      ACCESSORY STRUCTURE. A building, the use of which is incidental to that
of the main building and which is located on the same lot.
      APPROVED. As applied to a written policy or standard of the Code
Enforcement Agency.
      BASEMENT. Any portion of the building partly underground and having at
least one-half of its height above the average grade.
      BUILDING. Any structure or part of a structure.
      BUILDING CODE. The current Building Code of the city.
      CELLAR. Any portion of the building partly or completely underground and
having at least one-half if its height below average grade.
      CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE. A document issued by the Housing Code
Department attesting that the designated dwelling, dwelling unit, or rooming
house on inspection was found to be in compliance with this chapter.
Certificates shall be prepared by the Housing Code Department and shall contain
such information as is required by the Department, including a description of
the rental unit, the expiration date of the certificate, and requirements as to
reapplication and reinspection and renewal.
      CONDOMINIUM UNIT. A dwelling unit together with the undivided interest in
the common area appertaining to that unit.
      CROSSWIRING. The condition where all or part of the electric service for
one dwelling unit is connected to or paid for through the electric meter that
serves another dwelling unit.
      DILAPIDATED. No longer adequate for the purpose or use for which it was
originally intended.
      DUMPSTER. A large sturdy metal container, with a capacity exceeding two
cubic yards, for the collection of rubbish and garbage, designed to be emptied
or transported to a dump by a specially designed truck.
      DWELLING. Any building, structure, trailer, mobile home or camp or part
thereof, used and occupied for human habitation or intended to be so used; and
includes any appurtenance belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith.
      DWELLING UNIT. A suite of one or more rooms located within a dwelling
with facilities for regular cooking, and occupied or intended to be occupied by
one or more individuals living in common.
      EXITWAY. An unobstructed passageway to the out-of-doors at ground level.
      EXTERMINATION. The control and elimination of insects, rodents, vermin,
and other pests by eliminating their harborage places; by removing or making
inaccessible materials that may serve as their food; by poison spraying,
fumigating, trapping, or by any other approved pest elimination methods.
      GARBAGE. The animal or vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking, and consumption of food.
      HABITABLE ROOM. A room which is designed for or may be used for living,
sleeping, eating, or cooking. Storerooms, bathrooms, toilets, closets, halls,
or spaces in attics or spaces in basements are not HABITABLE ROOMS except as
permitted in this chapter.
      HAZARDOUS BUILDING. Any building which because of inadequate maintenance,
dilapidation, physical damage, unsanitary condition, or abandonment,
constitutes a fire hazard or a hazard to public safety or health.
      INFESTATION. The presence within or contiguous to a structure or premises
of insects, rodents, vermin, and other pests.
      INTERIM RENTAL PERMIT. A document issued by the Housing Code Department
authorizing the owner to rent, offer for rent, or allow the occupancy of the
designated dwelling, dwelling unit, or rooming house for a specified term
pending further action. Permits shall be prepared by the Housing Code
Department and shall contain such information as is required by the Director
including a description of the rental unit in question, the expiration date of
the permit and requirements as to application, inspections, and certificates of
compliance.
      LEAD-BASED PAINT. Any paint containing more lead than the level
established by the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission as being the safe
level of lead in residential paint and paint products.
      LET FOR OCCUPANCY or LET. To allow the use of a dwelling unit by any
person or persons with or without remuneration.
      MULTI-FAMILY. More than two dwelling units.
      OCCUPANT. Any person (including owner or agent) living and sleeping in a
dwelling unit or having actual possession of the dwelling or rooming unit.
      OWNER. Any person or agent having a legal or equitable interest in the
property or premises or control over its use or disposition. It shall include
any part-owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint
tenant, or tenant in entirety of the whole or any part of the premises.
      PERSON. Any individual, association, club, society, firm, partnership, or
body corporate or politic.
      PLUMBING or PLUMBING FIXTURE. Water heating facilities, water pipes, gas
pipes, garbage and disposal units, waste laboratories, bathtubs, shower baths,
installed clothes washing machines or other similar equipment, catch basins,
drains, vents, or other similarly supplied fixtures, together with all
connections to water, gas, sewer, or vent lines.
      PREMISES. A plot or parcel of land including any dwelling or accessory
structure thereon.
      PUBLIC NUISANCE. Includes the following:
         (a)   The physical condition, or use of any premises regarded as a
public nuisance at common law.
         (b)   Any physical condition, use or occupancy of any premises or its
appurtenances considered an attractive nuisance to children, including, but not
limited to abandoned wells, shafts, basements, excavations, and unsafe fences
or structures.
         (c)   Any premises which have unsanitary sewerage or plumbing
facilities.
         (d)   Any premises designated as unsafe for human habitation or use.
         (e)   Any premises from which the plumbing, heating, and/or facilities
required in this chapter have been removed, or from which utilities have been
disconnected, destroyed, removed, or rendered ineffective, or the required
precautions against trespassers have not been provided.
         (f)   Any premises which are manifestly capable of being a fire
hazard, or are manifestly unsafe or unsecure as to endanger life, limb, or
property.
         (g)   Any premises which are unsanitary, or which are littered with
rubbish or garbage, or which have an uncontrolled growth of weeds.
         (h)   Any structure or building that is in a state of dilapidation,
deterioration, or decay; damaged by fire to the extent as not to provide
shelter, in danger of collapse or failure and is dangerous to anyone on or near
the premises.
      REMOTE EXITWAY. Exitways to be arranged or constructed as to minimize any
possibility that both exitways may be blocked by any one fire or other
emergency.
      RENOVATION. A building and its facilities made to conform to present day
minimum standards of sanitation, fire, and life safety.
      RENTAL PROPERTY. Any residential unit in a building, dwelling, or rooming
house which provided permanent or transient living facilities and occupied by
tenants on a rental basis.
      ROOMING HOUSE. Any structure containing three or more rooming units, in
which space is let by the owner or operator to persons who are not members of
the family.
      ROOMING UNIT. A dwelling unit which consists of a room or suite of two or
more rooms without facilities for regular cooking, occupied or intended for
occupancy by one or more individuals living in common. Whenever the term
DWELLING UNIT is used in §§
150.035 through
150.090 of this chapter, it shall also mean ROOMING UNIT unless a different
meaning clearly appears in the context.
      RUBBISH. The combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except
garbage, and the term shall include the residue from burning wood, coal, coke,
and other combustible materials, papers, rags, cartons, boxes, wood excelsior,
rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals, mineral
matter, glass, crockery, and dust and other similar materials.
      SMOKE DETECTION DEVICE. A wall- or ceiling-mounted assembly containing an
ionization chamber or photoelectric type of smoke detector, control equipment,
and audible alarm in one unit which detects visible or invisible particles of
combustion and which, upon detection of smoke, activates the alarm; which
device is listed by a nationally recognized laboratory that maintains periodic
inspections of the list equipment where produced, and whose listing states
either that the equipment meets nationally recognized standards or that the
equipment has been tested and found suitable for use in a specified manner.
      SPECIAL INSPECTIONS. Any requested inspection which is not a part of the
city's regular inspection program.
      STRUCTURE. Assembly of materials forming a construction for occupancy or
use, including among others, buildings, stadiums, tents, reviewing stands,
platforms, stagings, observation towers, radio towers, water tanks, trestles,
piers, wharves, open sheds, coal bins, shelters, fences, and display signs.
      TOTER. A garbage/rubbish container with a fixed hinged lid, wheels and a
horizontal handle. The container must meet the approval of the Public Works
Director and is typically 65 to 95 gallons in size.
      VENTILATION. The process of supplying and removing air by natural or
mechanical means to or from any space:
         (a)   Mechanical: ventilation by power-driven devices.
         (b)   Natural: ventilation by opening to outer air, through windows,
skylights, doors, louvers, or stack wind driven devices.
      WORKMANLIKE. Such maintenance and repairs shall be made in a reasonable
and skillful manner.
('71 Code, § 13-2) (Ord. passed 8-2-60; Am. Ord. passed 4-15-80; Am. Ord.
passed 3-16-82; Am. Ord. passed 9-2-86; Am. Ord. passed 10-15-91; Am. Ord.
passed 2-15- 94; Am. Ord. passed 6-21-94; Am. Ord. passed 11-5-03; Am. Ord.
passed 2-7-09; Am. Ord. passed 3-7-17)
§ 150.003 FINDING OF FACT.
   The Board of Mayor and Aldermen finds that there exists in the municipality
dwellings which are unfit for human habitation due to dilapidation, dangerous
defects which are likely to result in fire, accidents, or other calamities,
unhealthy or hazardous or dilapidated conditions.
('71 Code, § 13-3) (Ord. passed 8-2-60)
§ 150.004 EXCEPTIONS TO REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Any dwelling, building, or structure situated within a historic
district established under R.S.A. 31:89-b may be approved by the Board of Mayor
and Aldermen as a special exception, after a public hearing, and the provisions
of this chapter may be waived in their application to such dwelling, building,
or structure in whole or in part or so modified as the Board of Mayor and
Aldermen may specify.
   (B)   Any dwelling, building, or structure which is determined by the Board
of Mayor and Aldermen to have special significance to the public interest as
demonstrated by the property owner may be approved by the Board of Mayor and
Aldermen as a special exception, after a public hearing, and the provisions of
this chapter may be waived in their application to the exterior of such
dwelling, building, or structure in whole or in part or so modified as the
Board of Mayor and Aldermen may specify. Examples of special significance may
include:
      (1)   Exhibiting a specific architectural period style; and/or
      (2)   Listing or eligibility for listing in the National Register of
Historic Places; and/or
      (3)   Any demonstration of special significance which is endorsed by a
recognized authority on historic properties.
   (C)   Should the characteristics relied upon to determine special
significance be removed or substantially altered, any waiver granted thereupon
is subject to recession or modification by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen
after a public hearing and opportunity for the property owner to be heard.
('71 Code, § 13-4) (Ord. passed 5-31-66; Am. Ord. passed 12-1-15)
Statutory reference:
   Buildings within historic district as a special exception, R.S.A. 647:46
GENERAL REGULATIONS
§ 150.015 OVERCROWDING.
   No person shall let to be occupied and no person shall occupy any dwelling
or dwelling unit which is overcrowded. Overcrowding is determined by the
following:
   (A)   No habitable room other than a kitchen or dining alcove, shall contain
less than 65 square feet of floor area, nor shall the least horizontal
dimension of such room be less than seven feet.
   (B)   The total area in all habitable rooms in a dwelling unit shall be such
as to provide at least 65 square feet of floor area per person.
   (C)   Every sleeping room or room used for sleeping purposes shall have at
least 50 square feet of floor area per person. Children under one year of age
shall not be counted, and a child more than one year of age but under ten years
shall be deemed one-half person.
('71 Code, § 13-90) (Ord. passed 4-15-80)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 150.016 FLOOR AREA COMPUTATION.
   In computing floor area under § 150.015 of this subchapter, the space used
for closets or other enclosed spaces and, in the case of rooms with sloping
ceilings, portions of such rooms with less than four feet in height shall be
excluded in computing the area.
('71 Code, § 13-91) (Ord. passed 4-15-80)
§ 150.017 WAIVER.
   The Department, on application from the owner or occupant, may waive the
provisions of § 150.016 of this subchapter for a period not to exceed six
months if he shall determine that there is not suitable and affordable
alternative housing for the occupants in the area and enforcement of the
provisions would work a substantial hardship on the occupants.
('71 Code, § 13-92) (Ord. passed 4-15-80)
§ 150.018 BASEMENT DWELLING UNITS.
   No person shall let to be occupied a room in any cellar or basement for use
as a habitable room unless the following standards are met:
   (A)   The ceiling shall have a clear inner height of at least at least seven
feet for one- and two-family dwellings, seven feet, six inches for all other
buildings, and shall be at least three feet, six inches above the surface of
the street or ground outside of or adjoining the room.
   (B)   The floors and walls shall be waterproof and damp- proof and the room
or rooms shall be well drained and dry.
   (C)   There shall be one or more windows, the combined total sash area of
which shall not be less than eight square feet, or 1/10 of total floor area,
whichever is greater, which windows shall open readily for purposes of
ventilation directly to the outside air, except that an approved method of
mechanical ventilation may be substituted therefor.
   (D)   All basement dwelling units shall have two means of egress.
('71 Code, § 13-93) (Ord. passed 4-15-80; Am. Ord. passed 5-3-22) Penalty, see
§
150.999
§ 150.019 PROHIBITED USES.
   No person shall occupy or let to be occupied any dwelling unit which opens
into a paint shop, paint store, vulcanizing shop, public garage, or any place
where paint, varnishes, lacquers, thinners, gasoline, or petroleum products are
stored. Common walls or ceilings separating such usage from dwelling units
shall have no vent or openings whereby fumes or vapors may pass into the
dwelling unit.
('71 Code, § 13-94) (Ord. passed 4-15-80)
Penalty, see § 150.999
§ 150.020 VENTILATION.
   No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or let to be occupied any dwelling
unit which is improperly ventilated. A dwelling unit is improperly ventilated
unless:
   (A)   Every habitable room shall have a window or windows with a total sash
area equal to at least 1/10 of its floor area opening on a street, alley, yard
or court open to the sky; such window or windows to be so constructed that at
least the top half of the sash area can be opened, except that an approved
method of mechanical ventilation may be substituted therefor.
   (B)   Every bathroom and water closet compartment shall have a window with a
minimum sash area of three square feet or shall be ventilated by a mechanical
means capable of producing a change of air every 12 minutes.
   (C)   Every basement, cellar, and crawl space shall have some means of
ventilation by providing some windows, openings, vents, or mechanical vents.
('71 Code, § 13-95) (Ord. passed 4-15-80)
Penalty, see § 150.999
§ 150.021 ACCESSORY STRUCTURES.
   It shall be the duty of the owner of premises let to be occupied in whole or
in part as a dwelling unit to maintain all accessory structures including
detached garages in good repair and in conformance with the requirements of §§
150.036 through 150.045 of this chapter.
('71 Code, § 13-96) (Ord. passed 4-15-80)
Penalty, see § 150.999
§ 150.022 STORAGE FUEL TANKS.
   It shall be the duty of the owner of premises let to be occupied in whole or
in part as a dwelling unit to insure that all fuel tanks be provided with means
for venting and that such tanks be installed and maintained so as not to be a
hazard to the premises served or surrounding property and conform with the
codes and ordinances of the Planning and Community Development Department and
Fire Prevention Bureau.
('71 Code, § 13-97) (Ord. passed 4-15-80; Am. Ord. passed 2-7-09)  
Penalty, see § 150.999
§ 150.023 PUBLIC NUISANCES.
   All premises shall be maintained free from public nuisances.
('71 Code, § 13-98) (Ord. passed 4-15-80)
Penalty, see § 150.999
MINIMUM STANDARDS
§ 150.035 APPLICABILITY.
   The following subchapter shall be considered minimum standards for use and
occupancy of dwellings under this subchapter, violation of which may result in
the imposition of criminal sanctions on the owners and occupants of dwelling
units. Nothing herein is intended to preclude prosecution under any other
statute, ordinance, or regulation which imposes a higher standard than those
prescribed herein.
('71 Code, § 13-35) (Ord. passed 4-15-80)
Statutory reference:
   Authority to adopt minimum standards, see R.S.A. 48-A:11
§ 150.036 EXTERIOR STRUCTURE.
   No person shall occupy as owner/occupant, or let to another for occupancy as
a dwelling unit, any structure or part thereof unless the entire exterior of
the structure is in compliance with the standards contained in
§§ 150.037 through 150.045 of this subchapter.
('71 Code, § 13-40) (Ord. passed 4-15-80)
Penalty, see § 150.999
§ 150.037 FOUNDATIONS.
   All foundations shall be free of holes and breaks and shall safely support
the structure at all points. All foundation walls shall be kept in good, safe,
sound condition and free of holes, cracks, and breaks. ('71 Code, § 13-41)
(Ord. passed 4-15-80)
Penalty, see § 150.999
§ 150.038 EXTERIOR WALLS.
   All exterior walls and trim shall be free of holes, breaks, loose or rotting
boards or timbers, and other conditions which might admit rain or dampness to
interior portions of the walls or to the occupied spaces of the building. The
exterior surface siding shall be maintained weatherproof and shall be surface
coated to prevent deterioration. All exterior walls and trim shall be kept
painted, treated, sided, or otherwise maintained so as to be substantially
weatherproof and neat in appearance.
('71 Code, § 13-42) (Ord. passed 4-15-80)
Penalty, see § 150.999
§ 150.039 ROOFS.
   The roof shall be structurally sound, weathertight, and have no defects
which might admit rainwater. Water from roofs shall be conveyed so as to
prevent wet floors, walls, ceilings, or a nuisance to adjacent buildings or
overflowing on abutting properties.
('71 Code, § 13-43) (Ord. passed 4-15-80)
Penalty, see § 150.999
§ 150.040 CHIMNEYS, FLUES, CLEANOUT, AND VENTS.
   All chimneys and similar appurtenances or attachments shall be maintained
structurally sound, in good repair and safe to use.
('71 Code, § 13-44) (Ord. passed 4-15-80)
Penalty, see § 150.999
§ 150.041 PORCHES, STAIRS, AND HANDRAILS.
   Every exterior stair, porch, balcony, and all appurtenances attached thereto
shall be structurally sound and no part thereof shall show excessive wear, or
be broken, cracked, or loose. Carpeting or other covering on stairs and porches
shall be maintained in a safe condition. Every flight of stairs which is more
than two risers high shall have at least one handrail, and every open portion
of a stair, porch, landing, or balcony shall have guardrails. Guardrails shall
be firmly fastened and maintained in good condition and new or replacement
guardrails shall comply with the provisions of the Building Code.
('71 Code, § 13-45) (Ord. passed 4-15-80)
Penalty, see § 150.999
§ 150.042 DOORS AND DOORWAYS.
   Every exterior door frame shall have a door and this door shall be
weathertight within its frame. Every exterior door, door hinge, doorknob, and
door latch shall be maintained in good usable condition. Door locks in dwelling
units shall be in good repair and capable of tightly securing the door. Every
door required as an exitway shall be capable of being opened from the inside
easily without the use of a key. All entrance doors of each dwelling unit shall
be equipped with functioning locking devices.
('71 Code, § 13-46) (Ord. passed 4-15-80)
Penalty, see § 150.999
§ 150.043 HATCHWAYS.
   Every hatchway, bulkhead, and exitway shall be so constructed and maintained
as to prevent the entrance of rodents, rain, and surface drainage water into
the structure.
('71 Code, § 13-47) (Ord. passed 4-15-80)
Penalty, see § 150.999
§ 150.044 WINDOWS.
   Every window sash and skylight shall be structurally sound and fit within
its frame and be weathertight so as to prevent passage through it of rain,
snow, wind, or other outside elements. Every window sash shall be fully fitted
with glass, plexiglass, or polycarbonate panes which are without cracks or
holes. Every window other than a fixed window, shall be capable of being held
in the open position and locked in the closed position by window hardware.
('71 Code, § 13-48) (Ord. passed 4-15-80)
Penalty, see § 150.999
§ 150.045 SCREENS AND STORM WINDOWS.
   Every window with openings to outdoor space required for ventilation in
habitable rooms shall be supplied with insect screens and storm windows which
shall be maintained in good repair. This section shall not apply to owner-
occupied dwelling units.
('71 Code, § 13-49) (Ord. passed 4-15-80)
Penalty, see § 150.999
§ 150.046 INTERIOR STRUCTURE.
   No person shall let for occupancy as a dwelling unit any structure or part
thereof unless the entire interior of the structure is in compliance with the
standards contained in §§ 150.047 through 150.051 of this subchapter.
('71 Code, § 13-50) (Ord. passed 4-15-80)
Penalty, see § 150.999
§ 150.047 STRUCTURAL MEMBERS.
   The supporting structural members shall be maintained structurally sound
showing no evidence of deterioration or defects which would render them
inadequate or unsafe.
('71 Code, § 13-51) (Ord. passed 4-15-80)
Penalty, see § 150.999
§ 150.048 DAMPNESS.
   Cellars, basements, and crawl spaces in every structure shall be maintained
free from repeated dampness or standing water.
('71 Code, § 13-52) (Ord. passed 4-15-80)
Penalty, see § 150.999
§ 150.049 INDOOR STAIRS AND HANDRAILS.
   Interior stairs shall be maintained structurally sound, and no part thereof
shall show excessive wear or be broken, warped, cracked or loose. Every flight
of stairs which is more than two risers high shall have at least one handrail,
and every open portion of a stair, porch, landing, or balcony shall have
guardrails as safety requires. Guardrails shall be firmly fastened and
maintained in good and safe condition and new or replacement guardrails shall
comply with the provisions of the building code.
('71 Code, § 13-53) (Ord. passed 4-15-80)
Penalty, see § 150.999
Cross-reference:
   Adoption of Building Code, see § 151.01
§ 150.050 INTERIOR SURFACES.
   Floors, walls, windows, doors, ceilings, and all other interior surfaces
shall be maintained in sound, clean, and sanitary condition free of peeling
paint, cracked or loose plaster, decayed wood, or other defective surface
conditions.
('71 Code, § 13-54) (Ord. passed 4-15-80)
Penalty, see § 150.999
§ 150.051 FLOOR COVERINGS.
   Carpeting, linoleum, or other covering on stairs and floors shall be
maintained in a safe condition.
('71 Code, § 13-55) (Ord. passed 4-15-80)
Penalty, see § 150.999
MAINTENANCE OF PREMISES
§ 150.060 SANITATION.
   It shall be the duty of the owner of any structure or part thereof let for
occupancy as a dwelling unit to maintain all exterior property areas in a clean
and sanitary condition free from any accumulation of rubbish and garbage.
('71 Code, § 13-60) (Ord. passed 4-15-80)
Penalty, see § 150.999
§ 150.061 SIDEWALKS AND OTHER AREAS.
   It shall be the duty of the owner of any structure or part thereof let for
occupancy as a dwelling unit to maintain all sidewalks, walkways, steps, and
driveways in a safe condition and free of snow, ice, and other debris, hazards,
or obstructions.
('71 Code, § 13-61) (Ord. passed 4-15-80)
Penalty, see § 150.999
§ 150.062 COMMON AREAS; SANITATION.
   It shall be the duty of the owner of any structure or part thereof let for
occupancy as a dwelling unit to maintain all common areas of the structure in a
clean and sanitary condition.
('71 Code, § 13-62) (Ord. passed 4-15-80)
Penalty, see § 150.999
§ 150.063 WASTE STORAGE FACILITIES.
   (A)   The owner of any structure, or part thereof, let for occupancy as a
dwelling unit shall supply each dwelling unit with rigid plastic or metal
containers, with covers, of sufficient volume to provide storage for all
rubbish and garbage generated within the dwelling unit. At least one such
container shall be provided for each dwelling unit.
   (B)   When they are not placed at the right- of-way for collection, all
waste storage containers shall be stored on the property to which they belong
in a manner that will prevent their being blown or carried about by the
elements and minimize the likelihood that they will be vandalized. When there
is a repeated violation of this section, the Department may establish specific
requirements reasonably calculated to correct the condition. Such requirements
may include, but are not limited to, proper container storage arrangements and
numbering or other identification of containers.
   (C)   The owner(s) of any multi-family dwelling shall supply a dumpster or
toters sufficient to provide storage for all rubbish and garbage generated
within the multi-family dwelling. Dumpsters will not be emptied or serviced by
the Manchester Highway Department or public works.
('71 Code, § 13-63) (Ord. passed 4-15-80; Am. Ord. passed 6-21-94; Am. Ord.
passed 11-5-03)
Penalty, see § 150.999
§ 150.064 WASTE STORAGE.
   It shall be the responsibility of the occupants of any dwelling unit to
properly store all rubbish and garbage in the containers required in this
subchapter. Rubbish or garbage shall not be allowed to accumulate in public
halls, stairways, or other means of egress. All halls, passages, and stairways
shall be kept free from encumbrances or obstructions of any kind. ('71 Code, §
13-64) (Ord. passed 4-15-80)
Penalty, see § 150.999
§ 150.065 SANITATION; DWELLING UNITS.
   It shall be the duty of the occupant of any dwelling or rooming unit to
maintain the unit and parts appurtenant thereto over which he has control in a
clean, safe, and sanitary condition.
('71 Code, § 13-65) (Ord. passed 4-15-80)
Penalty, see § 150.999
§ 150.066 PLUMBING FIXTURES.
   The occupant shall be responsible for the cleanliness and sanitation of all
plumbing fixtures used by his household. No occupant shall deposit material in
any fixture which will result in stoppage or drainage of the fixture. Stoppages
deemed to be due to improper use or neglect shall be corrected by the occupant,
but nothing in this section shall be construed to exempt the owner or his agent
from making plumbing repairs as required in section § 150.084 of this chapter.
('71 Code, § 13-66) (Ord. passed 4-15-80)
Penalty, see § 150.999
§ 150.067 INSECTS, RODENTS, VERMIN AND OTHER PESTS.
   All structures shall be kept free from infestation by insects, rodents,
vermin and other pests. All yards and other exterior areas shall be kept free
from infestation by rodents and other harmful pests that endanger public
health, safety, and welfare. When such infestations are found on a premises,
they shall be promptly treated by means of an accepted process by a licensed
commercial pest control applicator. After pest remediation, all property
precautions shall be taken to prevent re-infestation.
('71 Code, § 13-67) (Ord. passed 4-15-80; Am. Ord. passed 2-3-15; Am. Ord.
passed 12-20-22) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.068 RESPONSIBILITY FOR INFESTATION CONTROL.
   (A)   Owner. The owner of any premises shall be responsible for pest
remediation within those premises, including all structures within those
premises.
   (B)   Single occupant. The occupant of premises, including a one-family
dwelling, shall be responsible for pest remediation on those premises,
including the dwelling.
   (C)   Multiple occupancy. The owner of a premises, including a structure
containing two or more dwelling units, a multiple occupancy, or a rooming
house, shall be responsible for pest remediation in all areas of those
premises, including the structure and exterior property. If infestation is
caused by failure of the occupant to prevent such infestation in the area of
the premises occupied by that occupant, the occupant and the owner shall be
responsible for pest remediation consistent with NH HB 482 (2013).
   (D)   Occupant. The occupant of any premises shall be responsible for the
continued pest-free condition of the premises, pursuant to §
150.067 and consistent with the guidelines set forth by a NH-licensed
commercial pesticide applicator.
   (E)   Exception. Where the infestations of the premises are caused by
defects in a structure, the owner shall be responsible for pest remediation.
('71 Code, § 13-68) (Ord. passed 4-15-80; Am. Ord. passed 2-3-15; Am. Ord.
passed 12-20-22) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.069 LEAD BASED PAINT.
   All interior and exterior surfaces of dwellings, dwelling units, and rooming
units shall be free of loose or flaking paint. All newly applied paint must
meet the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission Standards as being safe in
accordance with the provisions of the Board of Health Department.
('71 Code, § 13-69) (Ord. passed 4-15-80)
Penalty, see § 150.999
REQUIRED FACILITIES
§ 150.080 BASIC FACILITIES REQUIRED.
   No person shall occupy as owner/occupant or let to another for occupancy any
dwelling, dwelling unit, or rooming unit which does not comply with the
requirements contained in this subchapter.
('71 Code, § 13-70) (Ord. passed 4-15-80)
Penalty, see § 150.999
§ 150.081 SANITARY FACILITIES.
   The following minimum sanitary facilities shall be supplied and maintained
in sanitary, safe, and working condition:
   (A)   Water closet and lavatory. Every dwelling unit shall contain within
its walls a room separate from habitable rooms, which affords privacy and a
water closet supplied with cold running water. Where possible the lavatory must
be located in the same room as the water closet, however, if this is not
practicable, it shall be located in close proximity to a door leading directly
into the room in which the water closet is located. The lavatory shall be
supplied with hot and cold running water.
   (B)   Bathtub or shower. Every dwelling unit shall contain a room which
affords privacy to a person in the room and which is equipped with a bathtub or
shower supplied with hot and cold running water.
   (C)   Kitchen sink. Every dwelling unit shall contain a kitchen sink apart
from the lavatory which shall be supplied with hot and cold running water.
   (D)   Sanitary facilities, rooming houses. At least one water closet,
lavatory, and bathtub or shower properly connected to an approved water and
sewer system and in good working condition, shall be provided for each four
rooms within a rooming house wherever the facilities are shared. All such
facilities shall be located within the rooming house in a room or rooms which
are accessible from a common hall, passageway, or a room used in common
(lounge) without going outside the rooming house or passing through another
dwelling unit or rooming unit therein and shall be not more than one story
removed from any persons sharing such facilities. A ceiling height of six and
two-thirds feet in all parts where a person has to stand. Every lavatory,
bathtub, or shower shall be supplied with hot and cold running water at all
times. Such facilities shall not be located in a cellar.
('71 Code, § 13-71) (Ord. passed 4-15-80)
Penalty, see § 150.999
§ 150.082 WATER AND SEWER SYSTEM.
   Every kitchen sink, lavatory basin, bathtub or shower, and water closet
required under the provisions hereof shall be properly connected to either a
public water and sewer system or to an approved private water or sewer system.
All sinks, lavatories, bathtubs and showers shall be supplied with hot and cold
running water.
('71 Code, § 13-72) (Ord. passed 4-15-80)
Penalty, see § 150.999
§ 150.083 WATER HEATING FACILITIES.
   Every dwelling unit shall be supplied with water heating facilities which
are installed, maintained, and connected with hot water lines to the fixtures
required in this subchapter to be supplied with hot water. Water heating
facilities shall be capable of heating water to such a temperature as to permit
an adequate amount of water to be drawn from every required kitchen sink,
lavatory basin, bathtub, shower, and laundry facility at a temperature of not
less than 130° F.
('71 Code, § 13-73) (Ord. passed 4-15-80)
Penalty, see § 150.999
§ 150.084 PLUMBING FIXTURES; INSTALLATION AND CONNECTION.
   All plumbing fixtures, vents, drains, and water supply lines shall be
properly installed, connected, and maintained in working order, shall be kept
free from obstructions, leaks, and defects and shall be capable of performing
the functions for which they were designed.
('71 Code, § 13-74) (Ord. passed 4-15-80)
Penalty, see § 150.999
§ 150.085 HEATING FACILITIES.
   Every dwelling and dwelling unit shall have heat equipment and appurtenances
which are properly installed, and are maintained in safe and good working
condition and are capable of safely and adequately heating all habitable rooms,
bathrooms, and water closet compartments located therein to a temperature of at
least 70° F. at 48 inches above floor level under ordinary winter conditions.
When the landlord has agreed to provide heat, every room shall be maintained at
a minimum of 68° F. in the daytime and 62° F. at night, or whatever the Federal
Energy Commission requires.
('71 Code, § 13-75) (Ord. passed 4-15-80)
Penalty, see § 150.999
§ 150.086 ELECTRICAL SERVICE AND OUTLETS.
   Every dwelling unit shall be supplied with electric service, outlets and
fixtures installed and maintained in accordance with the provisions of the
electrical code for the city. The following electric outlets are required:
   (A)   Every habitable room of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall contain at
least two separate and remote outlets, one of which may be a ceiling or wall-
type electric light fixture.
   (B)   In kitchens, three separate and remote wall-type outlets and one
ceiling or wall-type electric light fixture shall be provided.
   (C)   Every water closet compartment, bathroom, laundry room, or furnace
room shall contain at least one electric light fixture.
   (D)   In addition to the electric light fixture in every bathroom and
laundry room there shall be provided at least one electric outlet.
   (E)   Extension cords. Temporary wiring shall not be used to fulfill the
electrical service and facilities required by this section. When extension
cords are used, they shall run directly from portable electrical fixtures to
convenient outlets. Extension cords shall not lie under rugs or other floor
coverings, nor extend through doorways, transoms, or similar openings.
   (F)   No dwelling unit shall be crosswired unless the electric service for
that unit is paid for by the building owner. The following procedures shall
apply when a tenant reasonably suspects that his or her dwelling unit is
crosswired:
      (1)   The tenant, at his or her own expense, shall hire a licensed
electrician to inspect the premises for such crosswiring. The building owner
shall be notified of this inspection at least five working days in advance and
shall not unreasonably refuse to restrict access to any portions of the
building which must be inspected for the electrician to make an accurate
determination of crosswiring.
      (2)   If the electrician determines that cross-wiring exists, a written
report clearly describing the crosswiring shall be provided to the tenant. The
tenant may file a copy of the report with the Department.
      (3)   If a report of crosswiring has been filed with the Department
within the preceding year, a subsequent tenant of the same dwelling unit may
request that the Department notify the building owner of a violation of this
section provided that the crosswiring described in the report was not corrected
by rewiring and the tenant demonstrates that he or she is paying for the
dwelling unit electrical service.
      (4)   Upon receipt of an electrician's report of crosswiring, the
Department shall give the building owner notice of a violation of this section.
      (5)   The building owner shall correct the violation by providing
evidence that the crosswiring has been eliminated by rewiring or by
demonstrating that he or she has assumed responsibility for payment of the
entire cost of the affected unit's electric service.
('71 Code, § 13-76) (Ord. passed 4-15-80; Am. Ord. passed 2-15-94)
Penalty, see § 150.999
§ 150.087 COMMON HALLWAYS AND STAIRWAYS.
   Every common hallway and stairway shall be supplied with a lighting system
which produces illumination sufficient to protect the safety of all persons
using those facilities. Such lighting systems shall either be kept in
continuous operation or shall be controlled by switches which are conveniently
located for all persons who might use the stairway or hallway. ('71 Code, § 13-
77) (Ord. passed 4-15-80)
Penalty, see § 150.999
§ 150.088 FACILITIES, EQUIPMENT, AND APPLIANCES.
   All facilities, equipment, and building space and parts in every building
and structure shall be constructed and maintained so as to properly and safely
perform their intended functions. It shall be the duty of the owner to maintain
in good and operable condition such kitchen appliances as are furnished by the
owner.
('71 Code, § 13-78) (Ord. passed 4-15-80)
Penalty, see § 150.999
§ 150.089 EXITWAYS.
   (A)   Two exitways required. Every dwelling unit or rooming unit shall have
access to two exitways or stairways leading to the exterior at ground level.
Exitways from any one dwelling unit shall not pass through any other such units
or bathrooms or toilet rooms. Exitways shall be as remote from each other as is
practicable. Access to the two required exits or stairs may be accomplished
through a common corridor or hallway, providing such corridor or hallway has
direct access to both exits. The use of ladders, ropes, or such devices as
substitutes for stairs are prohibited.
   (B)   Exception. A single exitway shall be permitted in dwelling units
within a newly constructed building or within a renovated existing building
that are constructed, inspected and issued a certificate of occupancy in
accordance with the current, adopted version (as defined by the State of New
Hampshire) of NEPA 101 — Life Safety Code and the current, adopted version of
the Manchester Building Code.
('71 Code, § 13-79) (Ord. passed 4-15-80; Am. Ord. passed 5-3-22) Penalty, see
§
150.999
§ 150.090 SMOKE DETECTION DEVICES.
   (A)   Each dwelling unit contained in a multi-unit dwelling shall be
equipped with smoke detection devices. In addition, these devices shall also be
located on every floor level of each common stairway and each common hallway,
including basements.
   (B)   Each single-family dwelling shall be equipped with smoke detection
device outside of each separate sleeping area in the immediate vicinity of the
bedrooms and on each story of the single-family dwelling including basements.
   (C)   Each rental unit in a building or single-family dwelling which
provides permanent or transient living facilities for one or more persons,
which is occupied by tenants on a rental basis shall be equipped with at least
one smoke detection device.
   (D)   All buildings four stories or more in height, or with 12 or more
dwelling units shall comply with the provisions of the Life Safety Code
sections on detection, alarm, and communication. These alarm systems shall be
installed and maintained in accordance with the Fire Department rules and
regulations.
   (E)   All smoke detection devices, installed in all multi-unit dwellings
after July 1, 1984 shall be powered by the house electrical current.
('71 Code, § 13-80) (Ord. passed 4-15-80; Am. Ord. passed 11-7-85)
Penalty, see § 150.999
§ 150.091 POSTING OF EMERGENCY CONTACT INFORMATION.
   (A)   All dwelling or rooming units subject to inspections under this
chapter shall have posted in a regularly accessible common area written
notification containing the following:
      (1)   The name, address and telephone number of the owner or his/her
agent. If the owner or his/her agent docs not reside in New Hampshire and
within 25 miles of the subject structure, the owner must post, in addition to
his/her agent's name, the name, address and telephone number of a person to
contact in the case of an emergency who resides in New Hampshire and within 25
miles of the structure.
      (2)   A statement noting that disputes regarding building code and/or
housing standards should first be addressed by the property owner(s) and tenant
(s) before contacting the Department of Planning and Community Development.
      (3)   The address, telephone number and website address of the code
enforcement division at the Department of Planning and Community Development.
   (B)   Transfer of ownership. Upon transfer of ownership, the new owner shall
comply with the posting or filing of emergency and Department of Building and
Planning information within 24 hours of transfer.
   (C)   Unattended emergency numbers. Whenever emergency numbers are left
unattended for a period of 24 hours or longer, another name and emergency
number shall be provided in accordance with this section.
   (D)   Violations. The Department of Planning and Community Development may
issue warnings or citations for violation of this section as provided for in §§
150.142 and
150.999.
(Ord. passed 3-7-17)
CERTIFICATES OF COMPLIANCE
§ 150.100 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for anyone to operate a rooming house or to rent, offer
for rent, or allow any person to occupy any dwelling, dwelling unit, or
condominium unit without a certificate of compliance, interim rental permit, or
transfer permit unless the building is exempt pursuant to this subchapter.
('71 Code, § 13-200) (Ord. passed 10-15-91)
Penalty, see § 150.999
§ 150.101 APPLICATION OF SUBCHAPTER; EXCEPTION.
   (A)   Except as provided herein this subchapter shall apply to all buildings
containing rental property. Structures having no more than four dwelling units
shall not be required to obtain a certificate of compliance provided that:
      (1)   One of the building dwelling units constitutes the principal
residence of the owner; and
      (2)   It has been this owner's principal residence continuously since
September 2, 1986.
   (B)   Owners of structures not required to have a certificate of compliance
shall file the initial application without fee. This exemption shall terminate
automatically upon the sale or other transfer of the property.
('71 Code, § 13-201) (Ord. passed 10-15-91)
§ 150.102 APPLICATION FOR CERTIFICATE.
   The owners of each building containing rental property shall file a
completed application for a certificate of compliance, including the fee
required by this subchapter, with the Department. A separate application shall
be filed for each building containing dwelling or rooming units. Each
condominium unit shall require a separate application. Application forms shall
be prepared by the Department and shall contain such information as is required
by the Department. Application forms shall be available at Department offices
and at the office of the City Clerk.
('71 Code, § 13-202) (Ord. passed 10-15-91)
§ 150.103 INTERIM RENTAL PERMIT.
   The Department shall issue an interim rental permit for each building
containing dwelling or rooming units and each condominium unit for which an
application has been received unless that building is exempt, as provided
herein.
('71 Code, § 13-203) (Ord. passed 10-15-91)
§ 150.104 INSPECTION OF PREMISES.
   Following receipt of an application for a certificate of compliance, an
inspection of that property shall be conducted to determine compliance with the
provisions of this chapter. After the inspection, the Department shall:
   (A)   Issue a certificate of compliance if the premises comply with all
provisions of this chapter; or
   (B)   Issue a violation notice if the premises do not comply with all
provisions of this chapter. The notice shall list all violations, order their
correction within a specified time period, establish reinspection requirements
and include such other items and conditions as the Department deems
appropriate.
('71 Code, § 13-204) (Ord. passed 10-15-91)
§ 150.105 REINSPECTION WHERE VIOLATIONS FOUND.
   On or before the date specified in a violation notice, the owner shall cause
the correction of all violations. If, on reinspection, the premises are found
to comply with all provisions of this chapter, a certificate of compliance
shall be issued. If, on reinspection, the premises still do not comply with all
provisions of this chapter, the Department may initiate such enforcement
action, including but not limited to revocation of the interim rental permit,
as he deems appropriate.
('71 Code, § 13-205) (Ord. passed 10-15-91)
§ 150.106 CERTIFICATES OF COMPLIANCE; TERM AND RENEWAL.
   Certificates of compliance shall be issued for a term of three years. The
expiration date shall be specified in the certificate and the owner shall apply
for a renewal of the certificate of compliance at least 30 days prior to the
expiration date.
('71 Code, § 13-206) (Ord. passed 10-15-91)
§ 150.107 EXTENSION OF TERM.
   If the Director of Planning and Community Development finds that
circumstances exist which make it impossible for the Department to conduct
substantially all of the required compliance inspections during an established
term, it may extend the term of existing certificates of compliance. Such
extensions shall be for a period not to exceed three years and shall be
applicable to a particular building only if the owner thereof has applied for
and received a certificate showing the extended expiration date. The Director
of Planning and Community Development may establish such additional terms and
conditions as are appropriate and necessary. The Director of Planning and
Community Development shall notify the Board of Mayor and Aldermen of any
extensions including the reasons therefore.
('71 Code, § 13-207) (Ord. passed 10-15-91; Am. Ord. passed 2-7-09)
§ 150.108 NEWLY CONSTRUCTED RENTAL PROPERTY.
   In the case of newly constructed rental property for which a certificate of
occupancy has been issued by the Planning and Community Development Department,
the following procedures shall apply. The Planning and Community Development
Department shall notify the owner of the requirements of this subchapter. An
application for a certificate of compliance shall be filed no later than 30
days from such notification. No inspection shall be required and no fee shall
be charged for the issuance of the certificate of compliance.
('71 Code, § 13-208) (Ord. passed 10-15-91; Am. Ord. passed 2-7-09)
§ 150.109 TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP.
   (A)   No rental property being rented, offered for rent, or otherwise
occupied shall be bought or sold without the property having a certificate of
compliance or transfer permit. This section shall not apply to real estate
mortgages but shall apply to foreclosure sales.
   (B)   No rental property being rented, offered for rent, or otherwise
occupied under a certificate of compliance shall be bought, sold, or otherwise
transferred without an application for assignment of certificate of compliance,
including the fee, required by this subchapter, having first been filed with
the Department.
   (C)   Application forms shall be available at the Department offices and at
the office of the City Clerk. A separate application shall be required for each
dwelling, dwelling unit, condominium unit, or rooming house. Such certificates
expire on the date that the previous certificate would have expired.
('71 Code, § 13-209) (Ord. passed 10-15-91)
§ 150.110 TRANSFER PERMITS.
   (A)   The Department may, in his discretion, issue a transfer permit, in
lieu of a certificate of compliance pursuant to §
150.109(A) of this subchapter. Transfer permits shall contain such reasonable
terms and conditions as the Department deems proper and may be issued in
circumstances such as the following:
      (1)   In the case of a backlog of applications for certificate of
compliance such as to result in unreasonable delay in transferring ownership;
      (2)   In the case of mortgage foreclosures, deeds in lieu of mortgage
foreclosures, bankruptcy, or other distress sales;
      (3)   In other cases where the Department deems that good cause exists
for the issuance of a transfer permit and such does not adversely affect the
objectives of this chapter.
   (B)   Applications for transfer permits shall be on forms prepared by the
Department, shall contain such information as is required by the Department and
shall ordinarily be signed by all sellers and buyers.
('71 Code, § 13-210) (Ord. passed 10-15-91; Am. Ord. passed 2-7-09)
§ 150.111 RENTAL ASSISTANCE.
   No owner of rental property with respect to which rental assistance is
provided by any city, county, or state agency shall rent the same without
applying for a certificate of compliance.
('71 Code, § 13-211) (Ord. passed 10-15-91; Am. Ord. passed 2-7-09)
Penalty, see § 150.999
§ 150.112 PUBLIC RECORDS.
   All applications, permits, certificates, or other documents kept or
maintained by the Department pursuant to this subchapter are public records and
are available for inspection during regular business hours.
('71 Code, § 13-212) (Ord. passed 10-15-91)
§ 150.113 SPECIAL INSPECTIONS.
   On request of owners, prospective purchasers, real estate brokers, financial
institutions, housing agencies, and others with a legitimate interest therein,
the Department may inspect or reinspect rental property other than as required
in this subchapter. Certificates of compliance shall be issued on such terms as
the Department determines to be proper.
('71 Code, § 13-213) (Ord. passed 10-15-91)
§ 150.114 FEES; EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   The following fees shall be charged by the Department.
      (1)   Application - $25 per dwelling unit or rooming unit as part of each
application for a certificate of compliance.
      (2)   Inspection.
         (a)   Dwelling unit: $50 per unit for each inspection to determine
compliance.
         (b)   Rooming unit: $25 per room for each inspection to determine
compliance.
      (3)   Reinspection. For reinspection of a building:
         (a)   First reinspection - no charge.
         (b)   Second and subsequent reinspections - $50.
         (c)   In addition, after a second reinspection, the fee shall increase
by $20 for each subsequent reinspection.
      (4)   Unaccompanied inspection or reinspection - $100 for each inspection
or reinspection at which a building owner or his representative is not present
unless such arrangement has been agreed to in advance.
      (5)   Transfer of ownership - $50 per certificate to assign a certificate
of compliance to a new owner.
      (6)   Replacement of certificate and permit - $50 per document for
replacing an existing certificate of compliance, interim rental permit, or
transfer permit.
      (7)   Transfer permit. Each application for a transfer permit:
         (a)   One to four dwelling or rooming units - $250.
         (b)   Five to eight dwelling or rooming units - $500.
         (c)   In addition, each unit in excess of eight units shall be charged
at the rate of $50 per unit.
      (8)   Special inspection. A minimum of $200 for each inspection and $50
per dwelling unit or rooming unit for each additional unit after the fourth
such unit.
      (9)   Extended terms - $100 per certificate to extend the expiration date
of a certificate. ('71 Code, § 13-214)
   (B)   Exemptions. No fee shall be charged under this subchapter for any
residential rental property that is owned by the state, the county, the city,
the City Housing and Redevelopment Authority, or any agency or facility
licensed by the state. Further, no fee shall be charged for student
dormitories, homes for the elderly, fraternal, charitable, or other nonprofit
organizations which are inspected pursuant to the requirements of the U.S.
Department of Housing and Urban Development or state agencies. ('71 Code, § 13-
215)
(Ord. passed 10-15-91; Am. Ord. passed 5-5-92; Am. Ord. passed 6-27-94; Am.
Ord. passed 10-7-97; Am. Ord. passed 10-17-06; Am. Ord. passed 9-2-14)
HOUSING COUNCIL
§ 150.125 [RESERVED].
   (Previous section repealed on 2-7-09)
§ 150.126 [RESERVED].
   (Previous section repealed on 2-7-09)
§ 150.127 [RESERVED].
   (Previous section repealed on 2-7-09)
§ 150.128 [RESERVED].
   (Previous section repealed on 2-7-09)
§ 150.129 [RESERVED].
   (Previous section repealed on 2-7-09)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 150.140 INSPECTION.
   The Director of Planning and Community Development shall direct his
attention to dwellings where from citizen complaints or exterior inspection he
has reasonable cause to believe there are housing code violations present. In
addition, there shall be systematic inspection of all other dwellings.
('71 Code, § 13-100) (Ord. passed 4-15-80; Am. Ord. passed 2-7-09)
§ 150.141 RESPONSIBILITY OF PERSONS.
   No person shall occupy as owner/occupant or let for occupancy any structure
or portion thereof unless the entire premises are in compliance with the
standards established in this chapter except as certain sections of this
chapter may otherwise delegate responsibility.
('71 Code, § 13-101) (Ord. passed 4-15-80)
Penalty, see § 150.999
§ 150.142 NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
   Whenever the Department determines that there has been or is a violation, or
that there are reasonable grounds to believe that there has been or is a
violation of any provision of this chapter, he may give or cause to be given
notice of such violation to the person or persons responsible therefor.
('71 Code, § 13-102) (Ord. passed 4-15-80)
§ 150.143 PLANNING AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT; POWERS.
   (A)   The Planning and Community Development Department and its delegated
officers shall exercise the powers that may be necessary or convenient to carry
out and effectuate the purposes and provisions of this chapter, including the
following powers in addition to others herein granted:
      (1)   To investigate the dwelling conditions in the municipality in order
to determine which dwellings therein are unfit for human habitation.
      (2)   To administer affirmations, examine witnesses, and receive
evidence.
      (3)   To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations,
provided that such entries shall be made in such manner as to cause the least
possible inconvenience to the persons in possession, and to obtain an order for
this purpose from a court of competent jurisdiction in the event entry is
denied or resisted.
      (4)   To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents, and
employees as are deemed necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter.
      (5)   To delegate any of its functions under this chapter to the officers
that it may designate. ('71 Code, § 13-15) (Ord. passed 8-2-60; Am. Ord. passed
3-19-68; Am. Ord. passed 2-7-09)
   (B)   The following positions within the Planning and Community Development
Department are hereby abolished:
      (1)   Account Clerk
      (2)   Clerk Typist III
      (3)   Housing Code Administrator
      (4)   Housing Code Director
      (5)   Housing Inspectors (5 positions)
(Ord. passed 7-1-94)
Statutory reference:
   Authority of city to confer power upon housing code department, see R.S.A.
48-A:8
§ 150.144 GROUNDS FOR FINDING UNFITNESS.
   (A)   The Planning and Community Development Department may determine that a
dwelling is unfit for human habitation if it finds that conditions exist in the
dwelling which are unusually, abnormally, or unreasonably dangerous or
injurious to the health or safety of the occupants of the dwelling, the
occupants of neighboring dwellings or other residents of the municipality.
   (B)   Such conditions may include the following:
      (1)   Defects which increase beyond normal the hazards of fire, accident,
or other calamities.
      (2)   Lack of reasonable adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary
facilities.
      (3)   Dilapidation, disrepair, dangerous structural defects.
      (4)   Uncleanliness.
      (5)   Overcrowding.
      (6)   Inadequate ingress and egress.
      (7)   Inadequate drainage.
      (8)   Any violation of other health, fire, or safety regulations.
(R.S.A. 48-A:7) ('71 Code, § 13-16) (Ord. passed 8-2-60; Am. Ord. passed 2-7-
09)
§ 150.145 IMMUNITY OF PERSONNEL.
   No officer or employee charged with the enforcement of this chapter and
acting for the city in the discharge of his duties shall render himself
personally liable for any damage that may accrue to any person or property as a
result of his acts in the discharge of his duties. Any suit brought against any
officer or employee because of any act performed by him under the provisions of
this chapter shall be defended by the City Solicitor until the final
determination of the proceedings therein.
('71 Code, § 13-17) (Ord. passed 8-2-60)
§ 150.146 COMPLAINT; NOTICE; HEARING.
   Whenever a petition is filed with the Planning and Community Development
Department by at least ten residents of the municipality charging that any
dwelling is unfit for human habitation or whenever it appears to the Department
by inspection that any dwelling is unfit for human habitation, it shall, if
preliminary investigation discloses a basis for such charges, issue and cause
to be served upon the owner, every mortgagee of record and all parties in
interest in such dwelling (including persons in possession) a complaint stating
the charges in that respect. If the person to be served resides outside the
state, service may be made upon him by registered mail; and if there are any
unascertained persons having an interest in said dwelling, notice may be given
them by publication in a newspaper having general circulation in the
municipality, such publication to be at least ten days before the date set for
the hearing. Such complaint shall contain a notice that a hearing will be held
before the Planning and Community Development Department at a place therein
fixed not less than ten days or more than 30 days after the serving of said
complaint; that the owner, mortgagee, and parties in interest shall be given
the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person, or
otherwise, and give testimony at the place and time fixed in the complaint; and
that the rules of evidence prevailing in courts of law or equity shall not be
controlling in hearings before the Planning and Community Development
Department.
(R.S.A. 48-A:3(II)) ('71 Code, § 13-18) (Ord. passed 8-2-60; Am. Ord. passed 2-
7-09)
§ 150.147 DEPARTMENT ORDER AFTER HEARING.
   If, after such notice, and hearing, the Planning and Community Development
Department determines according to the standards prescribed in this chapter
that the dwelling under consideration is unfit for human habitation, it shall
state in writing its findings of fact in support of such determination and
shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner thereof an order, which, if
the repair, alteration or improvement of the dwelling can be made at a
reasonable cost in relation to the value of the dwelling and the ability of the
owner to assume such cost, requires the owner, within the time specified in the
order, to repair, alter, or improve such dwelling to render it fit for human
habitation or to vacate and close the dwelling as a human habitation; or if the
repair, alteration or improvement of the dwelling cannot be made at a
reasonable cost in relation to the value of the dwelling and the ability of the
owner to assume such cost, requires the owner, within the time specified in the
order, to remove or demolish such dwelling.
(R.S.A. 48-A:3(III)) ('71 Code, § 13-19) (Ord. passed 8-2-60; Am. Ord. passed
2-7-09)
§ 150.148 APPEALS FROM PLANNING AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT ORDERS.
   (A)   If an owner is aggrieved by an order of the Planning and Community
Development Department made pursuant to §
150.147 hereof, he may appeal to the Board of Mayor and Aldermen.
   (B)   The Board of Mayor and Aldermen shall hold a public hearing upon the
appeal, due notice of the hearing having first been given to the Housing Code
Department and to the owner.
   (C)   The Board of Mayor and Aldermen may affirm or revoke the order of the
Housing Code Department or they may modify it in accordance with their
findings. If they shall affirm or modify the order, the Housing Code Department
shall proceed to enforce the order as affirmed or so modified, in the manner
prescribed in §
150.149. If the Board of Mayor and Aldermen shall revoke said order, the
proceedings shall be terminated.
(R.S.A. 48-A:3(IV)) ('71 Code, § 13-20) (Ord. passed 8-2-60; Am. Ord. passed 2-
7-09)
§ 150.149 COURT HEARING.
   (A)   If the owner fails to comply with an order, made pursuant to the
provisions of §
150.147 hereof, to repair, alter, improve, or to vacate and close the dwelling,
or to remove or demolish the dwelling, the Planning and Community Development
Department may file a petition in the Superior Court in which it shall set
forth the charges issued pursuant to §
150.146, as well as any other allegations bearing upon the unfitness of the
dwelling for human habitation.
   (B)   The court shall thereupon direct notice to be given all parties having
an interest in said dwelling, including mortgagees and persons in possession
thereof. Such notice shall be given, where practicable, by personal service,
except that if the person to be served resides outside the state, service may
be made upon him by registered mail: and if there are any unascertained persons
having an interest in said dwelling, notice may be given them by publication of
the petition in a newspaper having general circulation in the municipality,
such publication to be at least ten days before the date set for the hearing.
   (C)   The court shall set a date for hearing such charges and additional
allegations.
   (D)   Upon hearing, the matter shall be treated as de novo, and the court
shall hear such pertinent evidence concerning the fitness of the dwelling for
human habitation as may be relevant.
(R.S.A. 48-A:4) ('71 Code, § 13-21) (Ord. passed 8-2-60; Am. Ord. passed 2-7-
09)
§ 150.150 COURT ORDER.
   (A)   The court shall as soon as practicable issue its order upon the
petition; and if the court finds the dwelling complained against is unfit for
human habitation due to any of the causes or conditions enumerated in §
150.144(B), such order shall direct the Planning and Community Development
Department to repair, alter, or improve such dwelling to render it fit for
human habitation if such repair, alteration, or improvement can be made at a
reasonable cost in relation to the value of the dwelling and the ability of the
owner to assume such cost; or if the repair, alteration or improvement of said
dwelling cannot be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the value of the
dwelling and the ability of the owner to assume such cost, to remove or
demolish such dwelling.
   (B)   If the court shall find in favor of the owner, it shall award to him
his reasonable costs and expenses, including counsel fees, all as determined by
the court, incurred by him in his defense of the action in the Superior Court.
(R.S.A. 48-A:5) ('71 Code, § 13-22) (Ord. passed 8-2-60; Am. Ord. passed 2-7-
09)
§ 150.151 LIEN.
   (A)   Whenever the Planning and Community Development Department shall incur
cost for the repair, alteration, improvement, vacating or closing, or for the
removal or demolition of a dwelling, pursuant to an order of the Superior
Court, the amount of such costs shall be a lien against the real property which
such cost was incurred and such lien, including as part thereof upon allowance
of his costs all necessary attorney's fees, may be foreclosed upon order of the
Superior Court made pursuant to a petition for that purpose filed in said
court. Such lien shall be subordinate to mortgages of record made before the
institution of proceedings under this section. Notice of the lien shall be
filed with the register of deeds for the county in which the real estate is
situated, and shall be recorded by him.
   (B)   If the dwelling is demolished by the Planning and Community
Development Department, it shall sell the materials of such dwelling and pay
the proceeds of such sale over to the Superior Court, for distribution to such
persons the court shall find entitled thereto.
('71 Code, § 13-23) (Ord. passed 8-2-60; Am. Ord. passed 2-7-09)
Statutory reference:
   For similar statutory provisions, see R.S.A. 38-A:6
§ 150.999 PENALTY.
   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this chapter
for which another penalty is not specifically provided shall, upon conviction,
be subject to the penalty provided under
§ 38.06(B) of the Code of Ordinances. Each day a violation occurs or continues
shall constitute a separate offense.
('71 Code, § 17¾-1) (Ord. passed 4-21-98)
CHAPTER 151: BUILDING REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
151.01   Adoption of local amendments to State Building Code
   
151.02   Abandoning excavations
   
151.03   Air rights
   
151.04   Issuance of building permits; state provisions adopted
Trailer Parks and Tourist Camps
   
151.40   Definitions
   
151.41   Parking trailers outside parks
   
151.42   Enforcement
 
   
151.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 151.01 ADOPTION OF LOCAL AMENDMENTS TO STATE BUILDING CODE.
   It is the purpose of this chapter to recognize the authority of the Building
Code of the State of New Hampshire ("State Building Code") as set forth by
R.S.A. 155-A and adopt local amendments thereto pursuant to R.S.A. 674:51,
which collectively shall be referred to as the "Building Code of the City of
Manchester" or the "Building Code." Updates by the State of New Hampshire to
the State Building Code shall automatically become effective for the Building
Code of the City of Manchester. Amendments adopted by the city are hereby
referred to, adopted, and made part hereof, as if fully set out in this
section, with the additions, insertions and deletions and changes set forth in
§§ 151.10 through 151.39 of the ordinance adopted July 6, 2021. Local
amendments to the State Building Code, now or in the future, shall survive all
amendments and updates to State Building Code and will remain in full force and
effect unless repealed or amended by the city. All further references to the
"Building Code" shall refer the Building Code of the City of Manchester.
('71 Code, § 6-12) (Ord. passed 2-7-89; Am. Ord. passed 9-4-01; Am. Ord. passed
7-6-21)
§ 151.02 ABANDONING EXCAVATIONS.
   (A)   Prohibited. No person shall excavate a lot or parcel of land for the
purpose of erecting a foundation to erect a building thereon and then abandon
the project.
   (B)   Time for filling. If a cellar hole has been excavated and the project
abandoned, the party responsible for the excavation shall cause the excavation
to be refilled within a period of 60 days after the project has been abandoned.
('71 Code, § 6-1)
Penalty, see § 151.99
§ 151.03 AIR RIGHTS.
   The Board of Mayor and Aldermen is hereby authorized to grant air rights
pursuant to and consistent with the provisions of R.S.A. 48-B.
('71 Code, § 6-2) (Ord. passed 3-3-81)
§ 151.04 ISSUANCE OF BUILDING PERMITS; STATE PROVISIONS ADOPTED.
   The provisions of R.S.A. 676.12 with respect to the issuance of building
permits are hereby adopted.
('71 Code, § 6-3) (Ord. passed 9-6-83; Am. Ord. passed 5-6-97; Am. Ord. passed
4-21-98)
TRAILER PARKS AND TOURIST CAMPS
§ 151.40 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CABIN PLOT. A section of ground not less than 30 feet by 40 feet in area,
upon which only one camp cottage, or cabin, is located.
   TOURIST CAMP. Any camp, park, court, site, lot, parcel, or tract of land
upon which any camp cottage or cabin is maintained for the accommodation of
transients, whether or not a charge is made.
   TRAILER. Any vehicle or structure designed and constructed in such a manner
as will permit occupancy thereof as sleeping quarters for one or more persons,
or the conduct of any business or profession, occupation, or trade, or used as
a selling or advertising device, and so designed that it may be mounted on
wheels and used as a conveyance on streets, whether propelled or drawn by its
own or other motive power. The term TRAILER shall not include a device used
exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
   TRAILER PARK. Any park, court, camp, site, lot, parcel, or tract of land
maintained for the purpose of providing accommodations for any trailer or upon
which any trailer is parked, and shall include all buildings used as part of
the equipment thereof, whether or not a charge is made for the use of the
trailer park and its facilities. The term TRAILER PARK shall not include
trailer sales lots on which unoccupied trailers are parked for purposes of
inspection and sale.
   UNIT. A section of ground in a trailer park of not less than 1,000 square
feet of unoccupied space in an area designated as the location for only one
automobile and one trailer. ('71 Code, § 25-1)
§ 151.41 PARKING TRAILERS OUTSIDE PARKS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful, within the limits of the city, for any person to
park any trailer on any street or other public place, or on any tract of land
owned by any person, occupied or unoccupied, except as provided in this
section.
   (B)   Emergency or temporary stopping or parking is permitted on any street
in the city for not longer than 24 hours, subject to any other and further
prohibitions, regulations, or limitations imposed by the traffic and parking
regulations or ordinances for that street.
   (C)   No person in the city shall park or occupy any trailer on the premises
of any occupied dwelling or on any lot which is not a part of the premises of
any occupied dwelling either of which is situated outside an approved trailer
park; except, the parking of only one trailer in an accessory private garage
building, or in a rear yard in any district, is permitted providing the trailer
is the property of a bona fide visitor with the owner or tenant of the property
and shall not have its wheels removed or remain on the premises for a period
exceeding 30 days.
('71 Code, § 25-2) (Am. Ord. passed 2-7-89; Am. Ord. passed 11-7-01)
Penalty, see § 10.99
Cross-reference:
   
Traffic code, see Title VII
§ 151.42 ENFORCEMENT.
   It shall be the duty of the Director of Planning and Community Development
and the Police Department to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
('71 Code, § 25-3) (Ord. passed 2-7-89; Am. Ord. passed 2-7-09)
§ 151.99 PENALTY.
   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this chapter
for which another penalty is not specifically provided shall, upon conviction,
be subject to a fine not exceeding the maximum allowed by R.S.A. 47:17 or other
law. Each day a violation occurs or continues shall constitute a separate
offense.
('71 Code, § 17¾-1)
CHAPTER 152: PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT
Section
Planning and Community Development Department
   
152.00   Planning and Community Development Department established
Planning Board
   
152.01   Board established; designated
   
152.02   Composition of Board
   
152.03   Board compensation; term; holding other offices
   
152.04   Removal of Board members
   
152.05   Filling of Board vacancies
   
152.06   Board Chairman; meetings; rules of procedure
   
152.07   Board employees; contracts with consultants
   
152.08   Board expenditures
   
152.09   Master plan authorized
   
152.10   Preparation of master plan
   
152.11   Adoption and amendment of master plan
   
152.12   Powers and duties of Board generally
   
152.13   Cooperation with Board
   
152.14   Zoning recommendations of Board
   
152.15   Alternates for regular members
   
152.16   Alternate for aldermanic member
Industrial Council
   
152.30   Establishment
   
152.31   Composition; appointment; terms of office
   
152.32   Industrial agent
   
152.33   Acquisition, development and disposal of industrial land and
facilities (R.S.A. 162-G adopted)
Publicity and Development
   
152.45   Bureau established
   
152.46   Function of Bureau
   
152.47   Board established; composition
   
152.48   Authority of Board
PLANNING AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT
§ 152.00 PLANNING AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED.
   (A)   Pursuant to
Charter § 3.02 there is established a Planning and Community Development
Department.
   (B)   The department head shall be the Director of Planning and Community
Development who shall be appointed as provided by
Charter § 3.03. Upon the effective date of this ordinance, the Planning
Director shall assume the title and position of Director of Planning and
Community Development.
   (C)   The Planning and Community Development Department shall be responsible
for coordinating the planning and development of the city and ensuring that
adequate public facilities are planned and funded. The department shall include
the Planning Department existing on the date of this ordinance.
   (D)   The Planning and Community Development Department shall provide staff
support to the following boards and committees subject to staff availability
and budget:
      (1)   Planning Board.
      (2)   Community Improvement Program Committee of the Board of Mayor and
Aldermen.
      (3)   Zoning Board of Adjustment.
      (4)   Heritage Commission.
      (5)   Millyard Design Review Committee.
      (6)   School Capital Improvement Committee.
      (7)   Conservation Commission.
   (E)   The Planning and Community Development Department shall also have the
following duties, powers and functions:
      (1)   Prepare land use plans and community development strategies and
assist the Planning Board in preparation of the Master Plan;
      (2)   Provide for the proper planning and design of community development
and facilities;
      (3)   (Reserved)
      (4)   Administer the processing of subdivisions, site plans, special use
permits and planned developments under the direction of the Planning Board;
      (5)   Administer the Urban Ponds Restoration Program. The Urban Ponds
Restoration Administrator is hereby transferred into the Planning and Community
Development Department;
      (6)   Assist the Mayor in preparation of the proposed Community
Improvement Program;
      (7)   Assist the Board of Mayor and Aldermen in the review and adoption
of the Community Improvement Program;
      (8)   Implement and administer the approved Community Improvement
Program;
      (9)   Provide coordination between departments for capital and special
projects which affect more than one department;
      (10)    Perform such other duties as prescribed by federal, state and
local law.
   (F)   The Planning and Community Development Department is responsible for
the administration, interpretation and enforcement of all codes and regulations
pertaining to the Office of Inspectors of Buildings and the administration,
interpretation and enforcement of land use codes and regulations.
   (G)   The Planning and Community Development Department shall have the
responsibility for the administration and enforcement of
Chapter 150: Housing Code.
   (H)   The Planning and Community Development Department shall have the
responsibility for the administration of
Chapter 151: Building Regulations.
   (I)   The Planning and Community Development Department shall have
responsibility for the administration of
Chapter 152: Airport Zoning pursuant to §
154.25 administration and enforcement.
   (J)   The Planning and Community Development Department shall have
responsibility for the administration of
Chapter 155: Zoning Code.
(Ord. passed 11-4-98; Am. Ord. passed 8-5-03; Am. Ord. passed 2-7-09)
PLANNING BOARD
§ 152.01 BOARD ESTABLISHED; DESIGNATED.
   (A)   For the purpose of making a study of the resources, possibilities, and
requirements of the city, and to make plans for its future development, the
layout of its streets and proper housing of its people, a city Planning Board
is hereby established under the provisions of R.S.A. Ch. 673.
   (B)   The Planning Board of Manchester shall be designated the City Planning
Board.
('71 Code, § 19-1) (Ord. passed 5-18-54)
Statutory reference:
   Authority of city to create Planning Board, see R.S.A. 673:1
§ 152.02 COMPOSITION OF BOARD.
   The Planning Board shall consist of nine members, namely the Mayor, an
administrative official of the city who shall be selected by the Mayor, and a
member of the Board of Aldermen who shall be selected by it, as members ex
officio, and six persons who shall be appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by
the Board of Mayor and Aldermen.
('71 Code, § 19-3) (Ord. passed 5-18-54)
Statutory reference:
   For similar statutory provisions, see R.S.A 673:2
§ 152.03 BOARD COMPENSATION; TERM; HOLDING OTHER OFFICES.
   All members of the Planning Board shall serve without compensation and the
appointed members shall hold no other municipal office except that one of such
appointed members may be a member of the Zoning Board of Adjustment, and
provided also that any of such appointed members may be a justice of the
municipal court. The terms of ex officio members shall correspond to their
respective official tenures, except the term of the administrative official,
selected by the Mayor, shall terminate with the term of the Mayor selecting
him. In the case of the appointed members, one member shall be appointed for
one year, one for two years, one for three years, one for four years, one for
five years, and one for six years. Thereafter, as the respective terms expire,
appointments shall be made on May 1, for six year terms.
('71 Code, § 19-4) (Ord. passed 5-18-54)
Statutory reference:
   For similar statutory provisions, see R.S.A 673:5 and 673:7
§ 152.04 REMOVAL OF BOARD MEMBERS.
   Members of the Planning Board, other than the member selected by the Board
of Aldermen, may, after public hearing, be removed by the Mayor for
inefficiency, neglect of duty, or malfeasance in office. The Mayor shall file
with the City Clerk a written statement of reasons for such removal.
('71 Code, § 19-5) (Ord. passed 5-18-54)
Statutory reference:
   For similar statutory provisions, see R.S.A 673:13
§ 152.05 FILLING OF BOARD VACANCIES.
   Vacancies in the membership of the Planning Board, occurring otherwise than
through the expiration of the stated term, shall be filled for the duration of
the unexpired term in the manner originally designated in
§ 152.02 of this chapter.
('71 Code, § 19-6) (Ord. passed 5-18-54)
Statutory reference:
   For similar statutory provisions, see R.S.A 673:12
§ 152.06 BOARD CHAIRMAN; MEETINGS; RULES OF PROCEDURE.
   (A)   The Planning Board shall elect its Chairman from the appointed members
and create and fill such other offices as it may deem necessary for its work.
   (B)   The term of Chairman shall be one year with eligibility for
reelection.
   (C)   The Planning Board shall hold at least one regular meeting in each
month.
   (D)   The Planning Board shall adopt rules for the transaction of business
and shall keep public records of its resolutions, transactions, findings, and
determinations.
('71 Code, § 19-7) (Ord. passed 5-18-54)
Statutory reference:
   For similar statutory provisions, see R.S.A 673:8 through 673:10
§ 152.07 BOARD EMPLOYEES; CONTRACTS WITH CONSULTANTS.
   (A)   The Planning Board may appoint such employees as it may deem necessary
for its work, whose appointment, promotion, demotion, and removal shall be
subject to the same provision of law as govern other corresponding civil
employees of the municipality.
   (B)   The Planning Board may also contract with city planners, engineers,
architects, and other consultants for such services as it may require.
('71 Code, § 19-8) (Ord. passed 5-18-54)
Statutory reference:
   For similar statutory provisions, see R.S.A 673:16
§ 152.08 BOARD EXPENDITURES.
   The expenditures of the Planning Board, exclusive of gifts, shall be within
the amounts appropriated for the purpose by the Board of Aldermen, who are
hereby authorized and empowered to provide such funds, equipment, and
accommodations as they may deem to be necessary or advisable for the Planning
Board's work.
('71 Code, § 19-9) (Ord. passed 5-18-54)
Statutory reference:
   For similar statutory provisions, see R.S.A 673:16
§ 152.09 MASTER PLAN AUTHORIZED.
   It shall be the function and duty of the Planning Board to make and to
perfect from time to time, so far as funds appropriated by the Board of
Aldermen for such purpose will permit, a master plan for the development of the
city, including any areas outside of its boundaries, which, in the Planning
Board's judgment, bear relation to the planning of the city. Such master plan,
with the accompanying necessary map, plats, charts, and descriptive matter, may
be designed with the intention of showing as fully as is possible and
practical, the Planning Board's recommendations for the desirable development
of the territory, legally and logically within the scope of its planning
jurisdiction. It shall include on that basis the general location, character,
and extent of streets, tunnels, bridges, boulevards, parkways, roadways in
streets and parks, playgrounds, squares, parks, aviation fields, and other
public ways, places, grounds and open spaces, sites for public buildings, and
other public property. It shall also include the routes of railroads, buses,
and other forms of public transportation and the general location and extent of
public utilities and terminals whether publicly or privately owned or operated,
for water, light, heat, sanitation, transportation, communication, power, and
other purposes; also the acceptance, removal, relocation, widening, narrowing,
vacating, abandonment, change of use of or extension of any of the foregoing
ways, grounds, places, open spaces, buildings, properties, utilities, or
terminals and other planning features; as well as a zoning plan for the control
of the height, area, bulk, location, and use of privately-owned and public
structures, buildings, and premises, and of population density. Provision shall
also be made for the general location, character, layout, and extent of
community centers and neighborhood units and the general character, extent, and
layout of the replanning of blighted districts and slum areas.
('71 Code, § 19-10) (Ord. passed 5-18-54)
Statutory reference:
   For similar statutory provisions, see R.S.A 674:1
§ 152.10 PREPARATION OF MASTER PLAN.
   In the course of the preparation of the master plan, the Planning Board may
make careful and comprehensive surveys and studies of existing conditions and
of data and information relative to the probable future growth of the city and
its environs. The master plan shall be made with the general purpose of guiding
and accomplishing a coordinated, adjusted, and harmonious development of the
city and its environs which will, in accordance with existing and probable
future needs, best promote health, safety, morals, order, convenience,
prosperity, or the general welfare, as well as efficiency and economy in the
process of development. Included shall be adequate provisions for traffic, the
promotion of safety from fire and other dangers, adequate provision for light
and air, the promotion of good civic design and arrangement, wise and efficient
expenditure of public funds, and the adequate provision of public utilities and
other public requirements.
('71 Code, § 19-11) (Ord. passed 5-18-54)
Statutory reference:
   For similar statutory provisions, see R.S.A 673:3
§ 152.11 ADOPTION AND AMENDMENT OF MASTER PLAN.
   (A)   The Planning Board may adopt the master plan as a whole by a single
resolution or may, by successive resolutions, adopt successive parts of the
plan, said parts corresponding with major geographical sections or divisions of
the city, or with functional subdivisions of the subject matter of the plan,
and may adopt any amendment or extension thereof or addition thereto. Such
master plan shall be a public record, but its purpose and effect shall be
solely to aid the Planning Board in the performance of its duties.
   (B)   The adoption of the master plan or any amendment thereof shall be by
resolution carried by the affirmative votes of not less than a majority of all
the members of the Planning Board. The resolution shall refer expressly to the
maps, descriptive matter, and other matters intended by the Planning Board to
form the whole or part of the plan.
   (C)   The action taken shall be recorded on the adopted plan or part thereof
approved by the identifying signature of the Chairman of the Planning Board,
and a copy of the plan or part thereof shall be certified by the Board of Mayor
and Aldermen.
('71 Code, § 19-12) (Ord. passed 5-18-54)
Statutory reference:
   For similar statutory provisions, see R.S.A 673:4
§ 152.12 POWERS AND DUTIES OF BOARD GENERALLY.
   (A)   The Planning Board shall have power to promote public interest in and
understanding of the master plan and of the official map of the city which may
hereafter be established by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen. To that end they
may publish and distribute copies of the master plan or such official map or of
any report and may employ such other means of publicity and education as may be
deemed advisable.
   (B)   Members of the Planning Board, when duly authorized by the Planning
Board, may attend city planning conferences or meetings of city planning
institutes or hearings upon pending city planning legislation and the Planning
Board may, by resolutions spread upon its minutes, pay the reasonable traveling
expenses incident to such attendance.
   (C)   The Planning Board shall have authority to make such investigations,
maps and reports, and recommendations in connection therewith, relating to the
planning and development of the city as may seem desirable and advisable.
   (D)   The Planning Board, may from time to time, report and recommend to the
appropriate public officials and public agencies programs for the development
of the city, for the erection of public structures and improvements and for the
financing thereof.
   (E)   It shall be a duty of the Planning Board to consult and advise with
public officials and agencies, public utility companies, civic, educational,
professional, research, and other organizations, and with citizens with
relation to the protecting or carrying out of the master plan and to make
recommendations relating to the orderly growth and development of the city.
   (F)   The Planning Board shall have the right to accept and use gifts for
the exercise of its functions.
   (G)   The Planning Board, its members, officers, and employees, in the
performance of their functions, shall be authorized to enter upon any land and
make such examinations and surveys as are reasonably necessary and place and
maintain necessary monuments and marks thereon.
   (H)   In general, the Planning Board shall have such power and authority as
may be necessary to enable said Board to fulfill its functions in promoting
municipal planning and carrying out the purposes of this chapter, provided that
the total expenditures of said Planning Board shall not exceed the
appropriation for its expenses.
('71 Code, § 19-13) (Ord. passed 5-18-54)
Statutory reference:
   For similar statutory provisions, see R.S.A 674:1
§ 152.13 COOPERATION WITH BOARD.
   All public officials shall, upon request, furnish to the Planning Board
within a reasonable period of time such available information as it may
properly require for its work.
('71 Code, § 19-14) (Ord. passed 5-18-54)
§ 152.14 ZONING RECOMMENDATIONS OF BOARD.
   The Planning Board may, from time to time, recommend to the Board of Mayor
and Aldermen amendments of the Zoning Code, Chapter 155 of this Code of
Ordinances, or zoning map or additions thereto to conform to the Board's
recommendations for the zoning regulation of the territory comprised within
approved subdivisions.
('71 Code, § 19-16) (Ord. passed 5-18-54)
Statutory reference:
   For similar statutory provisions, see R.S.A 674:1
§ 152.15 ALTERNATES FOR REGULAR MEMBERS.
   Provision is hereby made for the appointment of three alternate members to
the Planning Board. Alternates shall be appointed in the same manner as other
regular appointive members and shall serve for terms of three years and until
their successors are appointed and qualified. Whenever a regular appointive
member of the Planning Board is absent or disqualifies himself the chairman
shall designate an alternate to act in his place.
('71 Code, § 19-17) (Ord. passed 4-5-88)
Statutory reference:
   For similar statutory provisions, see R.S.A. 673:6
§ 152.16 ALTERNATE FOR ALDERMANIC MEMBER.
   (A)   In addition to the alternates provided in §
152.15, the Aldermen shall designate an alternate who shall be a member of the
Board of Aldermen and whose term shall coincide with that of the regular
aldermanic member and who shall serve in the absence or disqualification of the
latter.
   (B)   The initial terms of the regular appointive alternate members whose
appointment is provided for in §
152.15 shall be staggered so that no more than one appointment shall occur
annually.
('71 Code, § 19-18) (Ord. passed 4-5-88)
INDUSTRIAL COUNCIL
§ 152.30 ESTABLISHMENT.
   For the purpose of encouraging the welfare of local industries and promoting
the establishment of new industries in metropolitan Manchester, an Industrial
Council is hereby established.
('71 Code, § 19-27) (Ord. passed 8-2-60)
§ 152.31 COMPOSITION; APPOINTMENT; TERMS OF OFFICE.
   The Industrial Council shall consist of 20 qualified members, one of whom
shall be a member of organized labor, 15 of whom shall be residents of the
city. They shall be appointed by the Mayor, subject to the approval of the
Board of Mayor and Aldermen, for a term of six years. The Mayor and two members
of the Board of Aldermen shall also serve as ex officio members of the
Industrial Council, whose terms shall correspond to their respective tenure of
office. The Aldermen shall be named by the Mayor subject to the approval of the
Board of Aldermen.
('71 Code, § 19-28) (Ord. passed 8-2-60; Am. Ord. passed 1-4-83)
§ 152.32 INDUSTRIAL AGENT. 
   The Industrial Council may appoint an industrial agent for the promotion of
industry. The industrial agent, so appointed, shall not later than one year
from the date of his appointment, or the enactment of this section, establish
and maintain his legal residence in the city. His salary and duties shall be
determined by the Industrial Council.
('71 Code, § 19-29) (Ord. passed 8-2-60)
§ 152.33 ACQUISITION, DEVELOPMENT AND DISPOSAL OF INDUSTRIAL LAND AND
FACILITIES (R.S.A. 162-G ADOPTED).
   In accordance with R.S.A. 162-G-1, with public hearing having been held on
April 5, 1999, the Board of Mayor and Aldermen of the city of Manchester do
hereby adopt the provisions of R.S.A. Ch. 162-G, Acquisition, Development and
Disposal of Industrial Land and Facilities.
(Ord. passed 4-20-99)
PUBLICITY AND DEVELOPMENT
§ 152.45 BUREAU ESTABLISHED.
   A Bureau of Publicity and Development of the city is hereby established.
('71 Code, § 19-40)
§ 152.46 FUNCTION OF BUREAU.
   The Bureau of Publicity and Development of the city is authorized to
advertise and promote the city and to further its interests.
('71 Code, § 19-41)
§ 152.47 BOARD ESTABLISHED; COMPOSITION.
   A Board of Publicity and Development is hereby created which shall consist
of the Mayor, as Chairman, and the Board of Mayor and Aldermen.
('71 Code, § 19-42)
§ 152.48 AUTHORITY OF BOARD.
   (A)   The Board of Publicity and Development shall have the entire
management of the affairs of the Bureau of Publicity and Development and shall
have full and final expenditure of all moneys which may be appropriated for
purposes of publicity and development.
   (B)   The Board of Publicity and Development shall have the power to appoint
such persons as may be necessary to carry out its purposes and to compensate
said persons for their services.
('71 Code, § 19-43)
CHAPTER 153: SUBDIVISIONS
Section
   
153.01   Authority to regulate
   
153.02   Certificate of authorization
   
153.03   Regulations required
   
153.04   Site plans
§ 153.01 AUTHORITY TO REGULATE.
   The Planning Board is hereby authorized and empowered to approve or
disapprove, in its discretion, plats and to approve or disapprove plans showing
the extent to which and the manner in which streets within subdivisions shall
be graded and improved and to which streets, water, sewer, and other utility
mains, piping, connections or other facilities within subdivisions shall be
installed.
('71 Code, § 23-1) (Ord. passed 2-19-85)
Statutory reference:
   For similar statutory provisions, see R.S.A. 674:35
§ 153.02 CERTIFICATE OF AUTHORIZATION.
   The City Clerk shall forthwith file with the register of deeds of
Hillsborough County a certificate of notice showing that the Planning Board has
been so authorized, giving the date of such authorization.
('71 Code, § 23-2) (Ord. passed 2-19-85)
§ 153.03 REGULATIONS REQUIRED.
   Before the Planning Board exercises its powers referred to in
§ 153.01, the Planning Board shall adopt subdivision regulations governing the
subdivision of land as set forth in R.S.A. 674:36.
('71 Code, § 23-3) (Ord. passed 2-19-85)
Statutory reference:
   For similar statutory provisions, see R.S.A. 674:36
§ 153.04 SITE PLANS.
   (A)   The Planning Board is hereby authorized and empowered to review, and
approve or disapprove site plans for the development of tracts for
nonresidential uses, or for multifamily dwelling units, which are defined as
any structures containing more than two dwelling units, whether or not such
development includes a subdivision or resubdivision of the site. ('71 Code, §
23-4)
   (B)   The City Clerk shall forthwith file with the register of deeds of
Hillsborough County a certificate of notice showing that the Planning Board has
been so authorized giving the date of such authorization.
('71 Code, § 23-5)
   (C)   Before the Planning Board exercises its powers referred to in division
(A) of this section, the Planning Board shall adopt site plan review
regulations as set forth in R.S.A. 674:44. ('71 Code, § 23-6)
(Ord. passed 2-19-85)
Statutory reference:
   For similar statutory provisions, see R.S.A. 674:43, 44
CHAPTER 154: AIRPORT ZONING
Section
General Provisions
   
154.01   Definitions
General Regulations
   
154.10   Zones
   
154.11   Height limits
   
154.12   Height permitted
   
154.13   Use restrictions
   
154.14   Permits
   
154.15   Hazard marking and lighting
   
154.16   Nonconforming uses
Administration and Enforcement
   
154.25   Administration
   
154.26   Board of appeals
   
154.27   Variances
 
   
154.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 154.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AIRPORT. Any area of land or water, whether constructed or not, which has
been approved by the Director as a site for the landing and taking off of
aircraft or utilized or to be utilized by the public as a point of arrival or
departure by air.
   AIRPORT HAZARD. Any structure, tree, smoke, steam, dust, or other substance
which obstructs the aerial approaches of a publicly owned airport or impairs
the reasonable visibility in the vicinity thereof, electrical impulses and
disturbances which interfere with radio aids or communications and lights which
might result in glare in the vision of pilots of aircraft or be confused with
airport lights.
   AIRPORT REFERENCE POINT. At the control tower and its elevation is 233 feet
above sea level.
   APPROACH ZONE. The approach area to a runway and landing strip having
dimensions as hereinafter described and the center line of which coincides with
the center line of the runway and landing strip extended. (The dimensions of
the runways are: N/S 7000 feet by 150 feet; NW/SE 5430 feet by 150 feet NE/SW
5850 feet by 150 feet; each of the landing strips is 500 feet wide and the same
length of the runway.)
   NONCONFORMING USE. Any structure, tree, or use of land which does not
conform to a regulation prescribed in this chapter or an amendment thereto, as
of the effective date of such regulations.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, copartnership, corporation, company,
association, joint stock association, or body politic, and includes any
trustee, receiver, assignee, or other similar representative thereof.
   STRUCTURE. Any object constructed or installed by man, including such
objects although regulated or licensed by other provisions of law.
   TREE. Any object of natural growth.
('71 Code, Appendix A, § 1) (Ord. passed 6-4-57)
Statutory reference:
   Similar definitions, see R.S.A. 424:1
GENERAL REGULATIONS
§ 154.10 ZONES.
   In order to carry out the purposes of this chapter, all of the land in the
city within the boundaries of the approach zones and all of the land within a
distance of 100,000 feet from the airport reference point is hereby declared
subject to the restrictions of this chapter, in accordance with the Grenier Air
Force Base Airport Approach Plan adopted by the N.H. Aeronautics Commission on
February 25, 1957.
('71 Code, Appendix A, § 2) (Ord. passed 6-4-57)
§ 154.11 HEIGHT LIMITS.
   No structure or tree shall be erected, altered, or allowed to grow within
the areas referred to in
§ 154.10, to wit:
   (A)   In the approach area to the N/S runway which are 1500 feet wide at
1000 feet from the end of the pavement of 4000 feet wide at 10,000 feet, an
inclined plane of 50:1 slope; 200 feet above the runway end from 10,000 feet to
25,000 feet; 500 feet above the runway end from 25,000 feet to 50,000 feet; in
the approach areas to the NW/SE and NE/SW runways, which are 500 feet wide at a
point 200 feet from the ends of the runways and 2400 feet wide at 10,000 feet
out from this point, an inclined plane of 40:1 slope.
   (B)   On the sides of the landing strips and approach areas, an incline
plane of 7:1 slope.
   (C)   Three hundred eighty three feet above sea level (150 feet above the
airport) within 10,000 feet of the airport reference point.
   (D)   Four hundred thirty three feet above sea level (200 feet above the
airport) from 10,000 feet to 25,000 feet from the airport reference point.
   (E)   Seven hundred thirty three feet above sea level (500 feet above the
airport) from 25,000 feet to 50,000 feet from the airport reference point.
   (F)   An inclined plane of 100:1 slope from the periphery of the horizontal
surface of 500 feet above the airport for a distance of 100,000 feet measured
horizontally from the airport reference point.
('71 Code, Appendix A, § 3) (Ord. passed 6-4-57)
Penalty, see § 154.99
§ 154.12 HEIGHT PERMITTED.
   No provision of
§ 154.11 shall limit the height of a structure or tree to less than 30 feet
above the ground upon which it is located.
('71 Code, Appendix A, § 4) (Ord. passed 6-4-57)
§ 154.13 USE RESTRICTIONS.
   Notwithstanding any other provisions of the Zoning Code, no use may be made
of the land described in
§ 154.10 hereof in such manner as to create electrical interference with radio
aids or communications between the airport and aircraft, make it difficult for
flyers to distinguish between airport lights and others, result in glare in the
eyes of flyers using the airport, impair visibility in the vicinity of the
airport by the creation and discharge of smoke, steam, dust, or other
obstructions to visibility or otherwise endanger the landing, taking-off, or
maneuvering of aircraft.
('71 Code, Appendix A, § 5) (Ord. passed 6-4-57)
Penalty, see § 154.99
§ 154.14 PERMITS.
   (A)   Future uses. No material change in violation of
§§ 154.11 or
154.13 hereof shall be made in the use of land, and no structure or tree shall
be erected, altered, planted, or otherwise established in violation of
§§ 154.11 or
154.13 hereof in any of the areas of land described in
§ 154.10 hereof, unless a permit therefor shall have been applied for and
granted. Each such application shall indicate the purpose for which the permit
is desired, with sufficient particularity to permit it to be determined whether
the resulting use, structure, or tree would conform to the regulations herein
prescribed. If such determination is in the affirmative, the permit applied for
shall be granted.
   (B)   Existing uses. Before any existing use, structure, or tree may be
replaced, substantially altered, or repaired, rebuilt, allowed to grow higher,
or replanted, within any of the areas of land described in
§ 154.10 hereof, a permit must be secured authorizing such replacement, change
or repair if it is in violation of
§§ 154.11 or
154.13. No such permit shall be granted that would allow the establishment or
creation of an airport hazard or permit a nonconforming use, structure or tree
to be made or become higher, or become a greater hazard to air navigation, than
it was on the effective date of this chapter or than it is when the application
for a permit is made. Except as indicated, all applications for a permit for
replacement, change or repair of existing use, structure, or tree shall be
granted.
('71 Code, Appendix A, § 8) (Ord. passed 6-4-57)
§ 154.15 HAZARD MARKING AND LIGHTING.
   Any permit or variance granted under
§§ 154.14 or
154.27 may, if such action is deemed advisable to effectuate the purposes of
this chapter and reasonable in the circumstances, be so conditioned as to
require the owner of the structure or tree in question to permit the present
owner or lessor at his own expense, to install, operate, and maintain thereon
such markers and lights as may be necessary to indicate to flyers the presence
of an airport hazard. ('71 Code, Appendix A, § 9) (Ord. passed 6-4-57)
§ 154.16 NONCONFORMING USES.
   The regulations prescribed in
§§ 154.11 and
154.13 of this chapter shall not be construed to require the removal, lowering,
or other change or alteration of any structure or tree not conforming to the
regulations as of the effective date hereof, or otherwise interfere with the
continuance of any nonconforming use. Nothing herein contained shall require
any change in the construction, alteration, or intended use of any structure
and the construction or alteration, of which was begun prior to the effective
date of this chapter, and is diligently prosecuted and completed within two
years thereof.
('71 Code, Appendix A, § 6) (Ord. passed 6-4-57)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 154.25 ADMINISTRATION.
   The office of the Planning and Community Development is hereby designated as
the administrative agency charged with the duty of administering and enforcing
the regulations herein prescribed. The duties of the Director of Planning and
Community Development shall include that of hearing and deciding all permits
under §
154.14 of this chapter, but shall not include any of those powers or duties
herein delegated to the Board of Adjustment.
('71 Code, Appendix A, § 10) (Ord. passed 6-4-57; Am. Ord. passed 2-7-09)
§ 154.26 BOARD OF APPEALS.
   The Board of Adjustment is hereby designated as the Board of Appeals and
shall have the duties and powers as set forth in R.S.A. 31:68-86 inclusive.
('71 Code, Appendix A, § 11) (Ord. passed 6-4-57)
§ 154.27 VARIANCES.
   Any person desiring to erect any structure or increase the height of any
structure, or permit the growth of any tree, or use his property not in
accordance with the regulations prescribed in this chapter, may apply for a
variance therefrom. Such variance shall be allowed where a literal application
of enforcement of these regulations would result in practical difficulty or
unnecessary hardship and the relief granted would not be contrary to the public
interest but do substantial justice, and be in accordance with the spirit of
this chapter.
('71 Code, Appendix A, § 7) (Ord. passed 6-4-57)
§ 154.99 PENALTY.
   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this chapter
for which another penalty is not specifically provided shall, upon conviction,
be subject to a fine not exceeding the maximum allowed by R.S.A. 47:17 or other
law. Each day a violation occurs or continues shall constitute a separate
offense.
('71 Code, § 17¾-1)
CHAPTER 155: ZONING CODE
Section
   
155.01   Continued in effect
   
155.02   Notice of hearing on rezoning amendments
§ 155.01 CONTINUED IN EFFECT.
   Nothing in this code of ordinances or the ordinance adopting it shall be
construed to repeal or otherwise affect the zoning ordinance of the city as
adopted by an ordinance enacted January 5, 1965, and as subsequently amended,
and the same is hereby continued in full force and effect.
§ 155.02 NOTICE OF HEARING ON REZONING AMENDMENTS.
   No zoning ordinance amendment shall be adopted without a public hearing as
required in R.S.A. 675:2. Notice of the public hearing for rezoning amendments
shall be not less than four inches in width and three inches in length. Prior
to publication of said notice, the person requesting the same shall pay the
cost of publication as determined by the City Clerk.
(Ord. passed 8-5-86; Am. Ord. passed 11-18-14)
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to New Hampshire Statutes
References to 1971 Code
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO NEW HAMPSHIRE STATUTES
R.S.A. Cite Code Section
R.S.A. Cite       Code Section
Title XV          114.03
31:22             32.010,
                  32.015
31:39             52.999
31:41-e           130.42
31:43 et seq.     130.03
31:68-86          154.26
31:89-b           150.004
31:120 - 31:125   37.01,
                  70.06
Ch. 34            32.010
Ch. 36-A          32.090
36:47, II         32.133
Ch. 38            Ch. 51
38-A:6            150.151
41:11             70.03
41:29             32.029,
                  32.124
45:2              30.02
45:6              Charter, §
                  2.05
45:9              Charter, §
                  2.08
46:4              30.01
47:5              34.04
47:6              Ch. 35
47:14             36.30,
                  36.31
                  10.99,
                  38.99,
                  52.999,
                  90.99,
47:17             91.76,
                  97.41,
                  130.99,
                  151.99,
                  154.99
47:17(II)         30.62,
                  Ch. 94
47:17(IV)         Ch. 117
                  70.03,
47:17(VII)        96.08,
                  97.36,
                  97.41
47:17(VIII)       Ch. 70,
                  70.03
47:17(X)          90.02
47:17(XI)         90.10
47:17(XIII)       130.07
                  30.20,
47:17(XV)         Ch. 94,
                  97.99
48:2              30.20
48:3              30.20
48:4              30.20
48:5              30.20
48:6              30.20
48:7              30.20
48:8              30.20
48:9              30.20
48.11             36.30
48:12             36.15
48:13             36.15,
                  36.16
48:14             36.15
48:15             36.15
48-A:3(II)        150.146
48-A:3(III)       150.147
48-A:3(IV)        150.148
48-A:4            150.149
48-A:5            150.150
48-A:7            150.144
48-A:8            150.143
48-A:11           150.035
48-B              151.03
49-B              Charter, §
                  8.03
72:23, III        114.03
76:13             36.04
76:15-a           36.04
Ch. 79-E          36.40
79-E:2 II         36.40
79-E:2 IV         36.40
79-E:5            36.40
Ch. 80            37.07
80:5              36.02
80:52 c           35.024
80:58 et seq.     36.05
80:58 - 86        36.05
91-A              118.28
100-A:20          33.007
Ch. 105           30.62
Ch. 107-C         92.80,
                  92.83
126:10            30.24,
                  30.25
147:7-b           91.71
149-I             52.101
149-I:7           52.095
149M:27           91.63
149M:58           91.63
155-A             151.01
156:3-a           151.04
Ch. 162-G         152.33
162-G-1           152.33
175:1             70.08,
                  97.34
193-B:1, II       91.83
193-B:43, II      91.84
236:15 et seq.    97.30
236.20            97.03
250:12            72.04
Chs. 259—269    Ch. 70
259:6             72.01
259:12-3(c)       70.06
259:125           70.08
261:86            70.36
261:88            70.36
261:175-A         70.09
265:73-a          70.36
265:74            70.06
265:143 - 265:153 72.02
Ch. 266           118.99
266:85 - 266:89   72.01
269:1 et seq.     70.24
275               118.01
275-E             118.01
281-A             118.01
281-A:38          33.064
287-A             115.11
318:1, XVIII      52.002
318:B             130.52
318-B:1 et seq.   91.81
318-B:16          111.47
318-B:26, II(f)   91.89
318-B:43          91.81
318-B:43, II      91.84,
                  91.87
318-B:43, II(b)   91.85
318-B:43, II(f)   91.88
318-B:44          91.89
320.1             115.01
321.1             115.01
Ch. 339           92.08
Ch. 382-A         30.26
424:1             154.01
436:99 et seq.    90.30
Ch. 466           90.10,
                  90.11
466:13            90.99
466:14            90.11.1
466:31            90.30
544:1             111.47
570:1             130.20
570:3             130.07
618:2             31.12
626:7             91.89
                  130.35,
634:2             130.36,
                  130.38
635:2             130.36
Ch. 644           31.10
644:3             130.21
644:3a            130.21
645:1             130.06
647:46            150.004
Ch. 650           130.07
651-B:6           118.12
Ch. 673           152.01
673               32.120
673:1             152.01
673:2             152.02
673:3             152.10
673:4             152.11
673:5             152.03
673:6             152.15
673:7             152.03
673:8 - 673:10    152.06
673:12            32.122,
                  152.05
673:13            152.04
673:16            152.07,
                  152.08
                  152.09,
674:1             152.12,
                  152.14
674:35            153.01
674:36            153.03
674:43            153.04
674:44            153.04
674-44-a          32.121
674-44-b          32.123,
                  32.124
674:44-b III      32.125
674-44:h          32.130
674:51            151.01
675:2             155.03
675:6             32.123
675:7             32.133
676:12            151.04
                  
 
REFERENCES TO 1971 CODE
1971 Code Section 1996 Code Section
1971 Code Section 1996 Code Section
1-2               10.06
1-3               10.04
1-4               10.04
1-5               10.04
1-8               10.20
1-12              10.21
1-13              10.22
2-1               11.01
2-2               30.01
2-3               30.02
2-6               30.05
2-7               30.06
2-8               34.04
2-9               30.07
2-11              32.001
2-12              32.002
2-13              32.003
2-14              32.004
2-19              30.20
2-20              30.21
2-21              30.22
2-22              30.23
2-23              30.24
2-24              30.25
2-25              30.26
2-26              30.27
2-37              30.40
2-38              30.41
2-39              30.42
2-40              30.43
2-41              30.44
2-42              30.45
2-43              30.46
2-44              30.47
2-67              32.010
2-68              32.011
2-69              32.012
2-70              32.013
2-71              32.014
2-101 - 2-117     30.09
2-129             32.040
2-130             32.041
2-131             32.042
2-132             32.043
2-133             32.044
2-134             32.045
2-150             33.090
2-151             33.091
2-152             33.092
2-154             33.093
2-154.1           33.094
2-161             32.055
2-162             32.056
2-166             32.065
2-170             32.069
2-180             30.60
2-181             30.61
2-182             30.62
2-185             32.090
2-186             32.091
2-187             32.092
2-188             32.093
2-190             34.01
2-191             34.02
2-192             34.03
3-1               95.01
3-2               95.02
4-1               90.02
4-2               90.03
4-13              90.11
4-15              90.14
4-21              90.10
4-22              90.01
4-23              90.12
4-24              90.15
4-25              90.16
4-27              90.18
4-38              90.30
5-1               72.01
5-2               72.02
5-3               72.03
5-4               72.04
5-5               72.05
5-6               72.06
5-7               72.07
5-8               72.08
5-9               72.09
5-10              72.10
5-11              72.11
5-13              72.12
5-26              72.20
5-27              72.21
5-28              72.22
5-29              72.23
5-30              72.24
5-32              72.25
5-33              72.26
5-34              72.27
5-35              72.28
6-1               151.02
6-2               151.03
6-3               151.04
6-12              151.01
7-1               98.01
7-2               98.02
7½-1             37.01
7½-2             37.02
7½-3             37.03
7½-4             37.04
7½-5             37.05
7½-6             37.06
7½-7             37.07
7½-8             37.08
9-60              92.80
9-61              92.81
9-62              92.82
9-63              92.83
10-1              117.01
10-2              117.02
10-3              117.03
10-14             117.15
10-15             117.16
10-16             117.17
10-17             117.18
10-18             117.19
10-19             117.19
10-20             117.21
10-21             117.22
10-22             117.23
10-23             117.24
10-24             117.25
10-25             117.26
10-26             117.27
10-27             117.28
10-28             117.29
10-29             117.30
10-30             117.31
10-31             117.32
12-2              98.03
12-8              91.01
12-9              91.01
12-20             91.20
12-21             91.21
12-22             91.22
12-23             91.23
12-30             91.35
12-31             91.36
12-32             91.37
12-33             91.38
12-34             91.39
12-35             91.40
12-36             91.41
12-37             91.42
12-38             91.43
12-39             91.44
13-1              150.001
13-2              150.002
13-3              150.003
13-4              150.004
13-15             150.143
13-16             150.144
13-17             150.145
13-18             150.146
13-19             150.147
13-20             150.148
13-21             150.149
13-22             150.150
13-23             150.151
13-35             150.035
13-40             150.036
13-41             150.037
13-42             150.038
13-43             150.039
13-44             150.040
13-45             150.041
13-46             150.042
13-47             150.043
13-48             150.044
13-49             150.045
13-50             150.046
13-51             150.047
13-52             150.048
13-53             150.049
13-54             150.050
13-55             150.051
13-60             150.060
13-61             150.061
13-62             150.062
13-63             150.063
13-64             150.064
13-65             150.065
13-66             150.066
13-67             150.067
13-68             150.068
13-69             150.069
13-70             150.080
13-71             150.081
13-72             150.082
13-73             150.083
13-74             150.084
13-75             150.085
13-76             150.086
13-77             150.087
13-78             150.088
13-79             150.089
13-80             150.090
13-90             150.015
13-91             150.016
13-92             150.017
13-93             150.018
13-94             150.019
13-95             150.020
13-96             150.021
13-97             150.022
13-98             150.023
13-100            150.140
13-101            150.141
13-102            150.142
13-200            150.100
13-201            150.101
13-202            150.102
13-203            150.103
13-204            150.104
13-205            150.105
13-206            150.106
13-207            150.107
13-208            150.108
13-209            150.109
13-210            150.110
13-211            150.111
13-212            150.112
13-213            150.113
13-214            150.114
13-215            150.114
15-40             71.01
15-42             71.02
15-43             71.04
15-44             71.05
15-45             71.06
15-46             71.07
15-47             71.08
15-48             71.09
15-51             71.12
15-52             Ch. 73, Sch. I
15-53             71.99
15-55             71.14
17-1              130.21
17-2              130.20
17-3              130.22
17-4              130.01
17-5              130.02
17-6              130.01
17-7              130.35
17-8              130.36
17-9              130.36
17-10             130.37
17-11             130.38
17-12             130.03
17-13             130.39
17-14             130.04
17-15             130.23
17-16             130.05
17-17             130.06
17-18             130.07
17-19             130.08
17-20             130.09
17-22             130.24
17-23             130.40
17-24             130.40,
                  130.99
17-25(a)          90.04
17-25(c)          90.99
17½-1            96.01
17½-16           96.02
17½-17           96.03
17½-18           96.05
17½-19           96.06
17½-20           96.07
17½-21           96.04
17½-22           96.08
                  10.99,
17¾-1            150.999,
                  151.99,
                  154.99
17¾-2            38.99
17¾-6            38.01
17¾-7            38.02
17¾-8            38.03
17¾-9            38.04
17¾-10           38.04
17¾-11           38.06
18-1              33.001
18-2              33.002
18-3              33.003
18-4              33.004
18-4.1            33.005
18-5              33.006
18-6              33.007
18-9              33.010
18-10             33.011
18-20             33.020
18-21             33.021
18-22             33.022
18-23             33.023
18-24             33.024
18-25             33.025
18-26             33.026
18-27             33.040
18-28             33.041
18-29             33.042
18-30             33.027
18-31             33.028
18-33             33.043
18-34             33.044
18-35             33.045
18-36             33.046
18-37             33.047
18-38             33.048
18-40             33.050
18-42             33.052
18-43             33.053
18-44             33.054
18-45             33.059
18-46             33.060
18-47             33.064
18-48             33.075
18-49             33.076
18-50             33.077
18-51             33.078
18-52             33.079
18-53             33.080
18-54             33.081
18-55             33.082
18-56             33.061
18-58             33.062
18-59             33.063
18-61             33.058
18-63             33.056
18-64             33.012
19-1              152.01
19-3              152.02
19-4              152.03
19-5              152.04
19-6              152.05
19-7              152.06
19-8              152.07
19-9              152.08
19-10             152.09
19-11             152.10
19-12             152.11
19-13             152.12
19-14             152.13
19-16             152.14
19-17             152.15
19-18             152.16
19-27             152.30
19-28             152.31
19-29             152.32
19-40             152.45
19-41             152.46
19-42             152.47
19-43             152.48
20-2              31.01
20-3              31.02
20-4              31.03
20-5              31.04
20-6              31.05
20-7              31.06
20-8              31.07
20-9              31.08
20-10             31.09
20-13             31.10
20-14             31.11
20-15             31.12
20-16             31.13
20-17             31.14
20-18             31.15
20-28             31.30
20-29             31.31
20-30             31.32
20-31             31.33
20-32             31.34
20-33             31.34
21-70             53.01
21-71             53.02
21-72             53.03
21-73             53.04
21-74             53.05
21-75             53.06
22-1              97.01
22-3              97.03
22-4              97.04
22-5              97.05
22-6              97.06
22-15             97.15
22-16             97.16
22-18             97.17
22-19             97.18
22-20             97.19
22-31             97.30
22-32             97.31
22-32.1           97.32
22-33             97.33
22-34             97.30
22-35             97.34
22-35(c)          97.99
22-36             97.35
22-37             97.36
22-38             97.37
22-39             97.38
22-40             97.39
22-41             97.40
22-42             97.41
22-43             97.42
22-44             97.43
22-50             97.55
22-51             97.56
22-52             97.57
23-1              153.01
23-2              153.02
23-3              153.03
23-4              153.04
23-5              153.04
23-6              153.04
23½-1            34.15
23½-2            34.16
23½-3            34.17
23½-4            34.18
23½-5            34.19
23½-6            34.20
23½-7            34.21
23½-8            34.22
23½-9            34.23
23½-10           34.24
23½-11           34.25
24-1              36.01
24-2              36.02
24-3              36.03
24-4              36.04
24-5              36.05
24-15             36.15
24-16             36.16
24-17             36.17
24-18             36.18
24-29             36.30
24-30             36.31
24-31             36.32
24-32             36.33
24-35             36.34
24-36             36.35
24-37             36.36
24-48             36.50
24-49             36.51
24-50             36.52
24-51             36.53
25-1              151.40
25-2              151.41
25-3              151.42
26-1              51.40
26-2              51.41
26-3              51.42
26-4              51.43
26-5              51.44
26-6              51.45
26-7              51.46
26-8              51.47
26-9              51.48
26-10             51.49
26-11             51.50
26-12             51.51
26-13             51.52
26-14             51.53
26-15             51.20
26-16             51.21
26-17             51.22
26-18             51.23
26-19             51.24
26-20             51.25
26-21             51.02
26-23             51.01
26-24             51.03
26-25             51.04
26-26             51.05
26-27             51.06
26-28             51.07
26-29             51.08
26-30             51.09
Appendix A, § 1  154.01
Appendix A, § 2  154.10
Appendix A, § 3  154.11
Appendix A, § 4  154.12
Appendix A, § 5  154.13
Appendix A, § 6  154.16
Appendix A, § 7  154.27
Appendix A, § 8  154.14
Appendix A, § 9  154.15
Appendix A, § 10 154.25
Appendix A, § 11 154.26
                  
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
—      12-1-53     130.04
—      5-18-54     152.01 -
                     152.14
—      9-7-54      130.06
—      10-18-55    130.39
—      3-20-56     90.30
                     154.01,
                     154.10 -
—      6-4-57      154.16,
                     154.25 -
                     154.27
—      11-19-57    130.03
—      5-6-58      30.21
—      9-2-58      33.079
                     150.002,
                     150.003,
—      8-2-60      150.143 -
                     150.151,
                     152.30 -
                     152.32
—      6-20-61     30.09
—      2-6-62      130.08
—      10-16-62    90.11,
                     90.14
—      6-4-63      97.03
—      10-15-63    30.09
                     90.01,
                     90.10,
—      12-17-63    90.12,
                     90.15,
                     90.16,
                     90.18
—      6-15-65     30.09
                     51.01,
                     51.03,
                     51.04,
—      10-26-65    51.06,
                     51.07,
                     51.24,
                     51.49
—      2-15-66     10.04
                     31.11,
—      4-19-66     31.30 -
                     31.34
—      5-31-66     150.001,
                     150.004
—      8-2-66      30.09
                     33.012,
                     33.020 -
                     33.026,
                     33.040 -
                     33.048,
                     33.052 -
                     33.054,
—      6-14-67     33.056,
                     33.058 -
                     33.063,
                     33.075,
                     33.076,
                     33.078,
                     33.079,
                     33.081
                     33.012,
                     33.042,
                     33.045,
                     33.052,
                     33.053,
—      12-27-67    33.054,
                     33.056,
                     33.059,
                     33.061,
                     33.075,
                     33.077
—      3-19-68     150.143
—      7-23-68     90.01
—      8-20-68     33.062
                     33.082,
                     117.02,
—      4-15-69     117.03,
                     117.15 -
                     117.28,
                     117.31
—      5-6-69      33.059,
                     33.060
—      11-12-69    33.022
—      2-3-70      10.04
—      10-6-70     31.11
—      2-16-71     96.02 -
                     96.08
—      3-2-71      96.01
—      12-7-71     30.07
—      12-21-71    33.081
                     33.011,
—      12-5-72     72.23,
                     72.27
                     71.01,
                     71.02,
—      12-19-72    71.04 -
                     71.09,
                     71.12,
                     72.28
—      5-15-73     33.060
                     33.079,
—      7-3-73      97.34,
                     97.99
                     33.054,
—      8-7-73      33.059,
                     97.33
—      12-17-74    33.054
—      5-20-75     33.061
—      7-1-75      33.047
—      8-5-75      130.24
—      9-2-75      97.34
—      3-2-76      11.01
                     30.47,
—      2-15-77     72.28,
                     90.16
—      7-13-77     32.040 -
                     32.045
—      10-11-77    34.04,
                     130.24
—      2-7-78      33.090 -
                     33.093
                     51.01,
—      6-6-78      51.24,
                     53.01 -
                     53.06
—      10-31-78    97.15,
                     97.16
—      12-19-78    71.99
                     72.22,
—      3-6-79      72.23,
                     72.25,
                     72.26
                     32.055,
—      5-1-79      32.056,
                     97.33
                     117.01,
                     117.19,
—      6-5-79      117.29,
                     117.30,
                     117.32
                     32.065,
—      10-9-79     32.069,
                     96.04
—      11-13-79    130.40,
                     130.99
                     32.065,
—      12-27-79    32.069,
                     33.027
                     33.081,
                     150.002,
                     150.015 -
                     150.023,
                     150.035 -
—      4-15-80     150.051,
                     150.060 -
                     150.069,
                     150.080 -
                     150.090,
                     150.140 -
                     150.142
                     32.010 -
—      8-26-80     32.014,
                     97.32
—      11-6-80     31.11
—      12-16-80    31.15
—      3-3-81      151.03
—      9-1-81      33.028,
                     33.077
—      12-28-81    96.01
—      3-16-82     150.002
—      7-6-82      33.005,
                     33.064
—      1-4-83      152.31
                     31.11,
—      3-1-83      53.04,
                     117.24
—      4-5-83      92.10
—      9-6-83      97.35,
                     151.04
—      4-3-84      90.16
—      5-1-84      33.063
—      6-5-84      37.01 -
                     37.08
                     33.094,
                     92.07,
—      6-19-84     117.19,
                     117.22,
                     117.27
—      8-7-84      33.028
—      11-20-84    97.34,
                     97.99
—      2-19-85     153.01 -
                     153.04
—      3-19-85     33.005,
                     91.01
—      4-16-85     71.99,
                     92.07
—      6-4-85      92.07,
                     92.09
—      8-13-85     33.027
—      10-1-85     37.07
—      11-5-85     Charter, §
                     8.09
—      11-7-85     150.090
—      11-19-85    96.06
                     31.11,
—      12-17-85    33.091 -
                     33.093
                     97.42,
—      8-5-86      130.05,
                     155.02
—      9-2-86      150.002
—      10-21-86    31.11,
                     33.022
—      4-7-87      33.081
                     53.04,
—      6-2-87      117.01,
                     117.19,
                     117.23
                     30.07,
                     32.001 -
                     32.003,
                     38.01 -
—      9-1-87      38.04,
                     38.08,
                     38.99,
                     130.24,
                     130.40
                     30.61,
                     30.62,
                     32.004,
—      4-5-88      32.040,
                     32.041,
                     152.15,
                     152.16
                     33.046,
—      4-19-88     33.048,
                     33.050,
                     36.05
—      5-3-88      92.07
—      6-7-88      31.34
—      10-4-88     96.06
—      1-17-89     91.20 -
                     91.23
                     151.01,
—      2-7-89      151.41,
                     151.42
—      3-7-89      32.090 -
                     32.093
—      4-4-89      34.15 -
                     34.25
—      5-16-89     92.09
—      5-22-90     92.09
                     90.16,
—      6-5-90      91.35 -
                     91.44,
                     117.19
                     32.002,
—      7-12-90     97.34,
                     97.99
—      11-7-90     33.064
—      6-4-91      92.09
—      9-4-91      92.09
                     33.093,
—      10-15-91    150.002,
                     150.100 -
                     150.114
—      11-6-91     71.13,
                     71.14
—      12-17-91    33.022
—      1-7-92      33.075
—      5-5-92      150.114
                     90.04,
—      2-17-93     90.99,
                     98.01,
                     98.02
—      4-20-93     34.01 -
                     34.03
—      10-19-93    97.35
—      2-15-94     150.002,
                     150.086
                     32.083,
                     34.05,
—      6-21-94     38.02,
                     150.002,
                     150.063
                     30.48,
                     30.60,
                     31.11,
—      6-27-94     33.092,
                     33.093,
                     93.01 -
                     93.19,
                     150.114
—      6-28-94     33.064
—      7-1-94      150.143
—      7-5-94      33.064
                     52.001 -
                     52.006,
                     52.020 -
                     52.036,
                     52.050 -
                     52.067,
                     52.080 -
                     52.084,
                     52.095 -
                     52.101,
—      1-17-95     52.115 -
                     52.135,
                     52.145 -
                     52.149,
                     52.160 -
                     52.162,
                     52.175 -
                     52.188,
                     52.999,
                     93.14,
                     111.65 -
                     111.69
                     92.01 -
                     92.04,
                     92.06 -
                     92.10,
                     92.20 -
—      2-7-95      92.28,
                     92.40 -
                     92.63,
                     92.70 -
                     92.74,
                     92.99
—      2-21-95     97.34,
                     97.99
                     110.01 -
                     110.09,
                     110.20 -
                     110.22,
                     110.24 -
                     110.28,
                     110.99,
                     111.01 -
                     111.03,
                     111.15 -
                     111.28,
                     111.40 -
                     111.52,
                     111.54 
                     111.55,
                     111.65 -
—      3-7-95      111.69,
                     111.80,
                     111.81,
                     111.99,
                     112.01 -
                     112.03,
                     114.01 -
                     114.04,
                     115.01,
                     115.02,
                     115.10,
                     115.11,
                     115.40 -
                     115.46,
                     115.60 -
                     115.63,
                     118.15
                     118.01,
                     118.10 -
—      4-4-95      118.18,
                     118.30 -
                     118.42,
                     118.99
—      5-16-95     52.160
                     30.09,
                     37.07,
—      9-5-95      92.09,
                     115.40,
                     115.60
—      12-19-95    37.06
                     30.07,
                     30.60,
                     110.02,
—      6-4-96      110.20,
                     111.40,
                     115.40,
                     117.19
—      8-6-96      90.04
                     33.028,
—      9-3-96      92.80 -
                     92.83
                     32.120 -
                     32.125,
                     38.02,
                     38.06,
—      10-1-96     52.026,
                     52.999,
                     90.16,
                     110.08,
                     130.99
—      11-19-96    70.40,
                     110.02
—      12-3-96     130.11,
                     130.12
—      1-7-97      Adopting Ordinance
                     52.002,
—      1-7-97      52.080,
                     52.082
                     110.02,
—      2-4-97      110.26,
                     110.27,
                     118.12
                     35.020 -
                     35.024,
                     35.030 -
—      5-6-97      35.032,
                     35.040,
                     38.06,
                     151.04
                     110.02,
—      7-1-97      110.26,
                     110.27
                     32.140,
—      8-5-97      52.026,
                     96.06.1,
                     130.03
                     52.160,
                     91.20,
—      10-7-97     91.21,
                     110.27,
                     150.114
—      12-2-97     71.14
—      2-17-98     31.32
                     118.12 -
—      4-7-98      118.15,
                     118.20 -
                     118.29
                     30.09,
                     32.083,
—      4-21-98     52.161,
                     150.999,
                     151.04
—      8-4-98      74.01,
                     97.20
                     30.18,
                     30.19,
                     30.38 -
                     30.40,
                     31.00,
                     32.017 -
                     32.022,
                     32.065,
                     32.140,
                     33.012,
                     33.021,
                     33.022,
                     33.026 -
                     33.028,
                     33.041,
                     33.043 -
                     33.046,
                     33.048,
                     33.050,
                     33.053,
                     33.054,
                     33.059 -
                     33.062,
                     33.077,
—      11-4-98     33.079,
                     33.081,
                     33.090,
                     33.093,
                     33.094,
                     35.015,
                     35.016,
                     36.10,
                     36.30,
                     51.001,
                     51.002,
                     51.02,
                     51.06,
                     51.23 -
                     51.25,
                     51.41,
                     51.45,
                     51.48,
                     51.49,
                     51.53,
                     91.00,
                     92.00,
                     96.00,
                     97.00,
                     149.00,
                     152.00
                     99.01 -
                     99.04,
—      1-19-99     99.99,
                     110.02,
                     130.41
                     32.015,
—      4-6-99      38.06,
                     70.40,
                     111.45
—      4-20-99     152.33
—      6-17-99     33.079,
                     90.11.1
—      8-3-99      38.06,
                     90.99
                     32.019,
                     32.083,
                     33.060,
—      12-7-99     33.079,
                     34.04,
                     38.06,
                     97.00
—      1-3-00      30.10,
                     30.11
—      3-21-00     130.42
                     Ch. 33 (title),
—      4-4-00      Ch. 38 (title),
                     90.12
                     90.18,
—      6-5-00      97.34,
                     130.24
                     33.048,
—      9-5-00      33.050,
                     33.081
                     118.01,
                     118.10 -
                     118.12,
                     118.15,
—      10-3-00     118.16,
                     118.33,
                     118.37,
                     118.39,
                     118.42,
                     118.99
—      11-28-00    90.16,
                     96.06
—      1-2-01      52.160
—      3-20-01     110.23,
                     111.53
—      9-4-01      33.046
—      9-4-01      52.160
—      9-4-01      53.01 -
                     53.07
                     91.01,
                     91.20,
                     91.21,
—      9-4-01      91.23,
                     91.35 -
                     91.44,
                     91.50,
                     91.51
        9-4-01      92.05
—      9-4-01      111.70
                     117.01 -
—      9-4-01      117.03,
                     117.15 -
                     117.32
—      9-4-01      151.01
—      11-7-01     33.046,
                     33.080
—      11-7-01     97.34
                     110.20,
                     111.65,
                     115.01,
—      11-7-01     115.40 -
                     115.46,
                     115.50 -
                     115.55
—      11-7-01     151.41
—      12-18-01    38.06
—      2-19-02     33.047
—      3-5-02      111.70
—      4-16-02     38.06
—      4-16-02     91.60 -
                     91.76
—      4-16-02     92.22
—      4-16-02     97.34
—      8-6-02      30.09
—      8-6-02      33.046
—      8-6-02      33.063
—      8-6-02      33.075
—      8-6-02      33.079
—      8-6-02      33.081
—      8-6-02      33.081
—      8-6-02      52.116
—      8-6-02      118.12
                     70.01 -
                     70.12,
                     70.15 -
                     70.30,
                     70.36 -
                     70.39,
                     70.48 -
—      8-6-02      70.57,
                     70.70,
                     70.71,
                     70.76 -
                     70.78,
                     70.80 -
                     70.82,
                     70.13
—      9-4-02      70.40
                     31.11,
—      11-6-02     35.023,
                     35.033 -
                     35.035
—      12-3-02     70.82
—      1-21-03     70.57
—      2-18-03     33.011,
                     33.046
—      3-18-03     33.046
—      4-15-03     38.06
                     70.54,
—      6-3-03      70.57,
                     90.11
—      6-9-03      31.11,
                     70.82
                     33.061,
—      8-5-03      149.00,
                     152.00
                     70.31,
                     70.71,
                     91.63,
—      11-5-03     91.66,
                     92.25,
                     150.002,
                     150.063
                     70.06,
—      4-6-04      70.36,
                     70.78
—      4-6-04      70.55
—      4-6-04      75.01 -
                     75.14
—      4-6-04      92.24
—      6-1-04      70.57
—      6-1-04      93.03
—      6-8-04      70.54
—      7-20-04     Repealing 130.10
—      7-20-04     70.55
—      10-5-04     38.06
—      10-26-04    35.036
—      11-16-04    70.71
—      1-4-05      70.57
—      2-1-05      33.079
—      2-1-05      33.081
—      2-1-05      90.11
—      2-15-05     70.55
—      5-3-05      39.01 -
                     39.14
—      5-3-05      52.160,
                     52.161
—      5-3-05      71.99
—      10-4-05     30.49,
                     30.50
—      10-4-05     32.092
—      10-4-05     Repealing 35.017, 35.018
—      10-4-05     36.15,
                     36.17
—      10-4-05     70.40
—      10-4-05     70.55
                     111.65 -
—      10-4-05     111.73,
                     111.99
                     115.01,
—      10-4-05     115.40,
                     115.44
                     36.16,
—      10-5-05     36.18,
                     36.35
—      10-18-05    33.079
—      12-6-05     33.079
                     70.07,
—      12-19-05    70.11, Repealing 70.61 - 70.65, 71.01, 71.02, Repealing
                     71.03, 71.04 - 71.09, 71.12 - 71.14, 71.99
—      4-18-06     70.55
                     111.70,
                     111.71,
—      6-6-06      111.75 -
                     111.77,
                     111.99
—      6-12-06     70.44 -
                     70.47
—      7-11-06     70.48,
                     70.78, Repealing 70.79
—      8-1-06      33.062
                     54.01 -
—      8-1-06      54.12,
                     54.99
—      8-3-06      33.062
                     94.01 -
                     94.06,
—      9-5-06      94.10 -
                     94.12,
                     94.40 -
                     94.43
—      10-3-06     33.062
—      10-3-06     33.080
—      10-17-06    150.114
—      11-14-06    33.054
—      11-14-06    33.076
—      11-14-06    117.19
—      11-28-06    33.047
—      11-28-06    33.048
                     70.06,
—      12-5-06     70.48,
                     70.78
—      1-2-07      33.048
—      1-2-07      33.079
—      2-6-07      52.160
—      3-6-07      38.06
—      3-20-07     37.03
—      5-1-07      70.54
—      7-10-07     70.54,
                     70.57
—      7-10-07     70.55
—      10-2-07     38.06
—      10-2-07     70.48
—      11-7-07     70.48
—      11-20-07    97.35
—      12-18-07    70.57
—      12-18-07    70.78
—      2-5-08      70.48
—      2-19-08     97.34
—      4-15-08     70.78
—      5-20-08     33.064
—      5-20-08     70.45
—      5-20-08     70.55
—      5-20-08     70.82
—      5-20-08     96.00
—      6-3-08      30.23
—      8-5-08      70.48
—      8-5-08      70.54
—      8-5-08      70.57
—      8-5-08      92.05
—      10-7-08     30.09
—      2-2-09      70.06,
                     70.36
                     34.20,
                     34.22,
                     34.24,
                     35.023,
                     37.06,
                     38.02,
                     51.06,
                     52.029,
                     52.126,
                     94.41,
                     97.32,
                     97.34,
                     97.35,
                     97.39,
                     97.40,
                     97.55,
                     97.56,
                     97.57,
                     110.02,
—      2-17-09     110.25,
                     111.02,
                     111.52,
                     115.40,
                     149.000,
                     150.002,
                     150.022,
                     150.107,
                     150.108,
                     150.110,
                     150.140,
                     150.143,
                     150.144,
                     150.146,
                     150.147,
                     150.149,
                     150.150,
                     150.151,
                     151.42,
                     152.00,
                     154.25, Repealing 150.125 - 150.129
—      4-21-09     70.54
—      5-5-09      31.06
—      5-5-09      30.47
—      5-19-09     97.34
—      5-19-09     70.78
—      5-19-09     70.36
—      5-19-09     71.99
—      5-19-09     70.81
—      7-7-09      70.54
—      7-7-09      70.57
—      8-18-09     30.09
—      8-18-09     38.05
—      8-18-09     70.54
—      8-18-09     35.037
—      8-18-09     70.57
—      10-6-09     33.100
—      12-1-09     118.33
—      12-1-09     70.78
—      12-1-09     70.57
—      2-10-10     71.13
—      2-2-10      71.08
—      3-16-10     96.03
                     96.04,
—      3-16-10     96.06,
                     96.06.1
                     96.06,
—      3-16-10     96.07,
                     96.08
—      3-16-10     97.00
—      3-16-10     98.01
—      5-4-10      35.038
—      5-4-10      70.36
—      5-4-10      70.54
—      5-4-10      70.55
—      5-4-10      70.78
                     92.22,
—      5-4-10      92.25,
                     92.26
—      5-4-10      93.03,
                     93.14
—      5-4-10      96.00
—      5-4-10      111.45
                     115.01,
—      7-6-10      115.43,
                     115.44
—      7-6-10      70.36
—      7-6-10      70.54
—      7-6-10      70.57
—      7-6-10      70.78
—      9-21-10     70.55
—      9-21-10     70.57
—      10-5-10     70.06
—      10-5-10     70.36
—      12-7-10     33.081
—      12-7-10     70.54
—      1-4-11      117.01
—      3-15-11     52.160
—      4-5-11      71.13
—      4-5-11      70.54
—      4-5-11      70.54
—      4-5-11      70.54
—      7-5-11      53.03,
                     53.04
—      7-5-11      91.37,
                     91.42
—      7-5-11      92.09
—      7-5-11      92.09
—      7-5-11      94.11
—      7-5-11      117.19
—      12-6-11     39.07
                     91.63,
—      12-20-11    91.64,
                     91.66
—      12-20-11    114.04
—      4-17-12     32.080
—      6-5-12      110.01
—      6-5-12      110.26
—      6-5-12      114.01,
                     114.02
—      6-5-12      114.03,
                     114.04
—      12-18-12    33.079
—      2-19-13     70.06
—      2-19-13     70.36
—      5-7-13      33.080
—      5-7-13      70.55
—      7-2-13      70.40
—      12-17-13    90.04
—      5-20-14     70.54
—      5-20-14     70.55
—      5-20-14     70.57
—      9-2-14      70.57
—      9-2-14      150.114
—      10-7-14     130.50 -
                     130.55
—      11-18-14    155.02
                     52.002,
                     52.026,
                     52.054 -
                     52.058,
                     52.081 -
                     52.084,
—      12-2-14     52.097 -
                     52.099,
                     52.101,
                     52.116,
                     52.117,
                     52.160,
                     52.162
                     111.40,
—      12-2-14     111.44,
                     111.45
—      2-3-15      150.067,
                     150.068
—      4-7-15      36.40
—      4-7-15      96.06
—      10-6-15     70.06
—      10-6-15     114.03
—      10-6-15     115.44,
                     115.53
—      11-17-15    Repealing 33.051
—      12-1-15     92.24
—      12-1-15     92.25
—      12-1-15     150.004
—      5-3-16      70.77
                     38.06,
                     110.02,
—      5-3-16      118.15,
                     118.39,
                     119.18,
                     119.99
—      3-7-17      150.002,
                     150.091
                     110.01,
—      4-18-17     110.02,
                     110.20,
                     110.23
                     111.40,
                     111.45,
—      4-18-17     111.65,
                     111.66,
                     111.90,
                     111.91
—      4-18-17     115.01
—      7-18-17     30.09
—      9-5-17      96.06
—      9-5-17      35.039
—      10-3-17     97.34
—      12-19-17    11.03,
                     11.04
—      5-15-18     Repealing 70.32
—      5-15-18     30.01,
                     30.02
—      6-5-18      35.0381
—      6-5-18      35.0351
—      6-5-18      35.035
—      6-5-18      35.032
—      7-17-18     97.34
—      10-2-18     39.02
—      1-8-19      33.079
—      2-5-19      30.09
—      3-5-19      36.40
—      4-2-19      33.064
                     91.61,
—      5-7-19      91.63,
                     91.64 -
                     91.67
—      6-4-19      35.0371
—      9-3-19      38.06
—      9-3-19      96.06
—      10-1-19     33.050
—      10-1-19     96.03
—      10-1-19     96.06
—      10-1-19     130.24
—      12-3-19     92.25
—      2-4-20      52.160
—      2-4-20      110.01
—      2-4-20      114.01
—      2-4-20      114.03
—      3-15-20     33.081
—      4-7-20      12.01 -
                     12.12
—      6-2-20      35.0352
—      8-4-20      12.06,
                     12.08
—      11-10-20    33.081
—      11-10-20    Repealing 97.02
—      11-10-20    130.15
—      1-5-21      118.39
—      1-19-21     96.06
—      1-19-21     130.13
—      5-4-21      130.13
—      7-6-21      151.01
—      8-3-21      32.130 -
                     32.134
—      8-3-21      39.05
—      12-7-21     96.04
—      12-7-21     130.39
—      12-21-21    12.01 -
                     12.12
—      3-1-22      33.046
—      5-3-22      150.018,
                     150.089
—      5-17-22     118.33
—      6-21-22     97.03,
                     97.06
—      8-2-22      33.080
—      10-4-22     70.40
—      10-4-22     33.075
—      10-18-22    96.06
—      12-20-22    33.079
—      12-20-22    33.081
—      12-20-22    150.067,
                     150.068
—      3-7-23      30.11
—      3-21-23     52.160
—      5-2-23      36.40
—      6-6-23      30.12
—      6-6-23      91.00, Repealing 32.104 - 32.107, 32.109, 32.110
—      8-1-23      32.150 -
                     32.155
—      9-5-23      36.45
                     91.63,
                     91.631,
—      9-5-23      91.64,
                     91.66,
                     91.67
—      10-3-23     71.04,
                     71.13, Repealing 71.10, 71.11
—      6-4-24      70.57,
                     70.78
—      7-2-24      33.081
—      7-2-24      130.13
—      9-3-24      30.09
—      9-3-24      39.08
—      10-1-24     91.80 -
                     91.90
—      11-19-24    70.57
                     52.029,
—      1-7-25      52.122,
                     52.125,
                     52.133
—      3-4-25      92.25
—      4-1-25      52.160
—      4-1-25      32.025 -
                     32.034, Repealing 32.035
                     33.012,
                     32.027,
                     33.046 -
                     33.048,
                     33.050,
                     33.053,
—      6-3-25      33.054,
                     33.056,
                     33.059 -
                     33.062,
                     33.064,
                     33.075,
                     33.077 -
                     33.082, Repealing 33.008, 33.009, 33.055, 33.057
                    
 
