ANTRIM TOWNSHIP, PENNSYLVANIA
CODE OF ORDINANCES
Code current through
Ordinance 368 passed 10-14-2025
 
 
AMERICAN LEGAL PUBLISHING
525 Vine Street, Suite 310, Cincinnati, Ohio 45202 (800) 445-5588
CHAPTER 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Article
      
I.   ADOPTION OF CODE
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Antrim as
indicated in article histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
Section
Article I: Adoption of Code
   
1-1   Approval, adoption and enactment of Code
   
1-2   Effect of Code on previous provisions
   
1-3   Repeal of legislation not contained in Code
   
1-4   Legislation saved from repeal; matters not affected by repeal
   
1-5   Inclusion of new legislation prior to adoption of Code
   
1-6   Changes and revisions in previously adopted legislation; new provisions
   
1-7   Interpretation of provisions
   
1-8   Titles and headings; editor s notes
   
1-9   Filing of copies of Code
   
1-10   Amendments to Code
   
1-11   Code books to be kept up-to-date
   
1-12   Publication of notices
   
1-13   Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation
   
1-14   Severability
   
1-15   Effective date
ARTICLE I ADOPTION OF CODE
[Adopted 7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 246]
 1-1 APPROVAL, ADOPTION AND ENACTMENT OF CODE.
   Pursuant to Section 1601(d) [53 P.S. 66601(d)] of the Second Class Township
Code, the codification of a complete body of legislation for the Township of
Antrim, County of Franklin, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, as revised, codified
and consolidated into titles, chapters and sections by American Legal
Publishing, and consisting of Chapters 1 through 150, together with Appendix,
which codification is to amend in its entirety the Code of Ordinances of the
Township of Antrim, adopted May 26, 1987, by Ordinance No. 158, is hereby
approved, adopted, ordained and enacted as a single ordinance of the Township
of Antrim, which shall be known and is hereby designated as the Code of the
Township of Antrim, hereinafter referred to as the Code.
 1-2 EFFECT OF CODE ON PREVIOUS PROVISIONS.
   The provisions of this Code, insofar as they are substantively the same as
those of ordinances and resolutions in force immediately prior to the enactment
of this ordinance, are intended as a continuation of such ordinances and
resolutions and not as new enactments, and the effectiveness of such provisions
shall date from the date of adoption of the prior ordinance or resolution. All
such provisions are hereby continued in full force and effect and are hereby
reaffirmed as to their adoption by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of
Antrim, and it is the intention of said Board of Supervisors that each such
provision contained within the Code is hereby reenacted and reaffirmed as it
appears in said Code. Only such provisions of former ordinances as are omitted
from this Code shall be deemed repealed or abrogated by the provisions of
1-3 below, and only new or changed provisions, as described in
1-6 below, shall be deemed to be enacted from the effective date of this Code,
as provided in
1-15 below.
 1-3 REPEAL OF LEGISLATION NOT CONTAINED IN CODE.
   All ordinances or parts of ordinances of a general and permanent nature
adopted by the Township of Antrim and in force on the date of the adoption of
this Code and not contained in the Code are hereby repealed as of the effective
date given in
1-15 below, except as hereinafter provided.
 1-4 LEGISLATION SAVED FROM REPEAL; MATTERS NOT AFFECTED BY REPEAL.
   The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
1-3 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights and
obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal; provided, however,
that the repeal of ordinances pursuant to
1-3 or the saving from repeal of ordinances pursuant to this section shall not
be construed so as to revive any ordinance previously repealed, superseded or
no longer of any effect:
   A.   Any ordinance adopted subsequent to March 26, 1996.
   B.   Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision of the Township prior to the effective date of this
ordinance or any action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of such right
or liability or any cause of action acquired or existing.
   C.   Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision of the Township or any
penalty, punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
   D.   Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this ordinance, brought
pursuant to any legislative provision of the Township.
   E.   Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred by the Township or any lawful contract, obligation or agreement.
   F.   Any ordinance appropriating money or transferring funds, promising or
guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance and delivery of
any bond of the Township or other instruments or evidence of the Township s
indebtedness.
   G.   Any ordinance adopting an annual budget or establishing an annual tax
rate.
   H.   Any ordinance providing for the levy, imposition or collection of
special taxes, assessments or charges.
   I.   Any ordinance authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of
property or acquiring property by acceptance of deed, condemnation or exercise
of eminent domain.
   J.   Any ordinance annexing land to the Township.
   K.   Any ordinance providing for or requiring the construction or
reconstruction or opening of sidewalks, curbs and gutters.
   L.   Any ordinance or part of an ordinance providing for laying out,
opening, altering, widening, relocating, straightening, establishing grade,
changing name, improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-of-way,
easement, street, road, highway, sidewalk, park or other public place or
property or designating various streets as public highways.
   M.   Any ordinance establishing water, sewer or other special purpose
districts and designating the boundaries thereof; providing for a system of
sewers or water supply lines; or providing for the construction, extension,
dedication, acceptance or abandonment of any part of a system of sewers or
water supply lines.
   N.   Any ordinance providing for the making of public improvements.
   O.   Any ordinance providing for the salaries and compensation of officers
and employees of the Township or setting the bond of any officer or employee.
   P.   Any ordinance concerning changes and amendments to the Zoning Map.
   Q.   Any ordinance relating to or establishing a pension plan or pension
fund for municipal employees.
 1-5 INCLUSION OF NEW LEGISLATION PRIOR TO ADOPTION OF CODE.
   All ordinances and resolutions of a general and permanent nature adopted
subsequent to the date given in
1-4(A) and/or prior to the date of adoption of this ordinance are hereby deemed
to be a part of the Code and shall, upon being printed, be included therein.
Attested copies of all such ordinances and resolutions shall be temporarily
placed in the Code until printed supplements are included.
 1-6 CHANGES AND REVISIONS IN PREVIOUSLY ADOPTED LEGISLATION; NEW PROVISIONS.
   A.   Nonsubstantive grammatical changes. In compiling and preparing the
ordinances and resolutions of the Township for adoption and revision as part of
the Code, certain nonsubstantive grammatical and style changes were made in one
or more of said ordinances and resolutions. It is the intention of the Board of
Supervisors that all such changes be adopted as part of the Code as if the
ordinances and resolutions so changed had been previously formally amended to
read as such.
   B.   Substantive changes and revisions. In addition to the changes and
revisions described above, changes and revisions of a substantive nature are
hereby made to various ordinances and resolutions included in the Code as set
forth in Schedule A attached hereto and made a part hereof. These changes are
made to bring provisions into conformity with the desired policies of the Board
of Supervisors, and it is the intent of the Board of Supervisors that all such
changes be adopted as part of the Code as if the legislation so changed have
been previously formally amended to read as such. All such changes and
revisions shall be deemed to be in effect as of the effective date of the Code
specified in
1-15.
 1-7 INTERPRETATION OF PROVISIONS.
   In interpreting and applying the provisions of the Code, they shall be held
to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety,
comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where the provisions of the Code
impose greater restrictions or requirements than those of any statute, other
ordinance, resolution or regulation, the provisions of the Code shall control.
Where the provisions of any statute, other ordinance, resolution or regulation
impose greater restrictions or requirements, the provisions of such statute,
other ordinance, resolution or regulation shall control.
 1-8 TITLES AND HEADINGS; EDITOR S NOTES.
   A.   Chapter and article titles, headings and titles of sections and other
divisions in the Code or in supplements made to the Code are inserted in the
Code and may be inserted in supplements to the Code for the convenience of
persons using the Code and are not part of the legislation.
   B.   Editor s notes indicating sources of sections, giving other information
or referring to the statutes or to other parts of the Code are inserted in the
Code and may be inserted in supplements to the Code for the convenience of
persons using the Code and are not part of the legislation.
 1-9 FILING OF COPIES OF CODE.
   Three copies of the Code in a post-bound volume shall be filed with the
Ordinance Book in the office of the Township Secretary and shall remain there
for use and examination by the public. Upon adoption, such copies shall be
certified to by the Township Secretary, as provided by law, and such certified
copies shall remain on file in the office of the Township Secretary, available
to persons desiring to examine the same during all times while said Code is in
effect.
 1-10 AMENDMENTS TO CODE.
   Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code,
when passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of the Board
of Supervisors to be a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated into
such Code so that reference to the Code shall be understood and intended to
include such changes. Whenever such additions, deletions, amendments or
supplements to the Code shall be adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and,
as provided hereunder, inserted in the post-bound book containing said Code as
amendments and supplements thereto.
 1-11 CODE BOOKS TO BE KEPT UP-TO-DATE.
   It shall be the duty of the Township Secretary or someone authorized and
directed by him or her to keep up-to-date the certified copies of the book
containing the Code required to be filed in the office of the Township
Secretary for the use of the public. All changes in said Code and all
legislation adopted by the Board of Supervisors subsequent to the effective
date of this codification which the Board of Supervisors shall adopt
specifically as part of the Code shall, when finally adopted, be included
therein by reference until such changes or new legislation are printed as
supplements to said Code books, at which time such supplements shall be
inserted therein.
 1-12 PUBLICATION OF NOTICES.
   The Township Secretary, pursuant to law, shall cause to be published in the
manner required proper advertisements for the adoption of the Code.
 1-13 ALTERING OR TAMPERING WITH CODE; PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION.
   A.   Any person who violates or permits a violation of a chapter (articles)
of the Code requiring civil enforcement, upon being found liable therefor in a
civil enforcement proceeding, shall pay a fine of not more than $600 plus all
court costs, including reasonable attorney s fees, incurred by the Township in
the enforcement of this chapter. No judgment shall be imposed until the date of
the determination of the violation by the District Justice and/or Court. If the
defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the Township may
enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable rules of civil procedure. Each
day a violation exists shall constitute a separate offense. Further, the
appropriate officers or agents of the Township are hereby authorized to seek
equitable relief, including injunction, to enforce compliance herewith.
   B.   Any chapters (articles) of this ordinance requiring criminal
enforcement shall be enforced by an action brought before a District Justice in
the same manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses under the
Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure. Any person who violates or permits
the violation of this chapter (article) shall, upon conviction in a summary
proceeding, be punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000 or by imprisonment
for a term not exceeding 90 days. Each day or portion thereof that such
violation continues, or is permitted to continue, shall constitute a separate
offense. Each section of this chapter (article) that is violated shall also
constitute a separate offense.
   C.   Any person who violates the Zoning and/or Subdivision and Land
Development sections of the Code shall be prosecuted pursuant to the
Municipalities Planning Code.
 1-14 SEVERABILITY.
   The provisions of this ordinance and of the Code adopted hereby are
severable, and if any clause, sentence, subsection, section, article, chapter
or part thereof shall be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be
illegal, invalid or unconstitutional, such judgment or decision shall not
affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof but shall be confined in its
operation and application to the clause, sentence, subsection, section,
article, chapter or part thereof rendered. It is hereby declared to be the
intent of the Board of Supervisors that this ordinance and the Code would have
been adopted if such illegal, invalid or unconstitutional clause, sentence,
subsection, section, article, chapter or part thereof had not been included
therein.
 1-15 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   All provisions of this ordinance and of the Code shall be in force and
effect on and after July 13, 1997.
CHAPTER 2 CHAPTER 6: RESERVED
[Former Ch. 2, Administration of Government, Art. I, Township Manager, adopted
6-28-2005 by Ord. No. 292, was repealed 9-9-2008 by Ord. No. 313.]
CHAPTER 7: COUNCIL OF GOVERNMENTS
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Antrim 8-23-
2005 by Ord. No. 294. Amendments noted where applicable.]
Section
   
7-1   Agreement to become member
   
7-2   Bylaws
 7-1 AGREEMENT TO BECOME MEMBER.
   The Township of Antrim agrees to become a member of the Franklin County
Council of Governments; and
 7-2 BYLAWS.
   The Bylaws of the Franklin County Council of Governments attached hereto and
made a part hereof, which specify the organizational structure and other
operational means of the Council of Governments, are hereby approved.[1]
[1] Editor s Note: The bylaws are on file in the Township offices.
CHAPTER 8: COOPERATIVE PURCHASING AGREEMENTS
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Antrim 6-23-
2015 by Ord. No. 342. Amendments noted where applicable.]
Section
   
8-1   Desire to enter Cooperative Purchasing Program Agreement
   
8-2   Operation under state statutes
   
8-3   Township authorized to participate
   
8-4   Advertising not required
   
8-5   Reference in Second Class Township Code
   
8-6   Ordinance and written agreement required
   
8-7   Best interest of Township
   
8-8   Cooperative Purchasing Program Agreement entered
 8-1 DESIRE TO ENTER COOPERATIVE PURCHASING PROGRAM AGREEMENT.
   Township of Antrim desires to enter into a Cooperative Purchasing Program
Agreement with the Keystone Purchasing Network , (hereinafter referred to as
KPN ).
 8-2 OPERATION UNDER STATE STATUTES.
   KPN is a cooperative purchasing program operating under Chapter 19,
Intergovernmental Relations of the Pennsylvania Commonwealth Procurement Code,
62 Pa. C.S. 1901 et seq., (hereinafter referred to as the Act ).
 8-3 TOWNSHIP AUTHORIZED TO PARTICIPATE.
   Township of Antrim is a political subdivision authorized to participate in
KPN as a Local Public Procurement Unit as defined in the Act .
 8-4 ADVERTISING NOT REQUIRED.
   Section 3102 (h)(3) of the Second Class Township Code provides that
contracts or purchases made by the Board of Supervisors with another municipal
corporation, county, school district or municipal authority, a council of
government, consortium, cooperative or other similar entity created pursuant to
53 Pa. C.S.A. Ch. 23 Subch. A (relating to intergovernmental cooperation) do
not require advertising by the Board of Supervisors.
 8-5 REFERENCE IN SECOND CLASS TOWNSHIP CODE.
   KPN is one of the entities referenced in Section 3102 (h)(3) of the Second
Class Township Code.
 8-6 ORDINANCE AND WRITTEN AGREEMENT REQUIRED.
   The Intergovernmental Cooperation Act (53 Pa. C.S. 2301-2315) requires the
passage of an ordinance and a written agreement with KPN in order for the
purchasing agreement to be effective.
 8-7 BEST INTEREST OF TOWNSHIP.
   The Township of Antrim Board of Supervisors find it to be in the best
interest of the public health and welfare of the residents of the Township to
enter into the Cooperative Purchasing Program Agreement with KPN.
 8-8 COOPERATIVE PURCHASING PROGRAM AGREEMENT ENTERED.
   The Township shall enter into a Cooperative Purchasing Program Agreement
with KPN. A copy of said Agreement is labeled Exhibit A , attached hereto and
incorporated herein by reference as if set forth in full hereunder.
CHAPTER 9: INTERGOVERNMENTAL AGREEMENTS
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Antrim 5-12-
2011 by Ord. No. 322. Amendments noted where applicable.]
Section
   
9-1   Guilford Township Intergovernmental Agreement
 9-1 GUILFORD TOWNSHIP INTERGOVERNMENTAL AGREEMENT.
   The terms of the agreement labeled Exhibit 1 , and attached hereto, are
hereby adopted by the Township of Antrim and the terms of the agreement may be
modified in the future by Resolution.
CHAPTER 10 CHAPTER 18: RESERVED
[Former Ch. 18, Manager, which was comprised of Ch. 1, Part 1 of the 1987 Code
of Ordinances, adopted 5-26-1987, as amended, was repealed 1-28-1997 by Ord.
No. 244, with an effective date of 2-3-1997. See now Ch. 2, Administration of
Government, Art. I, Township Manager.]
CHAPTER 19: INVESTMENTS
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Antrim 9-22-
1998 by Ord. No. 257. Amendments noted where applicable.]
Section
   
19-1   Settlor in Pennsylvania Local Government Investment Trust
   
19-2   Purchase and redemption of shares
   
19-3   Official custody of funds
   
19-4   Findings
 19-1 SETTLOR IN PENNSYLVANIA LOCAL GOVERNMENT INVESTMENT TRUST.
   This governmental unit shall join with other local governmental units in
accordance with the Intergovernmental Cooperation Act and other similar acts by
becoming a settlor of the Pennsylvania Local Government Investment Trust (the
Trust) and entering into the Declaration of Trust, which is adopted by
reference with the same effect as if it had been set out verbatim in this
section and a copy of which shall be filed with the minutes of the meeting at
which this chapter was adopted.[1]
[1] Editor s Note: The Declaration of Trust is on file in the Township offices.
 19-2 PURCHASE AND REDEMPTION OF SHARES.
   This governmental unit is authorized to purchase shares in the Trust from
time to time with available funds and to redeem some or all of those shares
from time to time as funds are needed for other purposes, subject to the terms
and restrictions of the Declaration of Trust referred to in
19-1. These actions are to be taken by the officers designated for this
purpose, pursuant to general or specific instructions by the governing body of
this governmental unit.
 19-3 OFFICIAL CUSTODY OF FUNDS.
   The Trustees of the Trust are designated as having official custody of this
governmental unit s funds which are invested by the purchase of shares in the
Trust.
 19-4 FINDINGS.
   As required by the Intergovernmental Cooperation Act, the following matters
are specifically found and determined:
   A.   The conditions of the agreements are set forth in the Declaration of
Trust referred to in
19-1.
   B.   This governmental unit s participation in the Trust shall be terminable
at any time by ordinance, subject to the terms and restrictions of the
Declaration of Trust referred to in
19-1.
   C.   The Declaration of Trust and the purchase of its shares are for the
purpose of investing this governmental unit s funds in obligations which are
otherwise legal investments, as part of a pooled arrangement with other local
governmental units, thereby achieving economic and other advantages of pooled
investments; and the powers and scope of authority delegated are set forth in
the Declaration of Trust referred to in
19-1.
   D.   It is not necessary to finance the agreement authorized herein from
funds of this governmental unit except through the purchase of shares in the
Trust.
   E.   The Trust shall be managed by a Board of Trustees as set forth in the
Declaration of Trust and the bylaws provided for therein.
   F.   Shares may be repurchased and redeemed from time to time as this
governmental unit may determine to be necessary or appropriate to meet its cash
investment requirements in accordance with the terms and restrictions of the
Declaration of Trust referred to in
19-1.
   G.   The Trust shall be empowered to enter into contracts for policies of
group insurance and employee benefits, including social security, for its
employees.
CHAPTER 20 CHAPTER 23: RESERVED
CHAPTER 24: PENSIONS
   Article
      
I.   PENNSYLVANIA MUNICIPAL RETIREMENT SYSTEM
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Antrim as
indicated in article histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
Section
Article I: Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement System
   
24-1   Change in member benefits
   
24-2   Official acceptance of agreement
   
24-3   Official acceptance of contract and obligations
   
24-4   Payment
   
24-5   Repeal of previous agreement
   
24-6   Certified copies
ARTICLE I PENNSYLVANIA MUNICIPAL RETIREMENT SYSTEM
[Adopted 4-14-2020 by Ord. No. 356]
 24-1 CHANGE IN MEMBER BENEFITS.
   Antrim Township (the Township), being a member municipality of the
Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement System (the System), hereby elects to amend
its Municipal Pension Plan administered by the System in accordance with
Article IV of the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement Law, 53 P.S. 881.101 et
seq. (Retirement Law), and does hereby agree to be bound by all the
requirements and provisions of the Retirement Law and the Municipal Pension
Plan Funding Standard and Recovery Act, 53 P.S. 895.101 et seq., and to assume
all obligations, financial and otherwise, placed upon member municipalities.
 24-2 OFFICIAL ACCEPTANCE OF AGREEMENT.
   The Township agrees that the System shall administer and provide the
benefits set forth in the amended Municipal Pension Plan Contract entered into
between the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement Board and the Township effective
April 1, 2020 (the Contract). Said contract is amended by the Pennsylvania
Municipal Retirement System Defined Benefit Plan Adoption Agreement Amendment ,
labeled Exhibit A , attached hereto and incorporated herein by reference as if
set forth in full hereunder. [Amended 10-14-2025 by Ord. No. 368]
 24-3 OFFICIAL ACCEPTANCE OF CONTRACT AND OBLIGATIONS.
   The passage and adoption of this Ordinance by the Township is an official
acceptance of the Contract and the financial obligations resulting from the
administration of the Contract.
 24-4 PAYMENT.
   Payment for any obligation established by the adoption of this Ordinance and
the Contract shall be made by the Township in accordance with the Municipal
Retirement Law and the Municipal Pension Plan Funding Standard and Recovery
Act. The Township hereby assumes all liability for any unfundedness created due
to the benefit structure set forth in the Contract.
 24-5 REPEAL OF PREVIOUS AGREEMENT.
   The Township intends this Ordinance to be the complete authorization of the
Contract and it shall become effective and specifically repeal Ordinance No.
343 either immediately or on April 1, 2020, which is the effective date of the
Contract, whichever is later.
 24-6 CERTIFIED COPIES.
   A duly certified copy of this Ordinance and an executed Contract shall be
filed with the System.
CHAPTER 25: UNEMPLOYMENT COMPENSATION
   Article
      
I.   PSATS UNEMPLOYMENT COMPENSATION GROUP TRUST
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Antrim as
indicated in article histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
Section
Article I: PSATS Unemployment Compensation Group Trust
   
25-1   Restated Trust Agreement adopted; inspection; modification
   
25-2   Purpose
   
25-3   Conditions applicable to participation
   
25-4   Withdrawal
   
25-5   Effective date
   
25-6   Powers
   
25-7   Organizational structure; Board of Trustees authorization
   
25-8   Funding
   
25-9   Entering into contracts
   
25-10   Compliance
   
25-11   Certified copy
   
25-12   Board of Supervisors authorized to take action
   
25-13   Duration
   
25-14   Findings and determinations
   
25-15   Severability
   
25-16   Effects; liability
   
25-17   Effective upon enactment
ARTICLE I PSATS UNEMPLOYMENT COMPENSATION GROUP TRUST
[Adopted 1-5-2015 by Ord. No. 339]
 25-1 RESTATED TRUST AGREEMENT ADOPTED; INSPECTION; MODIFICATION.
   That the Chairman of the Board of Supervisors and Secretary of the Township
are hereby authorized to adopt the Restated Trust Agreement and any other
agreements necessary for the Township s participation in the Trust.
   The Restated Trust Agreement is on file for inspection and review at the
Township s offices at 10655 Antrim Church Road, Greencastle PA 17225. The
Restated Trust Agreement may be subsequently modified or amended in accordance
with its terms, but in no event shall such modifications or amendments divert
any of the trust funds from the purposes of the Trust. The Township may
withdraw from the Trust in accordance with the Restated Trust Agreement,
including if the Board of Supervisors determines the modifications or
amendments are not in the best interests of the Township.
 25-2 PURPOSE.
   That the participation of the Township in the Trust is authorized for the
purpose of pooling resources for the purpose of providing unemployment
compensation insurance for Participating Employers at reasonable cost.
 25-3 CONDITIONS APPLICABLE TO PARTICIPATION.
   That, as set forth in greater detail in the Restated Trust Agreement and as
otherwise stated herein, the following conditions apply to the participation of
the township in the Trust:
   A.   That each Participating Employer must meet the admission and
eligibility requirements set forth therein;
   B.   That each Participating Employer agrees to pay all contributions when
due as provided in the Restated Trust Agreement or as otherwise established by
the Board of Trustees; and
   C.   That each Participating Employer complies with all other conditions of
the Restated Trust Agreement.
 25-4 WITHDRAWAL.
   That the Township agrees to participate in the Trust and may withdraw for
any reason and in accordance with the Restated Trust Agreement provided that it
has fulfilled all its financial obligations to the Trust upon withdrawal.
 25-5 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   That the effective date of the Township s agreement to and joinder in the
Restated Trust Agreement and the participation of the Township in the Trust
pursuant to the terms of the Restated Trust Agreement will be January 5, 2015.
 25-6 POWERS.
   That each Participating Employer delegates to the Board of Trustees the
powers enumerated in the Restated Trust Agreement.
 25-7 ORGANIZATIONAL STRUCTURE; BOARD OF TRUSTEES AUTHORIZATION.
   That the organizational structures of the Trust shall consist of a Board of
Trustees. Under the Restated Trust Agreement, the Board of Trustees is
authorized to, among other things, enter into contracts with third parties to
perform various services necessary for the administration of the Trust.
 25-8 FUNDING.
   That the funds required for the operation of the Trust shall be provided by
the Participating Employers through scheduled appropriations as determined by
the Board of Trustees.
 25-9 ENTERING INTO CONTRACTS.
   That the Trust is empowered to enter into contracts for policies of group
insurance and employee benefits, including Social Security, for employees of
the trust, if any.
 25-10 COMPLIANCE.
   That as a condition of participating in the Trust, the Township agrees to
comply with all of the terms and conditions in the Restated Trust Agreement.
 25-11 CERTIFIED COPY.
   That the Secretary of the Township shall provide a certified copy of this
Ordinance upon its enactment to the Board of Trustees of the Trust.
 25-12 BOARD OF SUPERVISORS AUTHORIZED TO TAKE ACTION.
   The Board of Supervisors of the Township is hereby authorized to take any
and all such other actions as may be necessary or appropriate to carry out the
purposes of this Ordinance and comply with the requirements of the attached
Restated Trust Agreement and any duly adopted amendments thereto.
 25-13 DURATION.
   The duration of the term of the Township s participation in the Trust and
obligations under the Restated Trust Agreement shall continue until the
withdrawal from the Trust by the Township in accordance with the terms of the
Restated Trust Agreement.
 25-14 FINDINGS AND DETERMINATIONS.
   The Board of Supervisors hereby specifically finds and determines as
follows:
   A.   The conditions of the intergovernmental cooperative agreement are set
forth in the Restated Trust Agreement incorporated by reference herein.
   B.   The Township shall participate in the Trust in accordance with the
Restated Trust Agreement until it withdraws by giving notice to the Board of
Trustees in accordance with the terms of the Restated Trust Agreement.
   C.   The purpose and objectives of the intergovernmental cooperative
arrangement, including powers and scope of authority delegated to the Board of
Trustees, are set forth in the incorporated Restated Trust Agreement.
   D.   The manner and extent of financing of the agreement are that (i) funds
to implement the Township s obligations under the agreement shall come from the
normal and usual budgeted amounts for Township employee compensation and
employee benefits and (ii) no borrowing is anticipated to be required.
   E.   The Trust shall be managed by the Board of Trustees pursuant to the
terms of the Restated Trust Agreement.
   F.   All assets and property, real or personal, of the Trust shall be titled
to, acquired, managed, licensed or disposed of by the Trust, and its Board of
Trustees, in accordance with the terms of the Restated Trust Agreement.
   G.   The Trust in accordance with the Restated Trust Agreement shall be
empowered to enter into contracts for policies of group insurance and employee
welfare benefits to be offered to Participating Employers for their eligible
employee and dependents.
 25-15 SEVERABILITY.
   The provisions of this Ordinance are severable and in the event that any
provision is held invalid, void, illegal, or unconstitutional by any court, it
is the intent of the Governing Body that such determination by the Court shall
not affect or render void the remaining provisions of this Ordinance. It is the
declared intent of the Governing Body that this Ordinance would have been
enacted if any provisions subsequently declared to be void, invalid, illegal or
unconstitutional had not been included at the time of enactment.
 25-16 EFFECTS; LIABILITY.
   Nothing in this Ordinance shall be interpreted to affect any rights or
liabilities of the Township, or to affect any cause of action existing prior to
the enactment of this Ordinance.
 25-17 EFFECTIVE UPON ENACTMENT.
   This Ordinance shall become effective immediately upon its enactment.
   This Ordinance is being enacted pursuant to the provisions of the
Pennsylvania Intergovernmental Cooperation Law, Act of July 12, 1792, No. 180,
as amended, 53 Pa. C.S. 2301, et seq.
CHAPTER 26: RESERVED
CHAPTER 27: PLANNING COMMISSION
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Antrim 5-26-
1987 as Ch. 1, Part 2 of the 1987 Code of Ordinances. Amendments noted where
applicable.]
Section
   
27-1   Creation of Planning Commission
   
27-2   Membership
   
27-3   Residency requirements
   
27-4   Compatibility with other Township offices
   
27-5   Powers and duties of Planning Commission
   
27-6   Subdivision regulations
GENERAL REFERENCES
   Subdivision and land development - See
Ch. 125.
   Zoning - See
Ch. 150.
 27-1 CREATION OF PLANNING COMMISSION.
   Pursuant to the provisions contained in the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code[1] and in order to carry the said provisions into effect, there
is hereby created in the Township of Antrim, Franklin County, Pennsylvania, a
Planning Commission. Said Commission shall have all the powers and duties
conferred upon it by law and any other powers vested in it by law or ordinance
as regulated by the Township of Antrim.
[1] Editor s Note: See 53 P.S. 10101 et seq.
 27-2 MEMBERSHIP.
[Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 246]
   The Antrim Township Planning Commission shall consist of five members, who
shall be appointed by the Board of Supervisors of Antrim Township, Franklin
County, Pennsylvania. Each member now on the Commission shall serve until the
end of his or her appointment, and thereafter each member appointed or
reappointed shall be appointed for a term of four years or until his or her
successor is appointed and qualified, except that the terms of no more than two
members shall be replaced or reappointed during any year. If a vacancy shall
occur otherwise than by expiration of term, it shall be filled by appointment
for the unexpired term.
 27-3 RESIDENCY REQUIREMENTS.
   All of the members of the Antrim Township Planning Commission shall be
residents of the Township of Antrim, Franklin County, Pennsylvania.
 27-4 COMPATIBILITY WITH OTHER TOWNSHIP OFFICES.
   A member of the Antrim Township Planning Commission shall hold no other
office except that of a member of the Antrim Township Zoning Hearing Board.
 27-5 POWERS AND DUTIES OF PLANNING COMMISSION.
   A.   The Antrim Township Planning Commission shall make an annual report to
the Antrim Township Supervisors showing its transactions and recommendations.
It shall also make available to the Supervisors a copy of the minutes of each
of its meetings.
   B.   It may employ engineers, technicians and other persons, with the
approval of the Supervisors. The salaries and wages of those employed, and
other necessary expenses of the Commission, after approved by the Supervisors,
shall be provided for through proper appropriation by the Township Supervisors
   C.   It may contract for professional planning services, the costs and
expenses of which, when approved by the Supervisors, shall be provided for
through proper appropriations by the Supervisors.
   D.   The Commission may also receive and expend, for the purposes of its
planning and zoning work, any gifts, grants and appropriations of local funds
and may contract with governmental or private agencies or individuals with
respect thereto with approval of the Supervisors.
 27-6 SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS.
   The Planning Commission shall prepare and present to the Supervisors land
subdivision regulations. The Commission shall assist the Supervisors in
administering said regulations by reviewing and recommending to the Supervisors
action to be taken on the subdivisions submitted in accordance with established
procedures.
CHAPTER 28 CHAPTER 32: RESERVED
CHAPTER 33: SALARIES AND COMPENSATION
   Article
      
I.   BOARD OF SUPERVISORS
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Antrim as
indicated in article histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
Section
Article I: Board of Supervisors
   
33-1   Compensation
   
33-2   Statutory limits on compensation
   
33-3   Payment schedule
ARTICLE I BOARD OF SUPERVISORS
[Adopted 5-26-1987 as Ch. 1, Part 3 of the 1987 Code of Ordinances]
 33-1 COMPENSATION.
[Amended 5-9-1989 by Ord. No. 190; 5-26-1992 by Ord. No. 218; 11-28-1995 by
Ord. No. 240[1]]
   A.   Each Supervisor of Antrim Township whose next term of office, or
initial term or appointment to office, commences on or after the effective date
of this section, as amended, shall receive compensation as a Supervisor based
upon the following schedule:
 
Township Population Compensation Annual Maximum
Not more than 4,999 $1,875
5,000 to 9,999      $2,500
10,000 to 14,999    $3,250
15,000 to 24,999    $4,125
25,000 to 34,999    $4,375
35,000 or more      $5,000
 
   B.   The population figures to be utilized in the figures set forth in
Subsection (A) above shall be the latest available official census figures in
effect immediately preceding the commencement of the next term of office, or
initial term or appointment to office, of the Supervisor.
   C.   Such compensation shall be paid in quarterly installments. Any
Supervisor failing to attend more than two official meetings within any quarter
will receive reduced compensation at the average rate per meeting for that
quarter.
[1] Editor s Note: This ordinance shall not apply to Supervisors currently in
office until the commencement of their next term of office. Antrim Township
Ord. No. 150, Ord. No. 190 and Ord. No. 218 shall continue to remain in effect
for the present Supervisors only until the end of their current terms.
 33-2 STATUTORY LIMITS ON COMPENSATION.
[Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 246]
   No Supervisor shall receive annual compensation under this article in excess
of the annual statutory limit set by the General Assembly for supervisors of
townships within the appropriate population category or in excess of other
applicable statutory limits.
 33-3 PAYMENT SCHEDULE.
   Such compensation shall be paid in quarterly installments.
CHAPTER 34 CHAPTER 44: RESERVED
CHAPTER 45: ALARMS
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Antrim 2-13-
1996 by Ord. No. 242. Amendments noted where applicable.]
Section
   
45-1   Definitions
   
45-2   Fine for false alarms
   
45-3   Installation of Knox-Box
   
45-4   Violations and penalties
 45-1 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words and phrases when used in this chapter shall have the
meaning given to them in this section, unless the context clearly indicates
otherwise:
ALARM SYSTEM
   Any assembly or equipment, mechanical, electrical or battery-operated,
arranged to signal County Control of the occurrence of a fire or hazardous
emergency requiring urgent attention.
BUILDING OWNER
   The record owner of any improved real estate within the Township of Antrim.
CALENDAR YEAR
   The 12 consecutive months beginning on January 1 and ending on December 31.
FALSE ALARM
   An alarm activated in the absence of a fire or hazard emergency whether
willfully, by inadvertence, negligence or unintentional act to which emergency
units of the Fire Department respond.
FIRE DEPARTMENT
   The Rescue Hose Company No. 1 of Greencastle, Pennsylvania, its successors
and its designated backup units.
FIRE EMERGENCY
   Fire, smoke or heat conditions indicating a fire.
HAZARD EMERGENCY
   An explosion or leak of a toxic gas, liquid or solid or a potential
explosion or leak of a toxic gas, liquid or solid.
KNOX-BOXES
   A high security key box system manufactured by the Knox Company of Irvine,
California, designed to give fire fighters and emergency services personnel
immediate access to locked buildings, elevators and other secured areas within
buildings.
NONRESIDENTIAL BUILDING
   Any building which has no residential living units within its boundaries.
RESIDENTIAL BUILDING
   Any building which has at least one residential living unit within its
boundaries.
 45-2 FINE FOR FALSE ALARMS.
   Any existing building owner, residential or nonresidential, whose building
is connected to an alarm system which experiences three false alarms within a
calendar year shall be subject to a fine of $100 per incident for the third and
subsequent false alarms within this period.
 45-3 INSTALLATION OF KNOX-BOX.
   A.   Any existing building owner, residential or nonresidential whose
building is connected to an alarm system which experiences three false alarms
within a calendar year shall be required to install a Knox-Box (boxes), the
number and location of which shall be prescribed by the Fire Department.
   B.   After the effective date of this chapter, any nonresidential building
owner installing an alarm system shall be required to install a Knox-Box, the
number and location of which shall be prescribed by the Fire Department.
 45-4 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
   A.   Any building owner or occupant of said building who is found to be in
violation of the requirements of
45-2 shall be subject to the fines mentioned in said section.
   B.   Any building owner who shall violate
45-3 shall, upon conviction in a summary proceeding, be punishable by a fine of
not more than $1,000 or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days. Each
day or portion thereof that such violation continues, or is permitted to
continue, shall constitute a separate offense. Section
45-3 shall be enforced by action brought before a District Justice in the same
manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses under the Pennsylvania
Rules of Criminal Procedure. [Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 246]
   C.   Fines and costs imposed under the provisions of this chapter shall be
payable to Antrim Township. [Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 246]
CHAPTER 46 CHAPTER 47: RESERVED
CHAPTER 48: AMUSEMENTS
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Antrim 5-14-
1991 by Ord. No. 213. Amendments noted where applicable.]
Section
   
48-1   Definitions
   
48-2   License required; application
   
48-3   Conditions for issuance of license
   
48-4   Investigation prior to approval of license
   
48-5   Type of amusement and time limit to appear on license
   
48-6   Bond or other security required
   
48-7   Evidence of insurance
   
48-8   License fee
   
48-9   License issuance
   
48-10   Separate license required for every site
   
48-11   Inspection after issuance of license
   
48-12   Noise restrictions
   
48-13   Lighting restrictions
   
48-14   Directional signs
   
48-15   Prohibited activities
   
48-16   Revocation of license
   
48-17   Violations and penalties
   
48-18   Rules and regulations
GENERAL REFERENCES
Amusement tax - See
Ch. 130, Art. V.
Fees - See
Ch. A155.
 48-1 DEFINITIONS.
   A.   As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
   AMUSEMENT
All manner or form of entertainment, diversion, sport, pastime or recreation,
to include, but not be limited to, trade shows, craft shows and similar
exhibitions, within the Township of Antrim for which admission is charged or
paid. Specifically excluded from this tax are admissions to movie theaters and
membership admissions, membership dues, fees or assessments, donations,
contributions or monetary charges of any character whatsoever paid by the
general public, or a limited or selected number thereof, for such persons to
enter into any place, indoors or outdoors, to engage in any activities, the
predominant purpose or nature of which is exercise, fitness, health,
maintenance, improvement or rehabilitation, health or nutrition education or
weight control.
      [Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 246]
   PERSON
Every natural person, copartnership, association, joint venture or corporation.
Whenever used in the clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, the term person
as applied to copartnerships, associations, or joint ventures, shall mean the
parties or members thereof; and as applied to corporations, shall mean the
officers thereof.
   TOWNSHIP
Antrim Township, Franklin County, Pennsylvania, or one of its designated
representatives.
   B.   In this chapter the singular shall include the plural and the masculine
shall include the feminine and the neuter.
 48-2 LICENSE REQUIRED; APPLICATION.
   A.   No person either as principal or agent shall conduct or hold, nor shall
permit the conduct of holding on premises owned or under the control of such
person, any amusement in the Township of Antrim, Franklin County, Pennsylvania,
unless the same shall have been licensed according to the provisions of this
chapter.
   B.   An application for the license required by this chapter must be filed
with the Township at least 30 days before the date on which the amusement is
proposed to be held. Such application shall be in writing and shall include:
      (1)   The name and business address of the person who proposes to conduct
the amusement.
      (2)   The type of amusement proposed.
      (3)   The date or dates on which the proposed amusement is to be
conducted.
      (4)   The hours during which the proposed amusement is to be conducted on
each date submitted as required by Subsection (B)(3), above.
      (5)   The site on which the proposed amusement is to be conducted.
      (6)   The number of persons attending and/or engaging in said amusement
which the applicant estimates will attend and/or engage in said amusement.
   C.   A separate application must be filed for each site and every
application must be duly acknowledged and contain a statement that the facts
set forth therein are true and correct under the penalties of perjury.
   D.   The Township shall provide official application forms which must be
used by the applicant.
 48-3 CONDITIONS FOR ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.
   No license shall be issued under this chapter until:
   A.   The application required by this chapter has been approved by the
Township.
   B.   A certified copy of all state and county permits are filed with the
Township in any instance in which such state and county permits are required to
conduct the proposed amusement.
   C.   The Township has inspected the premises where the proposed amusement is
to be held to ascertain whether such premises are suitable for the purpose and
free from unsanitary, dangerous or hazardous features.
   D.   The cash bond or other similar security required by this chapter has
been paid.
   E.   The evidence of public liability insurance required by this chapter has
been filed with the Township.
   F.   The license fee required by this chapter has been paid.
 48-4 INVESTIGATION PRIOR TO APPROVAL OF LICENSE.
   The Township may cause any other investigation or inspection to be made to
secure the facts needed by it to determine if the application should be
approved and the license granted. It may reject the application and refuse to
grant the license if any unsanitary, hazardous or dangerous condition exists or
if the location is deemed to be unsuitable because the conduct of the proposed
amusement thereon would create a traffic hazard or because of the lack of
accommodations for the number of persons and/or vehicles likely to be attracted
thereto or if the proposed amusement is likely to create unnecessary annoyance
to the residents or inhabitants of the locality.
 48-5 TYPE OF AMUSEMENT AND TIME LIMIT TO APPEAR ON LICENSE.
   In every case in which the Township approves the application and issues a
license, the license shall state the type of amusement authorized and the time
for which the license is to remain in effect.
 48-6 BOND OR OTHER SECURITY REQUIRED.
   Every person applying for a license for an amusement under this chapter
shall deposit with the Township a bond or other similar security in suitable
form in the sum of $25,000 conditioned for the faithful observance of the
provisions of this chapter and the saving harmless of the Township of Antrim,
Franklin County, Pennsylvania, from any and all liabilities and causes of
action which might arise by virtue of the granting of such license in said
Township, and conditioned further that no damage shall occur to the streets,
bridges and other public or private property in the Township, or adjacent
thereto, as a result of the amusement and that the licensee will not permit
dirt, paper, litter or other debris from the amusement to remain thereon. Said
bond or other similar security shall also be a guaranty for treating with
suitable dust layer those unpaved roads in the vicinity of the licensed
premises designated by the Township. Before any amusement commences, the
licensee shall treat the roads so designated by the Township with suitable dust
layer approved by the Township. Such bond or other similar security shall be
returned upon certification by the Township that all conditions of this chapter
have been complied with and that the aforesaid property and roads have been
placed in a neat condition and all debris removed. Said bond or other similar
security shall be further conditioned that the applicant will pay the necessary
license fee to the Township. The Township shall have complete discretion in
determining the type of similar security that will be acceptable under this
section.
 48-7 EVIDENCE OF INSURANCE.
   Every applicant for a license under this chapter shall furnish satisfactory
evidence to the Township Administrator that a public liability insurance policy
in amounts of not less than $100,000 for one person and $500,000 for any one
accident will be in force and effect during the period which such amusement is
to be conducted in the Township. Such policy shall be subject to the approval
of the Township Solicitor.
 48-8 LICENSE FEE.
[Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 246]
   Before a license shall be issued to any person whose application under this
chapter has been approved by the Township, that person shall pay to the
Township a license fee as set forth from time to time by resolution of the
Board of Supervisors.
 48-9 LICENSE ISSUANCE.
   When all requirements of this chapter have been met and the application has
been approved by the Township, the Township shall issue a license hereunder to
conduct the amusement. The license shall in every case state:
   A.   The name and business address of the person authorized to conduct the
amusement.
   B.   The type of amusement authorized.
   C.   The date or dates on which the proposed amusement is to be conducted.
   D.   The hours during which the amusement is to be conducted on each date or
authorized by Subsection (C) above.
   E.   The site on which the amusement is to be conducted.
   F.   The hour and date on which the license shall expire.
 48-10 SEPARATE LICENSE REQUIRED FOR EVERY SITE.
   A separate license must be issued for every site and a separate fee paid for
each. A license shall not be assignable.
 48-11 INSPECTION AFTER ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.
   After any license has been issued under this chapter, the Township shall
inspect the site designated therein before any amusement is begun to ensure
that no dangerous, hazardous and unsanitary conditions exist. The licensee
shall correct any such dangerous, hazardous and unsanitary conditions which may
exist before any amusement is begun. If he or she does not, his or her license
shall forthwith be revoked and the license fee shall be forfeited.
 48-12 NOISE RESTRICTIONS.
   No holder of a license under this chapter shall make or permit to be made
any unnecessary or unreasonable noise by loudspeaker, amplifying device or any
other means which would disturb the residents in the vicinity of the amusement.
 48-13 LIGHTING RESTRICTIONS.
   No holder of a license under this chapter shall make or permit to be made
any unnecessary or unreasonable lighting by any means which would disturb the
residents in the vicinity of the amusement.
 48-14 DIRECTIONAL SIGNS.
   At no time shall any directional signs to the amusement named in the
application for a license hereunder be posted along any roads in the Township,
except those designated and approved by the Township.
 48-15 PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES.
   No person granted a license under this chapter shall permit upon the site of
the amusement named therein:
   A.   Any unruly, loud, boisterous, disorderly or immoral conduct.
   B.   Any gambling.
   C.   Any sale of obscene literature, pictures, film or other objects.
   D.   Any indecent, immoral or lewd act or performance.
   E.   Any possession, sale or use of any illegal drugs of any kind.
   F.   The sale or furnishing by the promoter of any alcoholic beverages,
unless licensed to do so by the Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board.
 48-16 REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   A.   The Township shall forthwith revoke any license granted under this
chapter if at any time dangerous, hazardous and unsanitary conditions develop
on the site designated in the license or if the licensee violates in any way
any provision of this chapter, and no chapter of the license fee shall be
refunded.
   B.   In addition to the grounds described in
48-11 and Subsection (A) of this section for revocation of licenses, the
Township shall have the authority to revoke a license if the licensee is in
violation of any section of this chapter or fails to comply in any manner with
Chapter 130, Article V, of this Code, the Amusement Tax Ordinance, or any other
ordinance or chapter or section of the Antrim Township Code.
 48-17 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
   A.   Any person who violates or permits a violation of this chapter, upon
being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding, shall pay a fine
of not more than $600 plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney s
fees, incurred by the Township in the enforcement of this chapter. No judgment
shall be imposed until the date of the determination of the violation by the
District Justice and/or Court. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals
the judgment, the Township may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable
rules of civil procedure. Each day a violation exists shall constitute a
separate offense. Further, the appropriate officers or agents of the Township
are hereby authorized to seek equitable relief, including injunction, to
enforce compliance herewith. [Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 246]
   B.   In addition to the penalties described above, the Township may
institute and maintain appropriate actions by law or in equity to restrain,
correct or abate violations of this chapter.
 48-18 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The Board of Supervisors may pass by resolution at any time after enactment
of this chapter any rules and/or regulations it deems necessary to implement,
effectuate, interpret, enforce, construe or apply this chapter.
CHAPTER 49 CHAPTER 58: RESERVED
[Former Ch. 56, Buildings, Numbering of, adopted 5-9-1991 by Ord. No. 211, as
amended, was repealed 11-25-2014 by Ord. No. 338.]
CHAPTER 59: OPEN BURNING
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Antrim 12-12-
2017 by Ord. No. 351. Amendments noted where applicable.]
Section
   
59-1   Title
   
59-2   Findings; policy
   
59-3   Definitions
   
59-4   General Regulations
   
59-5   Prohibitions
   
59-6   Burn Ban
   
59-7   Violations and penalties
 59-1 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known as the Antrim Township Open Burning Ordinance.
 59-2 FINDINGS; POLICY.
   The Board of Supervisors of Antrim Township, Franklin County, Pennsylvania,
has determined that open burning may be hazardous to the health, welfare,
safety and property of the citizens of Antrim Township. It is hereby declared
to be the policy of Antrim Township to safeguard the citizens of the Township
from such hazards. It shall be unlawful to burn material within Antrim Township
except in full conformity with all regulations in this Chapter.
 59-3 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, unless
the context clearly indicates otherwise, shall have the following meanings
ascribed to them:
BOARD
Township Board of Supervisors.
BURNING
The act of consuming by fire; to flame, char, scorch, or blaze. As used in this
ordinance, smoldering shall have the same meaning as burning and any smoldering
shall be deemed burning.
CARCASS
A dead animal body, in parts or whole, with or without the hide.
CLEARING AND GRUBBING WASTES
Trees, shrubs, and other native vegetation which are cleared from land during
or prior to the process of construction. The term does not include demolition
wastes and dirt laden roots.
DOMESTIC REFUSE
Waste which is generated from the normal occupancy of a structure occupied
solely as a dwelling by two families or less. The term does not include
appliances, carpets, demolition waste (insulation, shingles, siding, etc.),
furniture, mattresses or box springs, paint, putrescible waste, solvents,
tires, or treated wood.
DWELLING
A building or structure designed for living quarters for one or more families,
including homes which are supported either by a foundation or by blocks or
jacks or are otherwise permanently attached to the land, but not including
hotels, rooming houses or other accommodations used for transient occupancy.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY, DETACHED (HOUSE)
A dwelling used by one family, having only one dwelling unit and having two
side yards.
FURNACE
Any enclosed device specifically designed for the burning of any material for
the production of heat.
GARBAGE
All putrescible animal and vegetable matter resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
INCINERATOR
Any device specifically designed for the destruction by burning of refuse,
sewage sludge or any other combustible material.
OPEN BURNING
A fire in which any material is burned in the open or in a receptacle other
than a furnace or incinerator.
PERSON
Any individual, partnership, association, syndicate, company, firm, trust,
corporation, department, bureau, agency or other entity recognized by law as
the subject of rights and duties.
REFUSE
Garbage, rubbish and trade waste.
RUBBISH
Solids not considered to be highly flammable or explosive, including but not
limited to rags, old clothes, leather, rubber, carpets, wood, excelsior, paper,
ashes, tree branches, tree leaves, yard trimmings, weeds or stubble in field,
furniture, tin cans, glass, crockery, masonry and other similar materials.
SALVAGE OPERATION
Any business, trade or industry engaged in whole or in part in salvaging or
reclaiming any product or material, including, but not limited to, metals,
chemicals, shipping containers or drums.
TRADE WASTE
All solid or liquid material or rubbish resulting from construction, building
operations, or the prosecution of any business, trade or industry, including,
but not limited to, plastic products, cartons, paint, grease, oil and other
petroleum products, chemicals, cinders and other forms of solid or liquid waste
materials.
YARD WASTE
Leaves, grass clippings, garden residue, tree trimmings, chipped shrubbery, and
other vegetative material.
 59-4 GENERAL REGULATIONS.
   A.   Open Burning of the following is permitted outside of a burn ban.
      (1)   Any open burning which has received approval from the Department of
Environmental Protection.
      (2)   Open burning of yard waste generated from the premises of a
dwelling occupied by two families or less when fire is on said premises.
      (3)   Recreational fires such as camp fires, ceremonial fires, or fires
for cooking.
      (4)   Agricultural related burning.
      (5)   Open burning of domestic refuse from a single family detached
dwelling when generated from that single family detached dwelling.
      (6)   Open burning shall be constantly attended and supervised by a
responsible adult until the fire is extinguished and the ash is cold. The
person shall have readily available for use such fire extinguishing equipment
as may be necessary for the total control of the fire.
   B.   Location of permitted open burnings. Permitted open burning shall be
located as follows:
      (1)   Open burning shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet away from any
property line, house, or driveway.
      (2)   No burning shall be permitted within road right of ways, on
sidewalks, in swales or other stormwater controls, or within easements.
      (3)   Burning shall be located in rear yards.
 59-5 PROHIBITIONS.
   A.   Prohibited open burning. The following shall be prohibited:
      (1)   Open burning of refuse from a commercial or industrial
establishment.
      (2)   Open burning of domestic refuse from a residential dwelling other
than a single family detached home.
      (3)   Open burning of yard waste on a property on which it was not
generated.
   B.   Prohibited Materials. Open burning of the following materials is
prohibited.
      (1)   Construction and demolition waste.
      (2)   Hazardous substances including but not limited to batteries,
household chemicals, pesticides, used oil, gasoline, paints, varnishes and
solvents.
      (3)   Furniture and appliances.
      (4)   Rubber including tires and synthetic rubber-like products.
      (5)   Any plastic materials including but not limited to nylon, PVC, ABS,
polystyrene or urethane foam, and synthetic fabrics, plastic films and plastic
containers.
      (6)   Treated, or painted wood including but not limited to plywood,
composite wood products or other wood products that are painted, varnished or
treated with preservatives.
      (7)   Garbage.
      (8)   Carcass.
 59-6 BURN BAN.
   A.   The Board shall have the power to institute a burn ban when weather
conditions exist during which open fires would be hazardous to the health,
comfort, safety and property of the citizens of Antrim Township.
   B.   Public Notice. When the Board makes a determination that a burn ban is
warranted, public notice shall be given that open fires within the Township
will be prohibited until such time as the Board determines that such weather
conditions no longer exist. When the Board determines that such conditions no
longer exist, public notice of that determination shall also be given. All
public notices required hereunder shall be given by the Board by publication of
same in one newspaper of general circulation within Antrim Township one time
and by posting such notice at the Antrim Township Municipal Office Building.
The prohibition against open fires provided for in this chapter shall take
effect upon publication of such notice and shall continue in effect until
publication of the notice that such prohibition has been terminated.
   C.   During periods when open fires are prohibited by the Board, no person
shall:
      (1)   Ignite or feed an open fire for the destruction of refuse or in the
conduct of a salvage operation in any public or private place outside of any
building.
      (2)   Cause, suffer, allow or permit the maintenance of any open fire for
the destruction of refuse or in the conduct of a salvage operation on any
property under his or her control outside of any building.
   D.   Exceptions.
      (1)   Open fires may be set in the performance of an official duty of any
public officer if the fire is necessary for:
      (a)   The prevention of a fire hazard which cannot be abated by other
means.
      (b)   The protection of public health.
      (2)   The Board may authorize in writing open fires during a burn ban
provided that:
      (a)   There is no practical available alternate method for the disposal
of the material to be burned.
      (b)   No hazardous or other objectionable condition will be created by
such burning.
 59-7 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
   This chapter shall be enforced by action brought before a District Justice
in the same manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses under the
Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure. Any person who violates or permits
the violation of this chapter shall, upon conviction in a summary proceeding,
be punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000 or by imprisonment for a term
not exceeding 90 days. Each day or portion thereof that such violation
continues, or is permitted to continue, shall constitute a separate offense.
Each section of this chapter that is violated shall also constitute a separate
offense.
CHAPTER 60: ROADS AND BRIDGES
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Antrim 10-12-
2010 by Ord. No. 319. Amendments noted where applicable.]
Section
   
60-1   Title
   
60-2   Findings; policy
   
60-3   Specific State Road Improvements
   
60-4   Specific State Bridge Improvements
   
60-5   Expenditure of Township Funds
   
60-6   Effective date
   
60-7   Repealer
   
60-8   Severability
 60-1 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be titled Roads and Bridges.
 60-2 FINDINGS; POLICY.
   The Board of Supervisors of the Township of Antrim, Franklin County,
Pennsylvania, has determined that in certain areas of the Township improvements
need to be made on state highways and Township funds should be spent in
connection therewith.
 60-3 SPECIFIC STATE ROAD IMPROVEMENTS.
   The Board of Supervisors of the Township of Antrim believe that it would be
in the best interest of the public, health, safety, and welfare of residents of
the Township of Antrim that improvements be made at the Interstate 81 Exit 3,
US Route 11 Interchange, generally consisting of, but not limited to, new
traffic signals, construction of the Antrim Commons Drive/Route 11
Intersection, timing changes at the Commerce Drive/Route 11 traffic signal,
right and left turn lanes and through lane improvements on Route 11 associated
with these signal and intersection improvements, and the second storage lane on
the I-81 northbound off-ramp.
 60-4 SPECIFIC STATE BRIDGE IMPROVEMENTS.
   (Reserved for future use.)
 60-5 EXPENDITURE OF TOWNSHIP FUNDS.
   The expenditure of Township funds to be made in connection with the
improvements to be made at the Interstate 81 Exit 3, US Route 11 Interchange
are as set forth on the attached Assignment, Assumption and Indemnification
Agreement, Traffic Light Agreement and Reimbursement Agreement, copies of which
are labeled Exhibits 1 , 2 and 3 , respectively, attached hereto and
incorporated herein by reference as if set forth in full hereunder.
 60-6 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This Ordinance shall become effective in accordance with the law.
 60-7 REPEALER.
   All other Township ordinances, or parts of other ordinances in conflict
herewith, are hereby repealed.
 60-8 SEVERABILITY.
   If any article, section, or provision of this Ordinance should be decided by
the Courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect
the validity of this Ordinance as a whole or any part thereof other than the
part so decided to be unconstitutional or invalid.
CHAPTER 65: CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM
   Article
      
I.   ELECTION TO ADMINISTER AND ENFORCE ACT
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Antrim as
indicated in article histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
Section
Article I: Election to Administer and Enforce Act
   
65-1   Pennsylvania Construction Code
   
65-2   Adoption of code
   
65-3   Means of administration and enforcement
   
65-4   Board of Appeals
   
65-5   Violations and penalties
   
65-6   Coordination with other municipal ordinances
   
65-7   Fees
   
65-8   When effective
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers - See
Ch. 110.
Streets and sidewalks - See Ch. 122.
Subdivision and land development - See
Ch. 125.
Zoning - See
Ch. 150.
ARTICLE I ELECTION TO ADMINISTER AND ENFORCE ACT
[Adopted 4-27-2004 by Ord. No. 286]
 65-1 PENNSYLVANIA CONSTRUCTION CODE.
   Antrim Township hereby elects to administer and enforce the provisions of
the Pennsylvania Construction Code, Act 45 of 1999, and applicable regulations
as promulgated by the Pennsylvania Department of Labor and Industry, as amended
from time to time.
 65-2 ADOPTION OF CODE.
   The Uniform Construction Code, contained in 34 Pa. Code, Chapters 401-405,
as well as those ancillary codes referenced in Department of Labor and Industry
Regulations Section 403.21, as amended from time to time, is hereby adopted and
incorporated herein by reference as the Municipal Building Code of Antrim
Township.
 65-3 MEANS OF ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
   Administration and enforcement of the code within Antrim Township shall be
undertaken in any of the following ways, as determined by the Board of
Supervisors from time to time by resolution:
   A.   By the designation of an employee of the Township to serve as the
municipal code official to act on behalf of the Township;
   B.   By the retention of one or more construction code officials or third-
party agencies to act on behalf of the Township;
   C.   By agreement with one or more other municipalities for the joint
administration and enforcement of the code through an intermunicipal agreement;
   D.   By entering into a contract with another municipality for the
administration and enforcement of the code on behalf of the Township; or
   E.   By entering into an agreement with the Pennsylvania Department of Labor
and Industry for plan review, inspections and enforcement of the code
provisions for structures other than one-family or two-family dwelling units
and utility and miscellaneous use structures.
 65-4 BOARD OF APPEALS.
   A Board of Appeals shall be established by resolution of the Board of
Supervisors in conformity with the requirements of the relevant provisions of
the code, as amended from time to time, and for the purposes set forth therein.
If at any time enforcement and administration is undertaken jointly with one or
more other municipalities, the Board of Appeals shall be established by joint
action of the participating municipalities.[1]
[1] Editor s Note: By Ordinance No. 288 adopted 11-9-2004, the Township
approved an intergovernmental agreement with other municipalities located in
Franklin County to establish a Joint Municipal Board of Appeals.
 65-5 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
   Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not less than $250 nor more than
$1,000, together with all costs. Each day a violation continues shall be
considered a separate violation.
 65-6 COORDINATION WITH OTHER MUNICIPAL ORDINANCES.
   A.   All building code ordinances or portions of ordinances heretofore
adopted by the Township are hereby repealed.
   B.   All relevant ordinances, regulations and policies of the Township not
governed by the code shall remain in full force and effect.
   C.   When any building or construction activity is contemplated within the
Township, application shall first be made to the Township at the Township
offices on a form to be provided by the Township for the issuance of a land use
permit. Issuance by the Township of a land use permit for the specific project
shall be a prerequisite to making application for a construction permit. No
construction permit application will be accepted without a completed land use
permit.
   D.   All construction permits issued pursuant to this article shall be valid
for one year, provided construction of the structure being permitted is
commenced within six months of the date of issuance of the construction permit.
If construction is not begun within the said six-month period, the permit shall
be void, and application for a new permit must be made prior to the
commencement of any construction on the structure. No extension of the six-
month starting period shall be granted. For reasonable cause shown, the one-
year period for completing the construction authorized by a construction permit
may be extended for an additional one-year period. However, not more than two
such extensions shall be granted.
   E.   All Township land use permits issued pursuant to this article shall be
valid for 18 months. Land use permits for construction in excess of one million
dollars ($1,000,000) shall be valid for 36 months. Two extensions may be
granted, each for an additional 18 or 36 months determined by the original
construction cost as long as reasonable cause is shown. Extension requests
shall be made in writing. [Amended 8-25-2009 by Ord. No. 317]
   F.   At the completion of any construction activity for which either a
construction permit and/or a Township land use permit is issued, the project
owner or agent of the project owner shall make application for a building
occupancy permit for the structure for which a construction permit has been
issued and application for a Township land use occupancy permit for the project
for which a land use permit has been issued. No Township land use occupancy
permit shall be issued until a construction occupancy permit, where required,
has been issued. No use or occupancy of the premises covered by the
construction permit and the Township land use permit shall occur until both
occupancy permits have been issued.
 65-7 FEES.
   Fees assessable by the Township for the administration and enforcement
undertaken pursuant to this article and the code shall be established by the
Township by resolution from time to time.
 65-8 WHEN EFFECTIVE.
   This article shall be effective July 1, 2004.
CHAPTER 66 CHAPTER 69: RESERVED
CHAPTER 70: FOOD PROCESSING RESIDUAL LAND APPLICATION AND STORAGE
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Antrim 4-8-
2025 by Ord. No. 367. Amendments noted where applicable.]
Section
   
70-1   Purpose, Application and Definitions
   
70-2   Required Minimum Distances
   
70-3   Slopes
   
70-4   Ground Water, Seasonal High Water Table, Bedrock
   
70-5   Erosion and Sediment Control, Field Markings
   
70-6   Quality, Sampling, Testing and Certification
   
70-7   Storage of Food Processing Residual
   
70-8   Water Supply Protection
   
70-9   Nuisance Prevention; Cleanup
   
70-10   Records, Compliance with Laws and Regulations, Notice
   
70-11   Violations and Penalties
 70-1 PURPOSE, APPLICATION AND DEFINITIONS.
   A.   The purpose of this Chapter is to establish uniform standards for land
application of food processing residual ( FPR ), as the term FPR is defined by
the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection ( PA DEP ) in Antrim
Township ( Township ). While the Township recognizes that PA DEP and the Courts
of the Commonwealth have determined that land application of FPR is a normal
agricultural operation ; and that the land application of FPR should comply
with PA DEP rules, regulations, standards and best management practices,
including those set forth in the Food Processing Residual Management Manual, PA
DEP document number 245-5400-100, as may be amended or revised (collectively
FPR Manual ), the Township also recognizes that it has an obligation to protect
public safety and to minimize the adverse effects of such land application of
FPR and/or the drainage or other discharge of FPR, including, without
limitation, protecting wells and drinking water, through the standards set
forth in the following provisions.
   B.   This Chapter shall apply in all respects to the following:
      (1)   Lessees or other persons or entities who are authorized by a
property owner, directly or indirectly, to engage in agriculture or other
activities on the owner s property and on which property such lessees or other
persons or entities intend to store or apply FPR;
      (2)   Any Property owner who owns property that is both in this Township
and any adjacent municipality, where such property owner (i) intends to store
FPR on their property in the adjacent municipality, (ii) apply FPR to that
property, and (iii) drain or otherwise discharge FPR from storage or elsewhere
on or in that property to the owner s property in this Township;
      (3)   Lessees or other persons or entities who are authorized by a
property owner to engage in agriculture or other activities on the owner s
property, where (i) the owner owns property that is both in this Township and
an adjacent municipality, (ii) such lessees or other persons or entities intend
to apply FPR to the owner s property in the adjacent municipality, and (iii)
such lessees or property owners intend to store FPR on that property and drain
or otherwise discharge FPR from storage or elsewhere on or in that property to
the owner s property in this Township.
      (4)   Any property owner in the Township that applies or stores FPR on
their property in connection with a normal agricultural operation.
   C.   For the purposes of this Chapter, certain words shall have the meanings
assigned to them, as follows:
Words used in the present tense include the future. The singular number
includes the plural, and the plural, the singular.
   ASTM LEACHING TEST
      American Society for Testing Materials leaching test.
   E&S PLAN
Erosion and Sediment Control Plan as described and defined in Chapter 102 of
Title 25 of the Pennsylvania Code.
   FPR OR FOOD PROCESSING RESIDUAL
Incidental organic material generated by processing agricultural commodities
for human or animal consumption. The term includes food residuals, food
coproducts, food processing wastes, food processing sludges, or any other
incidental material whose characteristics are derived from processing
agricultural products as further described and defined in the FPR manual.
Examples include: process wastewater from cleaning slaughter areas, rinsing
carcasses, or conveying food materials; process wastewater treatment sludges;
blood; bone; fruit and vegetable peels; seeds; shells; pits; cheese whey; off-
specification food products; hides; hair; and feathers.
   FPR MANUAL
PA DEP rules, regulations, standards and best management practices, including
those set forth in the Food Processing Residual Management Manual, PA DEP
document number 245-5400-100, as may be amended or revised
   FPR STORAGE PLAN
A design plan, signed and sealed by engineer, architect, or other design
professional acceptable to the Township and licensed in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania; and narrative plan prepared by a professional consultant
acceptable to the Township, showing and certifying that the FPR storage and
design of the FPR Storage Tank comply with all applicable local, state and
federal rules, regulations and statutes, including this Chapter and PA Code
Title 25, Chapter 299, as applicable; and certifying that the size (volume) of
the proposed FPR Storage Tank is a suitable size (and not oversized) for land
application on the acreage of the tract of land on which the FPR Storage Tank
is located. FPR stored in an FPR Storage Tank must only be applied to the
parcel or contiguous tract of land upon which the FPR Storage Tank is affixed,
as further defined and described in Section
70-7 of this Chapter.
   FPR STORAGE TANK
A storage tank or other structure affixed to the land and used for the storage
of FPR.
   MCLs FOR PFAs
The maximum contaminant levels for per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances for
drinking water as established by PA DEP or US EPA, whichever is lower.
   HAZARDOUS WASTE
Hazardous waste as defined by Chapter 287 of Title 25 of the Pennsylvania Code.
   PA DEP
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
   PFAs
Per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances.
   PROPERTY OWNER and OWNER
Shall include a person or entity who holds title in whole or in part to a lot
or a person or entity who exercises or has the power or authority to exercise
control in whole or in part over a lot, including lessees.
   TOWNSHIP
Antrim Township.
   US EPA
United States Environmental Protection Agency.
   USGS
United Stated Geological Survey.
   RESIDUAL WASTE
Residual waste, excluding FPR, as defined by Chapter 287 of Title 25 of the
Pennsylvania Code.
   TCLP TEST
Toxic Characteristics Leaching Procedure test.
   WATER SUPPLY PLAN
A narrative plan to the Township providing for a temporary and permanent water
supply in the event of contamination of a water supply by FPR as further
defined and described in Section
70-8 of this Chapter.
 70-2 REQUIRED MINIMUM DISTANCES.
   A.   Unless otherwise agreed, in writing, by permission of the owner of the
feature listed, the minimum setback of land application of FPR from the listed
features is as follows:
Property line: 50 feet
Occupied buildings: 300 feet
Individual (private) water well: 300 feet
Public water well: 300 feet
Upgradient from a surface water source (including a continuous spring water
source): 1,000 feet
Intermittent stream: 100 feet
Perennial streams: 100 feet
Exceptional value wetlands as defined by PA DEP or the Environmental Protection
Agency: 100 feet
Sinkhole (or any Karst landscape): 100 feet
Sinkhole drainage area (or any Karst landscape): 100 feet
Perimeter of pond or undrained depression: 25 feet
Bedrock outcrop: 25 feet
   B.   The above isolation distances shall be depicted on a USGS Map, or other
map acceptable to the Township, with a scale not to exceed 1 = 200.
 70-3 SLOPES.
   A.   Subject to compliance with all other provisions of this Chapter, land
application of FPR is permitted on land having slopes of less than 15%.
   B.   Land application of FPR on land having slopes of greater than 15% but
less than 20% is permitted on such slopes with well-established crop cover or
adequate crop residue cover as required pursuant to PA DEP guidelines and
regulations applicable to land application of FPR. Land application of FPR on
slopes of 20% or more is discouraged.
   C.   Application of FPR on slopes of 20% to less than 25% is only permitted
by subsurface injection approved by PA DEP.
   D.   Application of FPR on slopes of 25% or greater is prohibited.
   E.   For purposes of this Chapter, slopes shall be determined by the most
current United States Geological Survey ( USGS ) slope maps or actual
topographical survey plan prepared and sealed by a surveyor professional
licensed in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. In the event of a conflict
between a USGS slope map and a sealed survey plan, the sealed survey plan will
be used to determine slopes.
 70-4 GROUND WATER, SEASONAL HIGH WATER TABLE, BEDROCK.
   A.   The regional groundwater depth under the site to which FPR will be
applied must be greater than 4 feet.
      (1)   For purposes of this Chapter, in the absence of actual measurements
performed and certified by a licensed hydrogeologist, regional groundwater
depth will be based upon USGS and Pennsylvania Geologic Survey.
      (2)   In the event that regional groundwater depths applicable to a
proposed FPR land application site are not available through USGS or
Pennsylvania Geologic Survey, actual groundwater depths, measured and certified
by a hydrogeologist must be provided to the Township.
   B.   The minimum seasonal high water table depth under a site to which FPR
will be applied must be greater than 20 inches.
      (1)   The seasonal high water table is determined by the presence of
mottling as determined by a licensed hydrogeologist or soil scientist.
      (2)   If the FPRs to be applied are certified as FPRs which have been
stabilized by a Process that Significantly Reduces Pathogens and a Process that
Further Reduces Pathogens recognized as acceptable by PA DEP, the seasonal high
water table minimum depth may be reduced to 12 inches.
   C.   The minimum bedrock depth under a site to which FPR will be applied
must be greater than 20 inches.
      (1)   Bedrock depth must be determined by a licensed hydrogeologist or
soil scientist.
      (2)   If the FPRs to be applied are certified as FPRs which have been
stabilized by a Process that Significantly Reduces Pathogens and a Process that
Further Reduces Pathogens recognized as acceptable by PA DEP, the bedrock
minimum depth may be reduced to 12 inches.
 70-5 EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL, FIELD MARKINGS.
   A.   Prior to the land application of FPR, the property owner to which FPR
is proposed to be applied must submit to the Township and Franklin County
Conservation District a farm conservation plan for erosion and sediment control
prepared in accordance with Pennsylvania Code Title 25, Chapter 102 ( E & S
Plan ). The E & S Plan must be implemented and maintained by the property
owner. Township approval of the E & S Plan must be obtained prior to the land
application of FPR.
   B.   Prior to the land application of FPR, if the land to which FPR is to be
applied is not clearly delineated (that is, for example, in a meadow condition
without a ploughed field or identifiable crop), the property owner must mark
the area to which FPR will be applied (for example, by way of corner stakes and
where boundaries change direction).
 70-6 QUALITY, SAMPLING, TESTING AND CERTIFICATION.
   A.   FPR for land application in the Township must meet the minimum quality
standards for food processing wastes used for agricultural purposes required by
PA DEP and Chapter 287 of Title 25 of the Pennsylvania Code as may be amended
or restated from time to time.
   B.   FPR stored in the Township for land application must not contain any
Hazardous Waste, Residual Waste, concentrations of PFA above the MCLs for PFAs,
or other material that does not meet the definition of FPR in excess of the
limits set forth in the FPR Manual. If testing, as required under Section
70-6(C), indicates the presence of Hazardous Waste, Residual Waste,
concentrations of PFA above the MCLs for PFAs, or other material that does not
meet the definition of FPR in excess of the limits set forth in the FPR Manual,
the land owner shall immediately notify the Township, EPA and PA DEP and
promptly prepare, and thereafter implement, a removal, remediation and clean-up
plan in compliance with applicable US EPA and PA DEP requirements and
regulations; and, in no event shall such materials be stored in an FPR Storage
Tank in the Township for more than 10 days after identification thereof through
testing required under Section
70-6(C).
   C.   The property owner of the land to which FPR will be applied must
provide, at their option, to the Township either:
      (1)   prior to land application, the results of: a US EPA Method 1633
test for PFAs in environmental samples and a TCLP test, ASTM water leaching
test, or such other test(s) acceptable to the Township on the FPR to be
applied; and a written certification, made under penalty of perjury, that said
results are true, the material tested is, in fact, FPR, the material tested
does not contain concentrations of PFAs above the MCLs of PFAs, Hazardous Waste
or Residual Waste, and that the said results are correct and representative of
the FPR to be applied; or,
      (2)   at least 14 days prior to application, an uncontaminated sample of
the FPR to be applied, which sample must be sufficient in form, substance and
size for a US EPA Method 1633 test for PFAs in environmental samples and TCLP
test, ASTM water leaching test, or such other test(s) acceptable to the
Township; or,
      (3)   in the event FPR is stored on-site, in the alternative, the
property owner may choose to provide the Township with access to stored FPR to
conduct its own sampling, provided that such access is provided 14 days prior
to application. Further, the property owner hereby authorizes the Township to
use the sample to conduct testing of the FPR to determine, among other things,
that the FPR does not contain substances that would, for example, classify the
FPR as residual waste or hazardous waste under PA DEP regulations. In the event
any test performed or test results obtained under this Section indicate that
the FPR to be land applied contains PFAs concentrations which exceed the MCLs
for PFAs or any substance that would reclassify the FPR as residual waste or
hazardous waste under PA DEP regulations, said reclassified FPR shall not be
land applied or stored in the Township.
   D.   The property owner of the land to which FPR is applied must provide the
Township with annual access to the lands upon which FPR is applied in the event
the Township desires to take samples of soil to verify compliance. The property
owner hereby authorizes the Township to use the sample to conduct soil
chemistry testing to ensure that the land application of FPR is not
introducing, for example, higher than acceptable levels of heavy metals or
synthetic organics onto the land. The lifetime heavy metal loading rates of FPR
applied to the land may not exceed the limits set forth in the FPR Manual.
   E.   The property owner of the land to which FPR are applied must provide
the Township with an annual report, in a form provided or approved by the
Township, by the end of January for the prior fiscal year in which FPR is
applied, which annual report shall include the minimum record keeping
information set forth in the FPR Manual (See, FPR Manual, Chapter 8). The
Township reserves the right, but is not obligated, to conduct soil testing to
verify information contained in the annual report.
   F.   The property owner of the land to which FPR are applied must keep a
log, acceptable in form to the Township, of daily activities including, at a
minimum, the following: tax parcel identification number upon which the FPR has
been applied; type, percentage of solids and weight or volume of FPR that is
land applied; name and mailing address of each generator of FPR that is land
applied; transportation records of FPR that is land applied (including a chain
of custody from FPR generator to land application); a sketch of the area to
which FPR are applied (for example, a USGS map overlaid with an outline of the
area to which FPR are applied); the FPR land application rate; and pH records
of the FPR applied. The aforementioned log must be made available by the
property owner to which FPR are applied to the Township for inspection or
copying, upon request by the Township, and within 1 business day of the
Township s request. The log, or portions of it may be marked confidential by
the property owner; and, if marked as such, the Township will treat any
physical copy of the log as confidential, subject to disclosure requirement
under the Pennsylvania Right-to-Know Law.
   G.   In the event the FPR to be land applied must be stabilized pursuant to
PA DEP rules or regulations prior to application, the property owner of the
land to which FPR will be applied must provide a certification acceptable to
the Township that the FPRs have been stabilized by a Process that Significantly
Reduces Pathogens and a Process that Further Reduces Pathogens recognized as
acceptable by PA DEP, and a summary of the manner of stabilization.
 70-7 STORAGE OF FOOD PROCESSING RESIDUAL.
   A.   Prior to storage of FPR in a FPR Storage Tank, or construction of a FPR
Storage Tank, the property owner of the land on which a FPR Storage Tank is
proposed to be located must provide the Township a FPR Storage Plan. FPR stored
in a FPR Storage Tank must only be applied to the parcel or contiguous tract of
land upon which the FPR Storage Tank is affixed.
   B.   The FPR Storage Plan must include a narrative describing proposed
notification, response, and clean-up measures to be implemented in the event of
a leak or spill of FPR from the FPR Storage Tank. The FPR Storage Plan must
also include a narrative describing proposed maintenance and inspection
schedule for the FPR Storage Tank to ensure proper working order of the FPR
Storage Tank and related improvements, and the structural integrity of the FPR
Storage Tank.
   C.   Prior to use or construction of an FPR Storage Tank, a land use permit
for the proposed FPR Storage Tank must be applied for and obtained from the
Township, and the FPR Storage Plan must be submitted to the Township. The FPR
Storage Plan may be updated or amended from time to time, with Township
verification of compliance.
   D.   The property owner of the land to which FPR are applied must keep a
log, acceptable in form to the Township, of delivery activities including, at a
minimum, the following: tax parcel identification number to which the FPR has
been delivered and stored; type, percentage of solids and weight or volume of
FPR delivered; and name and mailing address of each generator of FPR that is
delivered; transportation records of FPR that is delivered (including a chain
of custody from FPR generator to land application). The aforementioned log must
be made available by the property owner to which FPR are stored to the Township
for inspection or copying, upon request by the Township, and within 1 business
day of the Township s request. The log, or portions of it may be marked
confidential by the property owner; and, if marked as such, the Township will
treat any physical copy of the log as confidential, subject to disclosure
requirement under the Pennsylvania Right-to-Know Law.
 70-8 WATER SUPPLY PROTECTION.
   A.   The property owner of the land to which FPR is proposed to be applied
must, or the owner of an FPR Storage Tank, as the case may be, prior to the
storage or application of FPR, submit a Water Supply Plan to the Township. The
Water Supply Plan must provide a temporary water supply within 48 hours of
notice of contamination and a permanent water supply within 90 days of notice
of contamination, and the estimated costs to provide a temporary water supply
and permanent water supply, and the means by with the property owner intends to
financially secure the costs of implementing the temporary water supply and
permanent water supply, if required. Prior to storage or application of FPR,
the property owner of the land on which FPR is to be stored must submit to the
Township a Water Supply Plan and provide adequate financial security for the
implementation thereof.
 70-9 NUISANCE PREVENTION; CLEANUP.
   A.   Land application and storage of FPR must be conducted in a manner that
limits odors, vermin, and ponding of liquids to those associated with a normal
agricultural operation, and as described in the FPR Manual.
   B.   Land application and storage of FPR must not adversely impact soil
composition, ground water, the food chain or environment more than a normal
agricultural operation.
   C.   FPR may not be applied to land where root vegetables which may be eaten
raw will be grown within 2 years of said FPR application.
   D.   In the event of a spill or application of material believed to be FPR
that, in fact, contains Hazardous Waste, Residual Waste, or concentrations of
PFA above the MCLs for PFAs, the land owner shall immediately notify the
Township, EPA and PA DEP and promptly prepare, and thereafter implement, a soil
remediation plan based upon US EPA s Soil Remediation Guidelines which is
acceptable to the US EPA and PA DEP.
 70-10 RECORDS, COMPLIANCE WITH LAWS AND REGULATIONS, NOTICE.
   A.   FPR may only be stored or applied to land as part of a normal
agricultural operation. As used in this Chapter, the term normal agricultural
operation means the activities, practices, equipment, and procedures that
farmers use to produce and prepare agricultural products for market, including
the production and harvesting of crops, livestock, and poultry, as well as
their products, on a tract of land at least 10 contiguous acres in size, or, if
under 10 acres in size, having an anticipated yearly gross income of at least
$10,000.00. FPR storage or land application that is not associated with a
normal agricultural operation is strictly prohibited.
   B.   Prior to the storage or land application of FPR, any change to an
existing FPR storage or land application activity, or the design, construction
and installation of pipes or other facilities to drain or in any other way
discharge FPR on property in the Township that is stored or spread on property
in an adjacent municipality, the property owner of land upon which FPR are
stored or applied must complete and deliver to the Township a Food Processing
Residual Land Application and Storage Compliance Review Form providing
documentation and certification that the storage and land application of FPR
or, as the case may be, the drainage or other discharge to property in the
Township of FPR that is stored or applied to property in an adjacent
municipality will comply with all federal, state and local laws, rules,
regulations and ordinances. The provided documentation shall include at a
minimum all documentation the property owner and/or land applier submitted to
the PA DEP.
   C.   Upon receipt of a Food Processing Residual Land Application and Storage
Compliance Review Form the Township will: review the documentation provided to
ensure compliance with all federal, state and local laws, rules, regulations
and ordinances; and mail a one-time notice to property owners within 500 feet
of the boundary of the tract upon which storage or land application of FPR or,
as the case may be, drainage or other discharge to property in the Township of
FPR that is stored on or applied to property in an adjacent municipality is
proposed alerting them of the submitted Food Processing Residual Land
Application and Storage Compliance Review Form and recommending property owners
review the testing guidelines posted on the PA DEP website and test their
private wells prior to the commencement of FPR land application.
   D.   The property owner of land upon which FPR are stored or applied or, the
property owner of land in this Township to which the owner intends to drain or
in any other way discharge FPR to land that the owner owns in this Township, on
behalf of themselves, their successors and assigns acknowledges and agrees that
the Township will maintain records provided to it and a list of parcels of land
upon which FPR is stored, applied or, drained or in any other way discharged,
in a manner and for a length of time deemed administratively necessary in the
Township s sole discretion; and, further acknowledges and agrees that those
records may constitute public records subject to public disclosure under the
Pennsylvania Right-to-Know Law unless otherwise exempt thereunder.
   E.   This Chapter is intended to supplement and not supersede the laws of
the Commonwealth or rules and regulations promulgated by PA DEP or any other
agency having jurisdiction over and application of FPR which are more stringent
than provisions hereof.
   F.   If a law of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, law of the Federal
Government, holding of the Pennsylvania Supreme Court or holding of the United
States Supreme Court determines that land application of FPR and/or storage of
FPR is not allowed as part of a normal agricultural operation the portions of
this ordinance permitting land application of FPR and/or storage of FPR, as the
case may be, of this ordinance shall be null and void and automatically
repealed.
 70-11 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
   A.   This Chapter shall be enforced by action brought before a District
Justice in the same manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses
under the Pennsylvania Criminal Rules of Criminal Procedure. Any person who
violates or permits the violation of this Chapter shall, upon conviction in a
summary proceeding, be punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000.00, plus
all costs incurred by the Township in the preparation and enforcement of such
violation including, but not limited to, court costs and attorney s fees
incurred in the prosecution of such violation, or by imprisonment for a term
not exceeding 90 days. Each day or portion thereof that such violation
continues, or is permitted to continue, shall constitute a separate offence.
Each section of this Chapter that is violated shall also constitute a separate
offense. In addition to the penalty provisions herein, the Board of Supervisors
may authorize institution of proceedings in equity to compel compliance with
this Chapter and/or seek to enjoin temporarily or permanently the land
application of FPR and/or the drainage or other discharge of FPR to property in
this Township.
   B.   The Township, by allowing land application of FPR and/or drainage or
other discharge of FPR or taking any other action pursuant to this Chapter,
does not waive, reduce, lessen, or impair the lawful police powers vested in
the Township under applicable federal, state, and local laws and regulations.
CHAPTER 71 CHAPTER 83: RESERVED
CHAPTER 84: JUNK AND JUNKYARDS
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Antrim 5-26-
1987 as Ch. 13, Part 1 of the 1987 Code of Ordinances. Amendments noted where
applicable.]
Section
   
84-1   Title
   
84-2   Definitions
   
84-3   License required; fee; issuance; renewal
   
84-4   Application for license
   
84-5   Issuance of license
   
84-6   License fee
   
84-7   License restrictions
   
84-8   Transfer of license
   
84-9   Transfer fee
   
84-10   Record of motor vehicles
   
84-11   Delay in disposal
   
84-12   Maintenance of premises
   
84-13   Salvage pool operation
   
84-14   Violations and penalties
   
84-15   Bond required
   
84-16   Abatement of nuisances
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning - See
Ch. 150.
Fees - See
Ch. A155.
 84-1 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as Antrim Township Junkyard and
Refuse Ordinance.
 84-2 DEFINITIONS.
   Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words and phrases shall be
construed throughout this chapter to have the meanings herein indicated:
ABANDONED VEHICLE
[Added 7-27-1999 by Ord. No. 260]
   A.   A vehicle that meets any one of the following criteria:
      (1)   Is inoperable and is left unattended on public property for more
than 48 hours; or
      (2)   Has remained illegally parked on public property for a period of
more than 48 hours; or
      (3)   Is without a valid registration plate or a certificate of
inspection or title and is left unattended on or along the street, highway,
etc.
   B.   Vehicle and equipment used or to be used in construction or in the
operation or maintenance of public utility facilities, which are left in a
manner which does not interfere with the normal movement of traffic, shall not
be considered to be abandoned.
BOARD
The Board of Supervisors of Antrim Township.
JUNK
Any discarded material or article, which shall include but not be limited to
scrap metal, scrapped, abandoned or junked motor vehicles, machinery,
equipment, paper, glass, containers and structures. It shall not include,
however, refuse or garbage kept in a proper container for the purpose of prompt
disposal. One engaged primarily in the sale of used car parts and used cars not
in a condition to be driven on highways shall be classified under this chapter
as a junk dealer.
JUNKED VEHICLE
Any motor vehicle not contained in a building, which is without either a
current inspection certificate or current registration plate; excluding
vehicles utilized in a bona fide farming operation or commercial enterprise.
[Added 7-27-1999 by Ord. No. 260]
JUNK DEALER
Any person, as hereinafter defined, who shall engage in the business of
selling, buying, salvaging and dealing in junk, and who maintains and operates
a junkyard within the Township of Antrim.
JUNKYARDS
Any place where any junk, as herein defined, is stored, disposed of or
accumulated.
LICENSE
The permit granted to a person who accumulates, stores or disposes of junk as
hereinbefore defined.
PERSON
Any partnership, association, firm or corporation.
TOWNSHIP
Antrim Township, Franklin County, Pennsylvania.
 84-3 LICENSE REQUIRED; FEE; ISSUANCE; RENEWAL.
   No person shall engage in business as a junk dealer or maintain a junkyard
without first having obtained a license from the Board, for which license a fee
in accordance with the schedule hereinafter set forth shall be paid to the
Township for the use of the Township. The license shall be issued for the
twelve-month period beginning July 1 and ending June 30 of the following year,
and each license must be renewed annually on or before the first day of July of
each year.
 84-4 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   The license provided for in this chapter shall be issued by the Board after
written application shall have been made therefor by the person desiring to be
licensed. Such license shall state the name of the person to whom such license
is issued and the premises on which such business is to be conducted or such
junkyard is to be maintained. Such license shall be posted conspicuously upon
the premises licensed thereunder. The written application for license
hereinabove mentioned shall be accompanied by a form, every question of which
must be answered, which form will be supplied by the Board. The applicant shall
also submit therewith a plot of the premises used or to be used in connection
with such license.
 84-5 ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.
[Amended 7-27-1999 by Ord. No. 260]
   Upon receipt of an application by the Board, the Board shall issue a license
or shall refuse to issue a license to the person applying therefor after an
examination of the application to determine whether the application meets the
requirements as set forth in this chapter.
 84-6 LICENSE FEE.
   A.   The license fee shall be paid immediately upon the issuance or renewal
of a license. The amount of the license fee shall be as set forth from time to
time by resolution of the Board of Supervisors. [Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No.
246]
   B.   No license shall be issued for the use of a tract of land in excess of
20 acres, excluding setback areas.
 84-7 LICENSE RESTRICTIONS.
   No person licensed under this chapter shall, by virtue of one license, keep
more than one place of business within the township or maintain more than one
junkyard, for the purpose of buying, selling and dealing in junk. No person
shall engage in business as a junk dealer in any place other than the place
designated upon his or her license or maintain a junkyard in any place other
than the place designed upon his or her license.
 84-8 TRANSFER OF LICENSE.
   No license issued by the Board shall be transferable by the licensee to any
other person unless such a transfer is authorized by the Board. Any person
desiring to transfer his or her license shall notify the Board in writing,
which notification shall be accompanied by an application for a license, as
described in
84-4 of this chapter, by the transferee.
 84-9 TRANSFER FEE.
[Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 246]
   In the event the Board shall approve the transfer of a license, the
transferee shall immediately pay to the township a transfer fee in an amount
set forth from time to time by resolution of the Board of Supervisors.
 84-10 RECORD OF MOTOR VEHICLES.
   Every person licensed under this chapter shall at all times keep and
maintain upon the licensed premises a book in which shall be written in English
a record of all motor vehicles purchased, received or handled by said licensee,
and such record book shall at all times be available for inspection by any
official of Antrim Township or the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
 84-11 DELAY IN DISPOSAL.
   Every person licensed under this chapter shall keep and maintain upon the
licensed premises, for a period of 48 hours after the purchase or receipt
thereof, all junk or used motor vehicles received or purchased by such
licensee, and he or she shall not disturb or reduce the same or alter the
original form, shape or condition thereof until such period of 48 hours shall
have elapsed.
 84-12 MAINTENANCE OF PREMISES.
   A.   Every person licensed under this chapter shall constantly maintain the
licensed premises in accordance with any special provisions imposed by the
Board and in the manner prescribed by this section and any subsequent
regulations adopted by the Board.
   B.   Such premises shall at all times be maintained so as not to constitute
a nuisance or a menace to the health of the community or of residents nearby or
a place for the breeding of rodents and vermin.
   C.   No garbage or other offensive or unhealthful organic waste shall be
stored in such premises.
   D.   Whenever any motor vehicle shall be received at such premises as junk,
all gasoline shall be drained and removed therefrom, and such gasoline shall be
stored as directed by the Pennsylvania State Police.
   E.   The manner of storage and arrangement of junk and used cars and the
drainage facilities of the premises shall be such as to prevent the
accumulation of stagnant water upon the premises, and to facilitate access for
fire-fighting purposes.
   F.   All junk and used cars kept, stored or arranged on the licensed
premises shall at all times be kept, stored and arranged with the junkyard as
described in the application for license hereunder, and as limited under
Subsection (E) above.
   G.   No motor vehicles or parts thereof shall be burned at any time or at
the licensed premises.
   H.   The premises to be licensed shall be set back a minimum distance of 50
feet from the right-of-way lines on all streets or roads. The premises to be
licensed shall be set back 75 feet from all other property lines unless written
permission of the owner of the adjacent property is secured and filed with the
Supervisors permitting use nearer the property line than 75 feet. The area
between the setback line and the right-of-way line of all streets and roads and
between the setback line and all other property lines shall be at all times
kept clear and vacant and planted with suitable ground cover vegetation.
   I.   The licensed premises shall be enclosed by a fence, at the setback
line, at least eight feet in height and not more than six inches from the
surface of the ground. Such fence shall be of a solid, non-see-through, type.
Evergreens may be planted to provide additional screening of the licensed
premises but shall not be used in lieu of a fence.
 84-13 SALVAGE POOL OPERATION.
[Amended 7-10-1990 by Ord. No. 202]
   A salvage pool operation, where monthly sale of salvage-consigned vehicles
is held, shall not be considered a junk dealer , provided that the area where
the salvage vehicles are stored is fenced in and visually screened from view
and all sold vehicles are removed, within 15 days of sale.
 84-14 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
[Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 246]
   This chapter shall be enforced by action brought before a District Justice
in the same manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses under the
Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure. Any person who violates or permits
the violation of this chapter shall, upon conviction in a summary proceeding,
be punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000 or by imprisonment for a term
not exceeding 90 days. Each day or portion thereof that such violation
continues, or is permitted to continue, shall constitute a separate offense.
Each section of this chapter that is violated shall also constitute a separate
offense.
 84-15 BOND REQUIRED.
[Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 246]
   Before a license shall be issued to any person pursuant to this chapter, the
applicant for the same shall post bond with sufficient sureties with the
Secretary-Treasurer of Antrim Township to further secure compliance with the
provisions of this chapter. The amount of said bond shall be set forth from
time to time by resolution of the Board of Supervisors.
 84-16 ABATEMENT OF NUISANCES.
   In addition to the remedies provided in
84-14 above, any continued violations of this chapter which shall constitute a
nuisance in fact or which shall, in the opinion of the Board, constitute a
nuisance, may be abated by proceedings against the violator in a court of
equity for relief.
CHAPTER 85 CHAPTER 91: RESERVED
CHAPTER 92: PARKS
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Antrim 6-26-
2001 by Ord. No. 272. Amendments noted where applicable.]
Section
   
92-1   Purpose
   
92-2   Definitions
   
92-3   Hours of operation
   
92-4   Use of facilities
   
92-5   Regulations for park use
   
92-6   Regulations for dog park use
   
92-7   Vehicle restrictions
   
92-8   Commercial traffic, soliciting and advertising
   
92-9   Advertising assemblies
   
92-10   Permits; fees
   
92-11   Violations and penalties; liability
   
92-12   Severability
   
92-13   Repealer
 92-1 PURPOSE.
   This chapter is hereby adopted by the Township of Antrim for the purpose of
prescribing rules and regulations governing the use of park and recreation
facilities in the Township. The park and recreation facilities are for the
benefit, pleasure and convenience of the public; therefore, detailed rules and
regulations are required for the purpose of providing for the safety and
general welfare of those using such parks and recreational facilities.
 92-2 DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PARKS AND RECREATION
Includes all lands, water and facilities used for parks and/or recreation
purposes under the control of the Antrim Township Board of Supervisors or that
may come under its control while this chapter is in effect.
PERSON
Refers to individual persons, groups or organizations who shall request use of
the facilities as indicated in this chapter or who shall use such facilities.
 92-3 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   A.   Parks shall be open from 8:00 a.m. to sunset unless written
authorization is obtained from the Township.
   B.   The use of park areas at night shall be opened as posted at such
facilities or by permit obtained from the Township.
   C.   Any Township park or facility that becomes hazardous for public use due
to weather, fire, water, construction or other conditions may be closed at the
discretion of the Township. Whenever possible, 24 hours notice of the closing
will be given to persons holding facility permits for use of such facility.
   D.   Enoch Brown Park shall be closed during the months of December, January
and February. All persons found within Enoch Brown Park during those months
shall be subject to the penalties herein provided by this chapter, unless they
have been granted permission in writing by the Board of Supervisors or its
representative, to be in and use said park during the time that Enoch Brown
Park is closed.
 92-4 USE OF FACILITIES.
   A.   The Township shall schedule the use of all group-use facilities,
including but not limited to ball fields, and picnic pavilions. If such
facilities are not scheduled, they would be available to the public.
   B.   Township residents shall receive priority in the use of park and
recreation facilities when applicable.
   C.   Only charcoal or wood fires shall be permitted in barbecue grills or
fire rings and shall be closely monitored and completely extinguished by the
user before the site is vacated. No fires shall be set during extremely dry
conditions as posted.
 92-5 REGULATIONS FOR PARK USE.
   A.   Use or possession of alcoholic beverages or illegal drugs is
prohibited. Persons under the influence of alcohol or illegal drugs may be
prohibited from entering or using the parks.
   B.   Abusive, indecent or threatening language or any indecent act shall be
prohibited.
   C.   Hunting, discharge of firearms, trapping, air rifles, bows and arrows,
slings, slingshots and fireworks shall be prohibited. However, hunting of in-
season wild game animals may be authorized for population or disease control
under regulations established by resolution and approved by the Board of
Supervisors.
   D.   Pets must be on a leash unless otherwise prohibited, and all droppings
must be cleaned up.
   E.   All trash, garbage and litter shall be deposited in the refuse cans
provided. Scattering, dropping, dumping or leaving any trash, litter or
substance of any kind or polluting or dumping any matter into park waters and
any portion of any park by any person is prohibited.
   F.   Intentionally breaking, cutting down, removing or in any manner
injuring or defacing any ornament, tree, plant, shrub, fern, flower and turf is
prohibited.
   G.   Damaging, destroying, defacing, adding to or removing from any park
property, including equipment, facilities and the natural environment, is
prohibited.
   H.   No person shall deface or destroy any notices, rules or regulations for
the regulation of a park system posted or in any manner permanently fixed
within the limits of the same.
   I.   Disturbance of waterflow in streams, pools, ponds or basins is
prohibited.
   J.   Disturbances of birds nests, eggs or any other wildlife habitat is
prohibited.
   K.   Erection of any temporary or permanent structure, such as tree houses
or platforms, clubhouses, goalposts, fences, etc., is prohibited unless written
authorization by the Township is provided.
   L.   Modifying any present structure or facility is prohibited without the
written authorization from the Township.
   M.   Digging, collecting or removing any natural or cultural resources is
prohibited.
 92-6 REGULATIONS FOR DOG PARK USE.
[Added 11-12-2013 by Ord. No. 330]
   A.   No attendant will be on duty. Users of dog parks shall do so at their
own risk. Antrim Township shall not be liable for injuries to dogs, their
owners/handlers or others that use the dog park. The area is for dogs and their
handlers/owners only. The owner is 100% responsible for any injuries inflicted
by their dog. Prevent injuries by supervising your dog closely at all times.
Dog owners are legally and financially responsible for their dog s behavior.
   B.   All dogs shall be spayed or neutered.
   C.   All dogs shall be legally licensed and vaccinated and shall wear a
visible dog license and identification.
   D.   No dogs over 30 pounds permitted in the small dog area.
   E.   Aggressive dogs are prohibited from this park and dogs exhibiting
aggressive behavior must be removed from the park immediately without debate.
   F.   Dog owners are solely liable for injuries or damage caused by their
dogs.
   G.   Dog waste shall be cleaned up by dog owners and placed in proper
receptacles.
   H.   Dogs must be on leash and under control by their owners/handlers at all
times outside of the fenced dog park.
   I.   No dogs under four (4) months of age are permitted in the dog park.
   J.   No animals other than dogs are permitted in the dog park.
   K.   Dog owners must be in the dog park and within view and voice control of
their dogs at all times.
   L.   Children under twelve (12) shall be closely supervised at all times by
an adult. It is strongly urged that young children not be brought to the dog
park for their own safety.
   M.   All dogs must be supervised by an adult handler/owner at least 18 years
of age in order to use the park.
   N.   No more than three (3) dogs and/or children allowed per handler.
   O.   No food or treats (human or dog), alcoholic beverages, strollers,
bicycles, or children s toys allowed in the dog park.
   P.   Owners/handlers shall stop their dogs from digging and immediately fill
any holes dug.
   Q.   Excessive barking is prohibited.
   R.   Violations of any of the above rules may result in the dog and/or the
owner/handler of the dog being prohibited from use of the park in the future.
 92-7 VEHICLE RESTRICTIONS.
[Amended 11-12-2013 by Ord. No. 330]
   A.   Operating or parking any vehicle while on park property in an
unauthorized, reckless or negligent manner or in excess of the posted speed or
in such a manner as to become a nuisance to other park users is prohibited.
   B.   The following shall be defined as operating in an unauthorized manner:
      (1)   Operating on areas other than cartways especially designed and
constructed for vehicular traffic. This shall not apply to vehicles of the
Township and authorized emergency vehicles.
      (2)   Washing, repairing or servicing of vehicles is prohibited in parks.
Abandonment of such vehicles is prohibited. If mechanical disablement occurs,
immediate steps must be taken for removal, otherwise the vehicle shall be towed
by a licensed hauler at the owner s expense.
   C.   All nonlicensed motorized vehicles are prohibited in all park areas.
Three- or four-wheelers, snowmobiles and mopeds are especially prohibited and
barred from any and all park properties. Licensed motorbikes and motor vehicles
are restricted to posted parking areas. Bicycles and horses are allowed on
designated paths.
 92-8 COMMERCIAL TRAFFIC, SOLICITING AND ADVERTISING.
[Amended 11-12-2013 by Ord. No. 330]
   Commercial traffic, the posting of signs, the distributing, selling,
servicing or renting of any commodity whatsoever or soliciting for any purpose
is prohibited on all park grounds unless permitted under
92-10 of this chapter.
 92-9 ADVERTISING ASSEMBLIES.
[Amended 11-12-2013 by Ord. No. 330]
   No gathering or meeting of any kind assembled through advertisement shall be
permitted in a park or recreation facility without written authorization from
the Township.
 92-10 PERMITS; FEES.
[Amended 11-12-2013 by Ord. No. 330]
   A.   Permits are available from the Township for the following:
      (1)   Reservations of group-use facilities: ball fields, basketball
courts, picnic pavilion, amphitheater, multipurpose fields, tennis courts and
any others that will be built.
      (2)   Use of special equipment, such as generators, sound systems and the
like.
      (3)   Posting of signs.
      (4)   Sale of refreshments and retailing items.
      (5)   Planting of trees and shrubs.
   B.   Fees for permits as determined by resolution and approved by the Board
of Supervisors shall be posted in the Township office, and a copy shall be
provided with each permit request. These fees may consist of a deposit or bond
against damages, a fee for electricity, special services, equipment rental or
pavilion rental.
   C.   A complete copy of the rules and regulations as set forth in this
chapter shall be provided to each applicant with the approved permit.
   D.   Issuance of a permit does not exempt any person from any of the rules
or regulations as set forth in this chapter.
   E.   Issuance of a permit in no way states, implies or guarantees that the
Township may not close down a park or recreation facility that becomes
hazardous or questionable for public use due to weather, fire, water,
construction or other conditions as set forth in
92-3.
 92-11 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES; LIABILITY.
[Amended 11-12-2013 by Ord. No. 330]
   A.   This chapter shall be enforced by an action brought before a District
Justice in the same manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses
under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure. Any person who violates or
permits the violation of this chapter shall, upon conviction in a summary
proceeding, be punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000 or by imprisonment
for a term not exceeding 90 days. Each day or portion thereof that such a
violation continues, or is permitted to continue, shall constitute a separate
offense. Each section of this chapter that is violated will also constitute a
separate offense. This chapter may also be enforced through an action in
equity.
   B.   In addition to the above, the Parks Administrator, in lieu of or in
addition to the above penalties, may impose restrictions or limitations on the
permit granted to such person. The permit may be revoked and the deposit
forfeited to the Township.
   C.   Any person who violates any of the foregoing rules and regulations to
the injury of Township property or to the person or property of any other
person shall be liable for such injury in addition to payment of the fines and
penalties set forth in this section. This section shall not be construed to
limit such liability in any manner.
 92-12 SEVERABILITY.
[Amended 11-12-2013 by Ord. No. 330]
   If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this
chapter is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of
competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and
independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portions hereof.
 92-13 REPEALER.
[Amended 11-12-2013 by Ord. No. 330]
   Any ordinance inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter is hereby
repealed to the extent of the conflict.
CHAPTER 93 CHAPTER 109: RESERVED
[Former Ch. 100, Fireworks, adopted 8-22-2006 by Ord. No. 303, was repealed 9-
14-2021 by Ord. No. 360.]
CHAPTER 110: SEWERS
   Article
      
I.   SEWER CONNECTIONS
      
II.   SEWER SPECIFICATIONS AND INSPECTIONS
      
III.   HOLDING TANKS
      
IV.   SEWER RENTS AND PROHIBITED DISCHARGES
      
V.   WATER WELL REGULATIONS
      
VI.   PRIVY REGULATIONS
      
VII.   MUNICIPAL MANAGEMENT OF ON-LOT SUBSURFACE SEWAGE DISPOSAL
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Antrim as
indicated in article histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
Section
Article I: Sewer Connections
   
110-1   Definitions
   
110-2   Connection to public sewers required; private sewage disposal systems
   
110-3   Permit required; conditions for connection
   
110-4   Grouping of connections prohibited except by special permission
   
110-5   Costs; liability
   
110-6   Point of connection
   
110-7   Failure to connect; collection of costs by Township
   
110-8   General regulations
   
110-9   Procedure for new connections
   
110-10   Violations and penalties
Article II: Sewer Specifications and Inspections
   
110-11   Title
   
110-12   Definitions
   
110-13   Connection of fixtures and drains; inspections
   
110-14   Sewer Inspector
   
110-15   Fees
   
110-16   Inspection
   
110-17   Effective date of rules and regulations
   
110-18   General rules and regulations
   
110-19   Quality and weights of materials
   110-20   Traps and cleanouts
   110-21   House drains and sewers
   110-22   Inspections and tests
   110-23   Violations and penalties
Article III: Holding Tanks
   110-24   Purpose
   110-25   Definitions
   110-26   Supervisors authorized to control holding tank sewage disposal
   110-27   Rules and regulations
   110-28   Rates and charges
   110-29   Compliance with regulations; prior approval required for permit
issuance
   110-30   Duties of improved property owner
   110-31   Permits issued in certain areas only
   110-32   Violations and penalties
   110-33   Abatement of nuisances
Article IV: Sewer Rents and Prohibited Discharges
   110-34   Declaration of purpose
   110-35   Definitions
   110-36   Sewer rentals or charges
   110-37   Computation of sewer rentals and charges
   
110-38   Time and method of payment
   
110-39   Liens for sewer rentals; filing and collection of liens
   
110-40   Prohibited wastes; industrial waste discharge
   
110-41   Right of access; inspection
   
110-42   Responsibility of owners of improved property
   
110-43   Failure of owner to provide information; rental estimates
   
110-44   Adoption of additional rules and regulations
   
110-45   Violations and penalties
Article V: Water Well Regulations
   
110-46   Short title
   
110-47   Purpose
   
110-48   Application
   
110-49   Standards
   
110-50   Repairs; reconstruction
   
110-51   Permits
   
110-52   Reports required
   
110-53   Enforcement; violations and penalties
   
110-54   Severability
   
110-55   Liability
Article VI: Privy Regulations
   
110-56   Purpose
   
110-57   Definitions
   
110-58   Rights and privileges granted
   
110-59   Approval required
   
110-60   Permit required
   
110-61   Adoption of rules and regulations
   
110-62   Procedure for permit application
   
110-63   Establishment of rates and charges
   
110-64   Conditions applicable to permit
   
110-65   Duties of improved property owner
   
110-66   Enforcement; violations and penalties
   
110-67   Abatement of nuisances
Article VII: Municipal Management of On-Lot Subsurface Sewage Disposal
   
110-68   Short title; introduction; purpose
   
110-69   Definitions
   
110-70   Applicability
   
110-71   Permit requirements
   
110-72   Replacement areas
   
110-73   Inspections
   
110-74   Operation
   
110-75   Maintenance
   
110-76   Systems rehabilitation
   
110-77   Liens
   
110-78   Disposal of septage
   
110-79   Administration
   
110-80   Appeals
   
110-81   Enforcement; violations and penalties
   
110-82   Repealer
   
110-83   Severability
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks - See Ch. 122.
Subdivision and land development - See
Ch. 125.
Stormwater management - See
Ch. 126.
Zoning - See
Ch. 150.
Fees - See
Ch. A155.
ARTICLE I SEWER CONNECTIONS
[Adopted 5-26-1987 as Ch. 18, Part 1 of the 1987 Code of Ordinances]
 110-1 DEFINITIONS.
   Unless the context specifically and clearly indicates otherwise, the meaning
of terms and phrases used in this article shall be as follows:
AUTHORITY
Antrim Township Municipal Authority, a municipality authority incorporated,
organized and existing under provisions of the Municipality Authorities Act,
being 53 Pa. C.S. §§ 5601 et seq., as amended and supplemented, acting by and
through its Board or, in appropriate cases, acting by and through its
authorized representatives.
   [Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 246]
BUILDING SEWER
The extension from the sewage drainage system of any structure to the lateral
of a sewer.
COMMONWEALTH
The Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
IMPROVED PROPERTY
Property within this Township upon which there is erected a structure intended
for continuous or periodic habitation, occupancy or use by human beings or
animals and from which structure sanitary sewage and/or industrial wastes shall
be or may be discharged. The term improved property shall not include or apply
to barns or other farm outbuildings unless such structures are improved with
bathroom facilities for the discharge of sanitary sewage.
   [Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 246]
INDUSTRIAL ESTABLISHMENT
Any room, group of rooms, building or other enclosure connected directly or
indirectly to the sewer system used or intended for use, wholly or in part, for
the manufacturing, processing, cleaning, laundering or assembling of any
product, commodity or article, or any other improved property located in this
Township from which wastes, in addition to or other than sanitary sewage, shall
be discharged.
   [Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 246]
INDUSTRIAL WASTE
Any solid, liquid or gaseous substance of waterborne wastes or form of energy
rejected or escaping in the course of any industrial, manufacturing, trade or
business process or in the course of the development, recovery or processing of
natural resources, as distinct from sanitary sewage.
   [Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 246]
LATERAL
That part of the sewer system extending from a sewer to the curbline or, if
there shall be no curbline, to a point designated by the Township, or, if no
such lateral shall be provided, then lateral shall mean that portion of or
place in a sewer which is provided for connection of any building sewer.
OWNER
Any person vested with ownership, legal or equitable, sole or partial, of any
improved property.
PERSON
Any individual, partnership, company, association, society, corporation, school
district, municipality, municipality authority or other group or entity.
   [Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 246]
SANITARY SEWAGE
Normal water-carried household and toilet wastes from any improved property.
SEWER
Any pipe, main or conduit constituting a part of the sewer system and used or
usable for collection and transportation of sanitary sewage and industrial
wastes.
   [Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 246]
SEWER SYSTEM
All facilities, as of any particular time, for collecting, pumping,
transporting, treating and disposing of wastewater to be acquired and/or to be
constructed and to be owned by the Authority and to be leased to the Township
for maintenance, operation and use.
   [Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 246]
STREET
Any street, road, lane, cul-de-sac, alley, public way or public square.
TOWNSHIP
The Township of Antrim, Franklin County, Pennsylvania, a municipal subdivision
of the commonwealth, acting by and through its Board of Supervisors or, in
appropriate cases, acting by and through its authorized representatives.
 110-2 CONNECTION TO PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED; PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS.
[Amended 12-8-2015 by Ord. No. 346]
   A.   The owner of any improved property accessible to and whose principal
building is within 150 feet from the sewer system shall connect such improved
property with such sewer system and shall use such sewer system, in such manner
as this Township may require, within 60 days after notice to such owner from
this Township to make such connection, for the purpose of discharge of all
sanitary sewage and industrial wastes from such improved property; subject,
however, to such limitations and restrictions as shall be established herein or
otherwise shall be established by this Township from time to time.
   B.   If a public sanitary sewer system is available within 500 feet of any
portion of the proposed subdivision, mobile home park or land development, the
subdivider or developer shall design and install a system which shall be
connected to the public system and which shall serve every property within the
proposed project. If the proposed subdivision, mobile home park or land
development is within 500 feet of the Antrim Township sanitary sewer system and
another municipality s sanitary sewer system, then said subdivision, mobile
home park or land development must connect to the Antrim Township Sanitary
Sewer System. All plans and installation shall be subject to the approval of
the Antrim Township Municipal Authority. The Antrim Municipal Authority
reserves the right to waive this requirement where, owing to topographic
features or character of development, such connection would be an undue
hardship.
   C.   Homestead. A subdivision of two lots or less from a homestead
containing 50 acres or more, where such lots are to be conveyed to the owner or
the owner s children and/or their spouses, shall not be considered a
subdivision requiring the main house to be connected to the sanitary sewer if
such main house is more than 150 feet from the sewer line. This provision shall
not exempt the lots created from sanitary sewer connection.
   D.   Where a public sanitary sewer system is not accessible but is planned
for extension to the subdivision or land development or to within 500 feet of
any part of the subdivision or land development, the subdivider or developer
shall install sewer lines, including lateral connections, to provide adequate
service to each lot within the proposed project when connection with the public
system is made. The sewer lines shall be capped at the limits of the
subdivision, mobile home park or land development and the laterals shall be
capped at the street or sewerage right-of-way line. All plans and installation
shall be subject to the approval of the Antrim Township Municipal Authority.
When capped sewers are provided, on-site disposal facilities shall also be
provided. A sewer shall be considered to be planned for extension to a given
area any time after engineering and related studies have been completed
preparatory to the construction of facilities within 500 feet of any part of
the subdivision or land development. The Antrim Township Municipal Authority
reserves the right to waive this requirement where owing to topographic
features or character of development such connection would be an undue
hardship. In lieu of providing the required sewer facilities the subdivider or
developer may, upon approval of the Antrim Township Municipal Authority, submit
to the Authority the amount of money necessary to cover the costs of providing
the required sewer facilities.
   E.   In any portion of the Township lying outside the service area defined
in Subsection (D) above where a central sewerage system is proposed, such
system shall be subject to approval of the Antrim Township Municipal Authority,
which may establish conditions for future acceptance by the Authority of such
system.
   F.   All sanitary sewage and industrial wastes from any improved property,
after connections of such improved property with a sewer as required under §
110-2(A), shall be conducted into a sewer; subject, however, to such
limitations and restrictions as shall be established herein or otherwise shall
be established by this Township from time to time.
   G.   No person shall place, shall deposit or shall permit to be placed or to
be deposited upon public or private property within this Township any sanitary
sewage or industrial wastes in violation of §
110-2(A).
   H.   No person shall discharge or shall permit to be discharged to any
natural outlet within this Township any sanitary sewage or industrial wastes in
violation of §
110-2(A), except where suitable treatment has been provided which is
satisfactory to this Township.
   I.   No privy vault, cesspool, sinkhole, septic tank or similar receptacle
shall be used or shall be maintained at any time upon any improved property
which has been connected to a sewer or which shall be required under §
110-2(A) to be connected to a sewer. Every such privy vault, cesspool,
sinkhole, septic tank or similar receptacle in existence shall be abandoned
and, at the discretion of this Township, shall be cleansed and shall be filled
at the expense of the owner of such improved property under the direction and
supervision of this Township; and any such privy vault, cesspool, sinkhole,
septic tank or similar receptacle not so abandoned and, if required by this
Township, not cleansed and filled, shall constitute a nuisance, and such
nuisance may be abated as provided by law at the expense of the owner of such
improved property.
   J.   No privy vault, cesspool, sinkhole, septic tank or similar receptacle
at any time shall be connected with a sewer.
   K.   The notice by this Township to make a connection to a sewer, referred
to in §
110-2(A), shall consist of a copy of this article, including any amendments
and/or supplements at the time in effect, or a summary of each section thereof,
and a written or printed document requiring the connection in accordance with
the provisions of this article and specifying that such connection shall be
made within 60 days from the date such notice is given. Such notice may be
given at any time when a sewer is in place which can receive and can convey
sanitary sewage and industrial wastes for treatment and disposal from the
particular improved property. Such notice shall be served upon the owner in
accordance with law.
 110-3 PERMIT REQUIRED; CONDITIONS FOR CONNECTION.
   A.   No person shall uncover, connect with, make any opening into or use,
alter or disturb, in any manner, any sewer or any part of the sewer system
without first obtaining a permit, in writing, from this Township.
   B.   Application for a permit required under Subsection (A) shall be made by
the owner of the improved property served or to be served or by the duly
authorized agent of such owner.
   C.   No person shall make or shall cause to be made a connection of any
improved property with a sewer until such person shall have fulfilled each of
the following conditions:
      (1)   Such person shall have notified the Secretary of this Township of
the desire and intention to connect such improved property to a sewer.
      (2)   Such person shall have applied for and shall have obtained a permit
as required by Subsection (A).
      (3)   Such person shall have given the appropriate Township official at
least 24 hours notice of the time when such connection will be made so that
this Township may supervise and inspect or may cause to be supervised and
inspected the work of connections and necessary testing. [Amended 7-8-1997 by
Ord. No. 246]
      (4)   If applicable, such person shall have furnished satisfactory
evidence to the Secretary of this Township that any tapping (or connection) fee
which may be charged and imposed by the Authority against the owner of each
improved property who connects such improved property to a sewer has been paid.
 110-4 GROUPING OF CONNECTIONS PROHIBITED EXCEPT BY SPECIAL PERMISSION.
   Except as otherwise provided in this section, each improved property shall
be connected separately and independently with a sewer through a building
sewer. Grouping of more than one improved property on one building sewer shall
not be permitted, except under special circumstances and for good sanitary
reasons or other good cause shown, but then only after special permission of
this Township, in writing, shall have been secured and only subject to such
rules, regulations and conditions as may be prescribed by this Township.
 110-5 COSTS; LIABILITY.
   All costs and expenses of construction of a building sewer and all costs and
expenses of connection of a building sewer to a sewer shall be borne by the
owner of the improved property to be connected, and such owner shall indemnify
and shall save harmless this Township and the Authority from all loss or damage
that may be occasioned, directly or indirectly, as a result of construction of
a building sewer or of connection of a building sewer to a sewer.
 110-6 POINT OF CONNECTION.
   A.   A building sewer shall be connected to a sewer at a place designated by
this Township or by the Authority and where, if applicable, the lateral is
provided.
   B.   The invert of a building sewer at the point of connection shall be at
the same or higher elevation than the invert of a sewer. A smooth, neat joint
shall be made and the connection of a building sewer to the lateral shall be
made secure and watertight.
 110-7 FAILURE TO CONNECT; COLLECTION OF COSTS BY TOWNSHIP.
   If the owner of any improved property abutting on or adjoining any street in
which a sewer constituting part of the sewer system is located, after 60 days
notice from this Township requiring the connection of such improved property
with a sewer, in accordance with §
110-2(A), shall fail to connect such improved property as required, this
Township may make such connection and may collect from such owner the costs and
expenses thereof by a municipal claim, an action in assumpsit or such other
legal proceeding as may be permitted by law.
 110-8 GENERAL REGULATIONS.
   A.   Where an improved property, at the time connection to a sewer is
required, shall be served by its own sewage disposal system or sewage disposal
device, the existing house sewer line shall be broken on the structure side of
such sewage disposal system or sewage disposal device and attachment shall be
made, with proper fittings, to continue such house sewer line as a building
sewer.
   B.   No building sewer shall be covered until it has been inspected and
approved by this Township. If any part of a building sewer is covered before so
being inspected and approved, it shall be uncovered for inspection at the cost
and expense of the owner of the improved property to be connected to a sewer.
   C.   Every building sewer of any improved property shall be maintained in a
sanitary and safe operating condition by the owner of such improved property.
   D.   Every excavation for a building sewer shall be guarded adequately with
barricades and lights to protect all persons from damage and injury. Any
street, sidewalk and other public property disturbed in the course of
installation of a building sewer shall be restored, at the cost and expense of
the owner of the improved property being connected, in a manner satisfactory to
this Township.
   E.   If any person shall fail or shall refuse, upon receipt of a notice of
this Township or the Authority, in writing, to remedy any unsatisfactory
condition with respect to a building sewer, within 60 days of receipt of such
notice, this Township or the Authority may refuse to permit such person to
discharge sanitary sewage and industrial wastes into the sewer system until
such unsatisfactory condition shall have been remedied to the satisfaction of
this Township and the Authority.
   F.   This Township reserves the right to adopt, from time to time,
additional rules and regulations as it shall deem necessary and proper relating
to connections with a sewer and with the sewer system, which additional rules
and regulations, to the extent appropriate, shall be construed as part of this
article.
 110-9 PROCEDURE FOR NEW CONNECTIONS.
   A.   When a property owner along an existing sewer line intends to connect
into the Authority s sewer, the following conditions must be met:
      (1)   If the property owner has paid his or her connection fee for a
future service at the time of construction and his or her lateral has been
constructed, a permit to connect to the system will be issued. The house
lateral will then be installed and the lateral inspected by the Township upon
payment of the inspection fee to the Township.
      (2)   If a property owner did not pay a connection fee at the time of
construction of the original public sewer system, an application must be made
to the Township to connect, and the then-existing connection fee, tapping fee
and inspection fee must be paid prior to issuance of a land use permit and
commencement of construction. The Township will provide the service lateral
from the sewer main to the right-of-way line at the owner s expense. The owner
shall, at his or her expense, install the line from the right-of-way to the
improvements on the owner s property. [Amended 1-9-1990 by Ord. No. 196; 8-25-
2009 by Ord. No. 317]
   B.   Special provisions for subdividers.
      (1)   When a property owner wants to subdivide his or her property and
have the lots connect into the Authority s sewer system, the following
procedures shall apply:
         (a)   If the subdivided lots are adjacent to the sewer line along a
road with a sewer line available, the procedures outlined in Subsection (A)
above shall be followed.
         (b)   If the subdivided lots are not serviced by an existing sewer,
the developer shall make application to the Township to connect into the
existing sewer system, present plans of his or her proposed sewer extension,
pay the tapping fees for each physical connection to the existing sewer system,
pay the connection fee for each EDU within the proposed subdivision/land
development, pay the Township inspection fees, and construct the proposed sewer
extension complete, including the service laterals, to the edge of the sewer
right-of-way at the developer s expense. The tapping fees for each physical
connection within the development/subdivision shall be paid as set forth in
Subsection (A)(2) above. [Amended 1-9-1990 by Ord. No. 196]
         (c)   The provisions of this subsection shall apply to all subdivision
or land developments located within 500 feet of the Authority s sewer system.
[Amended 1-9-1990 by Ord. No. 196]
      (2)   After dedication of the lines to the Township, the Township will
not charge the developer connection fees for the future lots within the
subdivision, provided that the developer has constructed all the lines at his
or her expense. Where another property owner owns land between the end of the
original service line and the new subdivision and applies for a permit to
connect into the newly dedicated line, the Authority will charge the in-between
developer connection fees as stated in Subsection (A)(2).
   C.   The provisions of §
110-9(A)(2) and (B)(2), as amended, shall not apply to building lots with
existing laterals at the time of enactment, nor to any subdivision and land
development plans submitted and approved prior to the effective date of this
article, provided that improvements are constructed upon any such lots and such
improvements are physically connected to the public sewer system within two
years from the date of enactment of this article.
 110-10 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
[Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 246]
   This article shall be enforced by action brought before a District Justice
in the same manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses under the
Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure. Any person who violates or permits
the violation of this article shall, upon conviction in a summary proceeding,
be punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000 or by imprisonment for a term
not exceeding 90 days. Each day or portion thereof that such violation
continues or is permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense. Each
section of this article that is violated shall also constitute a separate
offense.
ARTICLE II SEWER SPECIFICATIONS AND INSPECTIONS
[Adopted 5-26-1987 as Ch. 18, Part 2 of the 1987 Code of Ordinances]
 110-11 TITLE.
   This article shall be cited and known as The Antrim Township Building Sewer
Code.
 110-12 DEFINITIONS.
   Unless the context specifically and clearly indicates otherwise, the meaning
of terms and phrases used in this article shall be as follows:
BUILDING SEWER
The extension from the sewage drainage system of any structure to the lateral
of a sewer.
FIXTURE
A receptacle intended to receive and discharge sanitary sewerage and/or
industrial waste into a building sewer and sewer system.
IMPROVED PROPERTY
Any property located within this Township upon which there is erected a
structure intended for continuous or periodic habitation, occupancy or use by
human beings or animals and from which structure sanitary sewage and/or
industrial wastes shall or may be discharged. The term improved property shall
not include or apply to barns or other farm outbuildings unless such structures
are improved with bathroom facilities for the discharge of sanitary sewage.
INDUSTRIAL WASTES
Any solid, liquid or gaseous substance or waterborne wastes or form of energy
rejected or escaping in the course of any industrial, manufacturing, trade or
business process or in the course of the development, recovery or processing of
natural resources, as distinguished from sanitary sewage.
LATERAL
[Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 246]
   A.   That part of the sewer system extending from a sewer to a curbline or,
if there is no curbline, to a point designated by the Township.
   B.   If no such lateral shall be provided, then lateral shall mean that
portion of or place in a sewer which is provided for connection of any building
sewer.
LOCAL VENTILATING PIPE
A local ventilating pipe is a pipe through which foul air is removed from a
room or a fixture.
OWNER
Any person vested with ownership, legal or equitable, sole or partial, of any
improved property.
PERSON
Any individual, partnership, company, association, society, corporation, school
district, municipality, municipality authority or other group or entity.
   [Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 246]
SANITARY SEWAGE
Normal water-carried household and toilet wastes discharged from any improved
property.
SEWAGE AREA
Any portion of the Township which has public sewers constructed and available
for use.
SEWER
Any pipe, main or conduit constituting a part of the sewer system and used or
usable for collection and transportation of sanitary sewage and industrial
wastes.
   [Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 246]
SEWER SYSTEM
All facilities, as of any particular time, for collecting, transporting,
pumping, treating and disposing of wastewater to be acquired and/or to be
constructed and to be owned by the Authority and to be leased to the Township
for maintenance, operation and use.
   [Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 246]
TOWNSHIP
The Township of Antrim, Franklin County, Pennsylvania, a municipality of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, acting by and through its Board of Supervisors
or, in appropriate cases, acting by and through its authorized representatives.
TRAP
A fitting or device so constructed as to prevent the passage of air or gas
through a pipe without materially affecting the flow of sewage or wastewater
through it.
TRAP SEAL
The vertical distance between the crown weir and the dip of the trap.
VENT PIPE
Any pipe provided to ventilate a house drainage system and to prevent trap
siphonage and back pressure.
 110-13 CONNECTION OF FIXTURES AND DRAINS; INSPECTIONS.
   A.   All fixtures and drains in any structure within a service area must be
connected to the building sewer of that structure.
   B.   From and after the passage of this article, it shall be unlawful for
any person or persons, firm or corporation to connect a building sewer system
of the Township before such building sewer has been properly inspected.
   C.   The Township or its Building Sewer Inspector shall have the right to
inspect the interior drainage systems of all buildings and structures within a
service area to determine that sewer pipes from all fixtures are connected to
the building sewer and that there are no prohibited or illegal connections to
the building sewer of any such building or structure.
 110-14 SEWER INSPECTOR.
   There is hereby created the office of Sewer Inspector for the Township. He
or she shall be competent by education and/or experience to administer this
article and shall not engage in or be connected directly or indirectly with the
business of installing sewers within the Township. He or she shall be appointed
by the Board of Supervisors of the Township and shall receive such compensation
as the Township may from time to time provide. It shall be his or her duty to
inspect all building sewer systems in conformity with the provisions of law and
this article. The Sewer Inspector shall be charged with the duty of enforcing
this article and shall have the power to bring appropriate proceedings before
the District Justice for the Township.
 110-15 FEES.
   A.   A fee, as set forth from time to time by resolution of the Board of
Supervisors, shall be paid to the Township by the owner for the inspection of a
building sewer for a building or structure existing at the time of adoption of
this article or constructed after the adoption of this article. [Amended 7-8-
1997 by Ord. No. 246]
   B.   A fee, as set forth from time to time by resolution of the Board of
Supervisors, will be charged for each additional inspection required due to
failure to pass the initial inspection. [Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 246]
   C.   All fees shall be paid prior to or at the time of a request for
inspection of a building sewer.
 110-16 INSPECTION.
   A.   It shall be the duty of the Township Sewer Inspector to inspect all
building sewers for conformity with the ordinances, rules and regulations of
the Township.
   B.   No building sewer installation shall be covered or concealed in any
manner until after it has been inspected and approved by the Sewer Inspector.
   C.   Notice shall be given at the Township office when the work is
sufficiently advanced for inspection, and it shall be the duty of said
Inspector to inspect the same within three working days after receipt of such
notification.
   D.   Any alteration, extension, addition or removal of a building sewer
shall also be inspected by the Sewer Inspector and shall be subject to his or
her approval in the same manner as new building sewer installations.
 110-17 EFFECTIVE DATE OF RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   Rules and regulations for the construction, repair, replacement or removal
of any portion of a building sewer in the Township and any modifications,
amendments or changes thereto as promulgated by the Board of Supervisors shall
become effective on the date of approval thereof by the Board of Supervisors of
the Township.
 110-18 GENERAL RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   Rules and regulations for the construction, repair, replacement or removal
of building sewers in Antrim Township shall be as follows:
   A.   Change in direction. All changes in direction shall be made by the
approximate use of 45 wyes, half wyes, long sweep bend, short sweep bend,
sixth, eighth, or sixteenth bends, except that single sanitary tees and double
sanitary tees may be used on vertical stacks and quarter bends may be used in
soil and waste lines where the change in direction flow is from the horizontal
to the vertical.
   B.   Sump pumps. No sump pump used to discharge stormwater, underground
seepage or any other type of water shall be connected into the sewer system.
   C.   Sewage sump pumps. Sump pumps or other pumps used to discharge sewage
as defined by Township ordinance shall be inspected by the Sewer Inspector
prior to connection into the sewer system and such pumps shall not be connected
to the sewer system until after approval by the Sewer Inspector.
   D.   Minimum slope of building sewer pipe. The minimum slope of a four-inch
building sewer shall be 1/4 inch per foot. Building sewers of a larger diameter
may be constructed at a flatter slope. Prior to construction, the minimum slope
of such larger building sewers must be approved by the Board of Supervisors.
 110-19 QUALITY AND WEIGHTS OF MATERIALS.
   A.   Quality of materials. All materials used in any drainage or building
sewer, or part thereof, shall be free from defects.
   B.   Label, cast or stamped. Each length of pipe, fitting trap, fixture and
device used in a building sewer shall be stamped or indelibly marked with the
weight or quality thereof and the maker s mark or name.
   C.   Vitrified clay pipe. All vitrified clay pipe and bedding shall conform
to the ASTM Standard Specifications for Extra Strength Clay Sewer Pipe.
   D.   Cast iron pipe. All cast iron pipe and fittings shall conform to the
Standard Specifications for Cast Iron Soil Pipe and Fittings approved by
American Standards Association. Pipe and fittings shall be of weights known as
extra heavy, uncoated and in accordance with the following table:
 
EXTRA HEAVY SOIL PIPE
Size     Weight Per Foot Weight Single Hub Length Weight Double Hub Length
(inches) (pounds)        (pounds)                 (pounds)
 
   E.   Wrought iron pipe. All wrought iron pipe shall conform to the ASTM
Standard Specifications for Welded Wrought Iron Pipe (in accordance with
federal specifications) and shall be galvanized.
   F.   Mild-steel pipe. All steel pipe shall conform to the ASTM Standard
Specifications for Welded and Seamless Steel Pipe (in accordance with federal
specifications) and shall be galvanized.
   G.   Brass and copper pipe.
      (1)   Brass and copper pipe shall conform, respectively, to the standard
specifications of the ASTM for Brass Pipe, Standard Sizes and for Copper Pipe,
Standard Sizes (in accordance with federal specifications).
      (2)   Copper waste piping shall conform to federal specifications for
tubing. D.W.V. tubing may be used for drainage, with Type K tubing for branch
lines serving only underground branches.
   H.   Asbestos-cement pipe shall be in accordance with Federal Specification
SS-P-331B.
   I.   Sheet lead. Sheet lead shall weigh not less than four pounds per square
foot.
   J.   Acid and chemical waste pipes. Acid and chemical waste pipes shall be
of materials unaffected by the discharge of such wastes, as approved by the
Township.
   K.   Plastic pipe shall be ABS-DMV Schedule 40 or approved equal. Pipe and
bedding must conform to the latest ASTM Specifications D 2321.
   L.   Thread fittings. All drainage fittings shall be of cast iron,
galvanized malleable iron, brass or plastic of standard weight and dimensions.
All drainage fittings shall have new improved recess installed throughout, with
smooth interior waterway, with threads tapped out of solid metal, and with the
long turn pattern.
 110-20 TRAPS AND CLEANOUTS.
   A.   Traps. The main soil line must be provided with a vented house trap,
known as a building sewer trap, no less than four inches, vented on the house
side.
   B.   Trap location in sewered area. The building sewer drain should be
provided with a horizontal intercepting trap placed inside the cellar wall or
on the outside as close to the cellar wall as possible. If the main soil line
has an existing trap in the basement, it will be approved and the property
owner will not be required to place a trap outside the wall.
   C.   Inspection tee and cleanout. Immediately adjacent to the end of the
lateral provided by the Township, or as close thereto as practical, a standard
tee with a vertical cleanout to the surface shall be constructed for inspection
purposes. Adjacent to the inspection tee a standard cleanout shall be
constructed.
   D.   Prohibited traps. No form of trap which depends for its seal upon the
action of movable parts or concealed interior partitions shall be used.
   E.   Trap levels and protection. All traps shall be set true with respect to
their water seals and protected from frost.
   F.   Interceptor pit. [Amended 4-8-2008 by Ord. No. 311]
      (1)   Vehicle repair facilities, car wash stands, commercial and
institutional establishments with food preparation, or other facilities with
the possibility of discharging grease, oil, gasoline, silt or sand shall
install a grease, oil, gasoline, silt or sand interceptor, placed as to be
readily accessible for cleaning and connection to the building sewer.
      (2)   Interceptor designs shall be reviewed and recommended for approval
by the Township engineer to the Board of Supervisors. The Board of Supervisors
shall approve such system at a public meeting prior to installation.
      (3)   No fixture connection carrying sanitary sewage, shall be permitted
to flow through the interceptor.
      (4)   Interceptors shall be designed to eliminate the release to the
highest extent possible of grease, oil, gasoline, silt, sand or similar
particles or products into the sewer system.
      (5)   All pits shall be subject to periodic inspections by the Township
at reasonable times. No pit shall be restricted from Township inspection.
      (6)   Operators/owners of the system shall maintain accurate records of
the installation and maintenance of the system and immediately supply such
records to the Township upon written or verbal request.
      (7)   A User shall be in violation of this Chapter if scheduled
maintenance of devices is not provided or if releases result in a violation of
this Chapter, or if releases result in fouling or obstruction of the public
sewer.
      (8)   The Township may, upon determining that releases are occurring,
issue an order for installation, replacement, upgrade and/or maintenance of a
control device and a schedule for such actions. Failure of a User to comply
with such an order constitutes a violation of this Chapter.
   G.   Floor drains. Floor drains from houses shall not be connected to the
sewer system. Floor drains from service stations or garages for washing cars
must be connected to the sewer system.
 110-21 HOUSE DRAINS AND SEWERS.
   A.   Cleanouts.
      (1)   Pipe cleanout fittings shall be installed no more than 70 feet
apart in horizontal lines of four inches nominal diameter or less. When
installed in underground lines they shall be extended to or above the finished
grade, directly above the place where the cleanout is installed. A cleanout
shall be installed at all changes in horizontal direction.
      (2)   If the building sewer is less than 70 feet in length and has no
changes in horizontal direction, a cleanout shall be installed either inside
the cellar wall or just outside the cellar wall on the downhill side of the
house trap.
   B.   Drainage below sewer level. In all buildings in which all or part of
the house drainage and plumbing system lies below the crown level of the main
sewer, sewage or house wastes shall be lifted by approved artificial means and
discharged into the building sewer.
   C.   Sumps and receiving tanks. All subhouse drains shall discharge into an
airtight sump or receiving tank so located as to receive the sewage by gravity,
from which sump or receiving tank the sewage shall be lifted and discharged
into the building sewer by pumps, ejectors or any equally efficient method.
Such sumps shall be either automatically discharged or be of sufficient
capacity to receive the house sewage and wastes for not less than 12 hours.
   D.   Ejector, vented. The soil or vent pipe leading to an ejector or other
appliance for raising sewage or other waste matter to the sewer system, where a
water closet or closets are installed, shall be provided with a vent pipe not
less in diameter than the soil pipe to which the water closet or closets are
connected, and, where fixtures other than water closets are installed, the
waste vent pipe shall be of the same diameter as the waste pipe.
   E.   Motors, compressors, etc. All motors, air compressors and air tanks
shall be located where they are open for inspection and repair at all times.
The air tanks shall be so proportioned as to be of equal cubical capacity to
the ejectors connected therewith, in which there shall be maintained an air
pressure of not less than two pounds for each foot of height the sewage is to
be raised.
 110-22 INSPECTIONS AND TESTS.
   A.   Inspections. All pipings and traps of a building sewer shall be
inspected by the Sewer Inspector to ensure compliance with the requirements of
this article.
   B.   Notification.
      (1)   It shall be the duty of the owner to notify the Sewer Inspector
orally, by telephone, or in writing, not less than eight working hours between
the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. before the work is to be inspected or
tested.
      (2)   It shall be the duty of the owner to determine that the work will
stand the test prescribed before giving the above notification.
      (3)   If the Board of Supervisors finds that the work will not stand the
test, the owner shall be required to renotify as above.
      (4)   If the Sewer Inspector fails to appear within three working days of
the time set for each inspection or test, the inspection or test shall be
deemed to have been made and the owner shall file an affidavit with the
Township that the work was installed in accordance with this article, that it
was free from defects, that the required test was made and the system found to
be free from leaks and that the owner or his or her authorized agent was
present when such inspection or test was made or was duly notified.
   C.   Material and labor for tests. The equipment, material, power and labor
necessary for the inspection and tests shall be furnished by the owner or his
or her authorized agent.
   D.   Covering of work. No building sewer or part thereof shall be covered
until it has been inspected, tested and approved as herein prescribed.
   E.   Uncovering of work. If any building sewer or part thereof is covered
before being regularly inspected, tested and approved, as herein prescribed, it
shall be uncovered upon the direction of the Inspector.
   F.   Defective work. If inspection or testing shows defects, such defective
work or material shall be replaced within three days and inspection and testing
shall not be repeated.
   G.   Methods of building sewer testing.
      (1)   System test. All of the piping of a building sewer shall be tested
with water or air. The property owner shall have the right to select the method
of testing to be used.
      (2)   Water test. The water test shall be applied to the building sewer
in its entirety or in sections. If applied to the entire system, all openings
in the piping shall be tightly closed, except the highest opening, and the
system shall be filled with water to a point five feet above the portion of the
building sewer under test. The water test shall be conducted for a period of 15
minutes. If the building sewer is to be tested in sections, each opening shall
be tightly plugged, except the highest opening of the section under test, and
each section shall be tested with no less than a five-foot head of water for a
period of 15 minutes. The maximum allowable volume of water lost during the
fifteen-minute period shall be based on 100 gallons per inch of diameter per
mile of pipe per day. (Example: A four-inch building sewer 100 feet long could
infiltrate nine ounces and pass the test).
      (3)   Air test. The air test shall be made by attaching an air compressor
or test apparatus to any suitable opening and closing all other inlets and
outlets to the system, then forcing the air into the system until there is a
uniform pressure sufficient to balance a column of mercury 10 inches in height
or five pounds per square inch on the entire system. The pressure shall be
allowed two minutes to stabilize, at which time the pressure shall be brought
back up to five pounds per square inch. All air hoses shall be disconnected and
if after four minutes the pressure registers 3.5 pounds per square inch or
greater, the system will have passed the test.
   H.   Garage and drainage system. With respect to a garage or any part of a
garage, the same tests and inspection of the building sewer shall be made as in
the case of an ordinary dwelling.I.   Certificate of approval. Upon the
satisfactory completion and final testing of a building sewer, a certificate of
approval shall be issued by the Inspector upon request.
   J.   Air test of defective building sewer. An air test shall be used in
testing the sanitary condition of the building sewer of any building where
there is reason to believe that it has become defective. In any building
condemned by the Township because of unsanitary conditions of the building
sewer, the alterations of such sewer shall not be considered as repairs, but as
new plumbing. All necessary alterations, repairs and retesting shall be
completed within 30 days after such condemnation.
   K.   Building sewers to all new houses not existing at the time this article
was adopted shall be inspected and tested in strict accordance with this
section.
 110-23 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
   A.   This article shall be enforced by action brought before a District
Justice in the same manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses
under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure. Any person who violates or
permits the violation of this article shall, upon conviction in a summary
proceeding, be punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000 or by imprisonment
for a term not exceeding 90 days. Each day or portion thereof that such
violation continues, or is permitted to continue, shall constitute a separate
offense. Each section of this article that is violated shall also constitute a
separate offense. [Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 246]
   B.   Any person who violates or permits a violation of any of the duly
approved rules and regulations of the Township regarding the construction,
reconstruction, testing or removal of any portion of a building sewer, shall,
upon conviction in a summary proceeding, be punishable by a fine of not more
than $1,000 or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days. Each day or
portion thereof that such violation continues, or is permitted to continue,
shall constitute a separate offense. Each section of the rules and regulations
that is violated shall also constitute a separate offense. These rules and
regulations shall be enforced by action brought before a District Justice in
the same manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses under the
Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure. [Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 246]
   C.   All fines and penalties assessed hereunder shall be paid to the
Treasurer of the Township for deposit in the general funds of the Township.
ARTICLE III HOLDING TANKS
[Adopted 5-26-1987 as Ch. 18, Part 3 of the 1987 Code of Ordinances]
 110-24 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this article is to establish procedures for the use and
maintenance of holding tanks designed to receive and retain sewage, whether
from residential or commercial uses, and it is hereby declared that the
enactment of this article is necessary for the protection, benefit and
preservation of the health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of Antrim
Township.
 110-25 DEFINITIONS.
   Unless the context specifically and clearly indicates otherwise, the meaning
of terms used in this article shall be as follows: HOLDING TANKA watertight
receptacle which receives and retains sewage and is designed and constructed to
facilitate ultimate disposal of the sewage at another site. Holding tanks
include but are not limited to the following:
   A.   CHEMICAL TOILET
A toilet using chemicals that discharge to a holding tank.
   B.   RETENTION TANK
A holding tank where sewage is conveyed to it by a water-carrying system.
   C.   VAULT PIT PRIVY
A holding tank designed to receive sewage where water under pressure is not
available.
IMPROVED PROPERTY
Any property located within this Township upon which there is erected a
structure intended for continuous or periodic habitation, occupancy or use by
human beings or animals and from which structure sanitary sewage and/or
industrial wastes shall or may be discharged. The term improved property shall
not include or apply to barns or other farm outbuildings unless such structures
are improved with bathroom facilities for the discharge of sanitary sewage.
   [Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 246]
OWNER
Any person vested with ownership, legal or equitable, sole or partial, of any
property located in the Township.
PERSON
Any individual, partnership, company, association, corporation, school
district, municipality, municipality authority or other group or entity.
   [Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 246]
SEWAGE
Any substance that contains any of the waste products or excrement or other
discharge from the bodies of human beings and any noxious or deleterious
substance being harmful or inimical to the public health, or to animal or
aquatic life or to the use of water for domestic water supply or for
recreation.
SEWAGE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER
Such representative or agent of the Township appointed by the Supervisors of
Antrim Township, Franklin County, Pennsylvania.
   [Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 246]TOWNSHIPAntrim Township, Franklin County,
Pennsylvania, a municipal subdivision of the Commonwealth, acting by and
through its Board of Supervisors or, in appropriate cases, acting by and
through its authorized representatives.
   [Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 246]
 110-26 SUPERVISORS AUTHORIZED TO CONTROL HOLDING TANK SEWAGE DISPOSAL.
   The Supervisors of Antrim Township are hereby authorized and empowered to
undertake within the Township the control and methods of holding tank sewage
disposal and the collection and transportation thereof.
 110-27 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The Supervisors of Antrim Township are hereby authorized and empowered to
adopt such rules and regulations concerning sewage which they may deem
necessary from time to time to effect the purpose herein.
110-28 RATES AND CHARGES.
   The Supervisors shall have the right and power to fix, alter, charge and
collect rates, assessments and other charges in the area served by Township
facilities at reasonable and uniform rates as authorized by applicable law.
 110-29 COMPLIANCE WITH REGULATIONS; PRIOR APPROVAL REQUIRED FOR PERMIT
ISSUANCE.
   The collection and transportation of all sewage from any improved property
utilizing a holding tank shall be done only under the direction and control and
pursuant to regulations adopted by the Supervisors. No permit for the
construction, operation or maintenance of a holding tank shall be issued except
with the prior approval of the Board of Supervisors of Antrim Township.
 110-30 DUTIES OF IMPROVED PROPERTY OWNER.
   The owner of an improved property that utilizes a holding tank shall:
   A.   Maintain the holding tank in conformance with this article or any
ordinance of Antrim Township, the provisions of any applicable law, and the
rules and regulations of the Supervisors and any administrative agency of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
   B.   Maintain a contract with a person approved by the Township Supervisors
to collect, transport and dispose of the contents of such holding tank at the
Antrim Township Sewage Treatment Plant at 13740 Worleytown Road for as long as
such holding tank is in use.
 110-31 PERMITS ISSUED IN CERTAIN AREAS ONLY.
   No permit for the construction, operation or maintenance of a holding tank
shall be issued except in those areas of the Township which are adjacent to and
not more than 150 feet from a proposed sewage line which is a main transmission
line and which has been approved by the Township and the Department of
Environmental Protection for construction and is shown on an official plan;
provided, however, that the Township Supervisors may authorize the issuance of
such a permit in other areas of the Township where the temporary or permanent
use of holding tanks shall be deemed by the Supervisors to be necessary and
proper.
 110-32 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
[Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 246]
   This article shall be enforced by action brought before a District Justice
in the same manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses under the
Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure. Any person who violates or permits
the violation of this article shall, upon conviction in a summary proceeding,
be punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000 or by imprisonment for a term
not exceeding 90 days. Each day or portion thereof that such violation
continues, or is permitted to continue, shall constitute a separate offense.
Each section of this article that is violated shall also constitute a separate
offense.
 110-33 ABATEMENT OF NUISANCES.
   In addition to any other remedies provided in this article, any violation of
110-31 above shall constitute a nuisance and may be abated by the municipality
or the Supervisors by either seeking appropriate equitable or legal relief from
a court of competent jurisdiction.
ARTICLE IV SEWER RENTS AND PROHIBITED DISCHARGES
[Adopted 5-26-1987 as Ch. 18, Part 4 of the 1987 Code of Ordinances]
 110-34 DECLARATION OF PURPOSE.
   It hereby is declared that the enactment of this article is necessary for
the protection, benefit, and preservation of the health, safety, and welfare of
the inhabitants of the Township.
 110-35 DEFINITIONS.
   Unless the context specifically and clearly indicates otherwise, the meaning
of terms used in this article shall be as follows:
AUTHORITY
Antrim Township Municipal Authority, a municipal authority incorporated,
organized, and existing under provisions of the Municipality Authorities Act,
being 53 Pa. C.S. 5601 et seq., as amended and supplemented, acting by and
through its Board or, in appropriate cases, acting by and through its
authorized representatives.
BOARD OF SUPERVISORS
The Board of Supervisors of the Township or, in appropriate cases, its
authorized representatives.
BOD5 (BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND)
The quantity of oxygen, expressed in ppm, utilized in the biochemical oxidation
of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure for five days at 20 C.
The standard laboratory procedure shall be that found in the latest edition of
Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Sewage published by the
American Public Health Association.
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT
Any room, group of rooms, building or enclosure connected directly or
indirectly to the sewer system and used or intended for use in the operation of
one business enterprise for the sale and distribution of any product,
commodity, article or service.
DWELLING UNIT
Any room, group of rooms, house trailer, building or other enclosure connected
directly or indirectly to the sewer system and occupied or intended for
occupancy as separate living quarters by a family or other group of persons
living together or by a person living alone.
GARBAGE
Solid wastes resulting from preparation, cooking and dispensing of food and
from handling, storage and sale of produce.
IMPROVED PROPERTY
Any property upon which there is erected a structure intended for continuous or
periodic habitation, occupancy or use by human beings or animals and from which
sanitary sewage and/or industrial wastes shall be or may be discharged. The
term improved property shall not include or apply to barns or other farm
outbuildings unless such structures are improved with bathroom facilities for
the discharge of sanitary sewage.
   [Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 246]
INDUSTRIAL ESTABLISHMENT
Any room, group of rooms, building or other enclosure connected directly or
indirectly to the sewer system and used or intended for use, in whole or in
part, in the operation of one business enterprise for manufacturing,
processing, cleaning, laundering or assembling any product, commodity or
article or from which any process waste, as distinct from sanitary sewage,
shall be discharged.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE
Any solid, liquid or gaseous substance or form of energy rejected or escaping
in the course of any industrial, manufacturing, trade or business process or in
the course of the development, recovery or processing of natural resources, as
distinct from sanitary sewage.
INSTITUTIONAL ESTABLISHMENT
Any room, group of rooms, building or other enclosure connected directly or
indirectly to the sewer system which does not constitute a commercial
establishment, a dwelling unit or an industrial establishment.
MULTIPLE UNIT
Any improved property in which there is located more than one dwelling unit,
commercial establishment, industrial establishment or institutional
establishment, or any combination thereof.
OWNER
Any person vested with ownership, legal or equitable, sole or partial, of any
improved property.
PERSON
Any individual, partnership, company, association, society, corporation, school
district, municipality, municipality authority or other group or entity.pHThe
logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions, expressed in grams
per liter of solution.PPMParts per million, by weight.
PROPERLY CHOPPED GARBAGE
Garbage that has been chopped to such a degree that all its particles will be
carried freely under normal sewer flow conditions, with no particle greater
than 1/2 inch in any dimension.
SANITARY SEWAGE
The normal water-carried household and toilet wastes from any improved
property.
SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT
As appropriate, the sewage treatment facilities owned by the Authority and
operated by the Township or, with respect to any period during which wastes
discharged into the sewer system are being transported for treatment pursuant
to the treatment agreement, the sewage treatment facilities of the Borough of
Greencastle, Franklin County, Pennsylvania, and/or the Greencastle, Franklin
County, Authority.
SEWER
Any pipe, main or conduit constituting a part of the sewer system and used or
usable for collection and transportation of sanitary sewage and industrial
wastes.
SEWER SYSTEM
All facilities, as of any particular time, for collecting, pumping,
transporting, treating and disposing of wastewater to be acquired and/or to be
constructed and to be owned by the Authority and to be leased to the Township
for maintenance, operation and use.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS
Solids neither dissolved nor floating on the surface of the liquid, as
determined by appropriate procedures found in the latest edition of Standard
Methods for the Examination of Water and Sewage published by the American
Public Health Association.
TOTAL SOLIDS
All solids as determined by appropriate procedures found in the latest edition
of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Sewage published by the
American Public Health Association.
TOWNSHIP
The Township of Antrim, Franklin County, Pennsylvania, a municipal subdivision
of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, acting by and through its Board of
Supervisors or, in appropriate cases, acting by and through its authorized
representatives.
TOXIC SUBSTANCE
Any poisonous substance, including copper, cyanide, chromium, beryllium,
cadmium, lead, nickel, tin and zinc ions, and any phenolic bodies, radioactive
isotopes, petrochemical compounds, or biocides.
TREATMENT AGREEMENT
A certain agreement for treatment of wastewater, dated February 21, 1972,
between the Township and the Borough of Greencastle, Franklin County,
Pennsylvania, and the Greencastle, Franklin County Authority, including all
amendments and/or supplements thereto, which may be entered into from time to
time, pursuant to which the Township and/or the Authority may discharge from
the sewer system to facilities of such borough and/or such Authority, sanitary
sewage and industrial wastes for treatment and disposal.
WASTES OR SEWAGE WASTES
Normal domestic sewage.
 110-36 SEWER RENTALS OR CHARGES.[Amended 7-26-1988 by Ord. No. 174]
   A.   Sewer rentals or charges hereby are imposed upon and shall be collected
from the owner of each improved property that shall be or is connected,
directly or indirectly, to the sewer system, for use of the sewer system, which
sewer rentals or charges shall be imposed and shall be effective as of the
effective date of this article, the date of connection of such improved
property to the sewer system, or the date when this Township first shall be
capable of accepting sanitary sewage and/or industrial wastes from such
improved property for transportation and treatment, whichever date shall last
occur. Such sewer rentals and charges hereby imposed shall be computed and
shall be payable as provided herein.
   B.   The provisions of Subsection (A) notwithstanding, sewer rentals or
charges hereby are imposed upon and shall be collected from the owner of any
improved property that is required to be connected to the sewer system by
appropriate ordinance of this Township from and after the date of expiration of
the time allowed to make such connection as set forth in such ordinance,
whether or not such connection shall have been made. Provided, however, that
this Township shall first be capable of accepting sanitary sewage and/or
industrial waste from such improved property for transportation and treatment.
Such sewer rentals or charges hereby imposed shall be computed and shall be
payable as provided herein.
   C.   Unoccupied mobile home pads in mobile home parks and unoccupied lots
not within mobile home parks which are improved for exclusive occupancy by
mobile homes shall not be liable for sewer rentals while they are unoccupied.
When a mobile home pad becomes vacant, the owner of such pad shall give
immediate notice to Antrim Township at the Antrim Township Office, personally,
by telephone or in writing, of such vacancy and, upon inspection of such pad by
an appropriate official or employee of Antrim Township or upon receipt of other
satisfactory proof of such vacancy, sewer rentals for such mobile home pads
shall be suspended and shall not be reimposed again for such pads until the
same is again occupied by a mobile home. Sewer rentals shall continue to
accrue, and shall be due from the owner of each mobile home pad served by the
sewer system, until notice of vacancy has been given in accordance with this
provision.
   D.   Any residential dwelling unit which has been unoccupied for a period of
180 days or longer shall be exempt from sewer rent from the 180th day until the
vacancy ends. This exemption from sewer rent shall not include dwellings that
are under construction, have a water supply source connected to the dwelling,
vacant as a result of being for sale or in the process of being sold, or a
habitable dwelling. Exceptions in extreme cases may be made by the Board of
Supervisors.
[Amended 7-10-2007 by Ord. No. 308]
   E.   Any builder/developer will be charged a rental, in an amount set forth
from time to time by resolution of the Board of Supervisors, for any new
building unit developed or constructed, which is connected to ATMA sewer, on
real estate owned by the builder/developer until such time that any units are
sold or occupied.
[Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 246]
   F.   It will be the duty of any builder/developer to notify the Township of
any sale or occupancy of a new dwelling connected to ATMA sewer, according to
Subsection (E) and this subsection. Failure to notify the Township shall result
in the builder/developer being charged full sewer rentals for any new building
which is connected to ATMA sewer from the date of such sale or occupancy until
the date of notification.
 110-37 COMPUTATION OF SEWER RENTALS AND CHARGES.
   Sewer rentals or charges imposed by this article shall be computed in
accordance with the schedules of classifications and rates set forth in this
section.
   A.   Residential flat rate.
      (1)   Sewer rentals or charges for sanitary sewage discharge into the
sewer system from any improved property constituting a dwelling unit shall be
on a flat-rate basis and shall be set forth from time to time by resolution of
the Board of Supervisors. [Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 246]
      (2)   For purposes of this section, each dwelling unit in a double house,
in a row of connecting houses, in an apartment building or in any other
multiple unit structure shall constitute a separate dwelling unit and shall be
billed as a separate cooking and/or toilet facility in an improved property,
the sewer rental or charge shall be computed as though each such family was a
separate user with a separate connection to a sewer.
   B.   Flat rate for commercial establishments and institutional
establishments.
      (1)   Sewer rentals or charges for sanitary sewage discharge into the
sewer system from any improved property constituting a commercial establishment
or an institutional establishment shall be on a flat-rate basis. The sewer
rental or charge for each such commercial establishment or institutional
establishment shall be determined by multiplying the applicable rate set forth
in Subsection (A)(1) of this section by the applicable number of billing units
assigned to such commercial establishment or institutional establishment in the
schedule of classifications set forth in Subsection (C) of this section.
      (2)   The rate applied to commercial establishments and institutional
establishments under this section shall be set forth from time to time by
resolution of the Board of Supervisors. [Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 246]
   C.   Billing units.
      (1)   Commercial establishments and institutional establishments are
hereby classified according to the following schedule. The applicable number of
billing units determined in accordance with the following schedule shall be
multiplied by the applicable rate per billing unit set forth in Subsection (A)
of this section to determine the sewer rental or charge for such commercial
establishment or institutional establishment:
Classification of Use Billing Units
Classification of Use                                             Billing Units
Bowling alley (in addition to restaurant facilities), per 5 lanes 1
or fraction thereof
Retail store with meat, vegetable or other food preparation       1
facilities, per employee food preparation station
Restaurant, club, tavern or other establishment which dispenses   1
food and/or beverages, per 10 seats or fraction thereof
Service station or vehicle repair garage:
   Per 2 bays or less without car wash facilities              1
   Each additional bay over 2                                  1/2
   Each car wash bay                                           1
Firehouse, municipal building, or similar use, per restroom       1
Drive-in theater or similar facility (in addition to food         1
preparation station), per 8 car spaces
Church (with or without kitchen facilities):
   For the first 200 members, based on average weekly attendanc1 1/2
   For the first 100 members, based on average attendance      1
Retail business (not otherwise listed)                            1/2
Beauty shop in detached building:
   Up to 2 chairs                                              1
   Every chair in excess of 2 chairs                           1 1/2
Beauty shop in operator s residence, per chair                    1/2
Barbershop:
   Up to 2 chairs                                              1
   Every chair in excess of 2 chairs                           1/2
Motel or hotel (in addition to restaurant facilities), per rental 1/4
room
Public laundromat, per washer                                     1/2
Schools or similar institutions:
   Without showers or kitchen facilities, per 12 pupils        1
   With shower facilities only, per 10 pupils                  1
   With kitchen facilities only, per 8 pupils                  1
   With shower and kitchen facilities, per 6 pupils            1
Business or professional office:
   3 or less employees                                         1
   Each additional employee over 3 or fraction thereof         1/2
Car washing establishment, per bay                                1
Each improved property having garbage grinder (3/4 horsepower or  1
greater), for each such grinder
Banquet facilities, per every 30 seats [Amended 3-22-1988 by Ord. 1
No. 169]
Institutions serving as domicile, per every 3 residents [Amended  1
7-26-1988 by Ord. No. 173]
Canine or feline grooming business, per each employee [Amended 8- 1/2
23-1988 by Ord. No. 175]
 
      (2)   The number of billing units to be ascribed to schools or similar
institutions hereunder shall be determined on the basis of the average daily
enrollment of pupils during the regular school term preceding the billing
period. Employees, including teachers and administrative personnel, shall be
treated as pupils for purposes of computation.
      (3)   The number of billing units to be ascribed to business or
professional offices hereunder shall be computed on the basis of the daily
average of employees (including individual owners and employers) for the
calendar quarter preceding the billing period.
   D.   Flat rate for industrial establishments. Sewer rentals or charges for
discharge of sanitary sewage not subject to a charge hereunder from any
improved property constituting an industrial establishment into the sewer
system, when the volume of discharge shall not be metered as required or
permitted by this article, shall be on a flat-rate basis in accordance with the
following schedule.
      (1)   For the period commencing November 1, 1981, the flat rate shall be
set forth from time to time by resolution of the Board of Supervisors. [Amended
7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 246]
      (2)   For the period commencing June 1, 1983, the flat rate shall be
based on the following:
 
Classification of Use                                   Billing Units
Without showers or kitchen facilities, per 10 employees 1
With shower facilities only, per 8 employees            1
With kitchen facilities only, per 7 employees           1
With shower and kitchen facilities, per 5 employees     1
 
   E.   Metered rate for industrial establishments.
      (1)   The owner of any improved property may install a sewage discharge
meter or other measuring device for the purpose of measuring discharge into the
sewage system from any industrial establishment. Sewer rentals or rates for
sanitary sewage, not subject to special charge hereunder, that shall be
discharged into the sewer system from any improved property constituting an
industrial establishment shall be based upon volume of such discharge where the
volume of such discharge shall be metered in connection with the sewer system
or otherwise as required or permitted by this article. In such case, the sewer
rental or charge shall be computed quarterly and shall be set forth from time
to time by resolution of the Board of Supervisors.
[Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 246]
      (2)   Meters or other measuring devices which shall be required or
permitted for use in determining volume of sewage waste discharge shall be of a
type approved for use by the Board of Supervisors, shall be furnished and
installed by the owner of the improved property at his or her expense, shall be
under the control of the Board of Supervisors and may be tested, inspected or
repaired by the Board of Supervisors whenever necessary. The owner of the
improved property upon which such meter or other measuring device shall be
installed shall be responsible for its maintenance and safekeeping, and all
repairs thereto shall be made at the expense of the owner, whether such repairs
shall be made necessary by ordinary wear and tear or other causes. Bills for
such repairs, if made by the Board of Supervisors, shall be due and payable
immediately upon completion of such repairs and shall be collected in the same
manner as quarterly bills for sewer rentals or charges.
   F.   Meter rates.
[Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 246]
      (1)   Commercial, industrial and institutional users. At the discretion
of the Antrim Township Board of Supervisors, a commercial, industrial or
institutional customer may be charged sewer rentals based on its water usage.
Such charges will be set forth from time to time by resolution of the Board of
Supervisors.
[Amended 5-8-1990 by Ord. No. 197; 1-3-1994 by Ord. No. 231; 1-2-1996 by Ord.
No. 241]
      (2)   Residential users. All residential users shall be charged a flat
rate as set forth from time to time by resolution of the Board of Supervisors.
   G.   Charges for sanitary wastes having certain concentrations.
      (1)   Additional charges.
         (a)   Additional charges will be made for all wastes discharged from
an improved property in the event that the Board of Supervisors shall consent
under separate agreement to accept sanitary wastes for discharge into the sewer
system from any improved property having total suspended solids and BOD5 in
excess of the following concentrations:
            [1]   Suspended solids (SS): 300 parts per million. [Amended 6-9-
2009 by Ord. No. 316]
            [2]   BOD5: 250 parts per million. [Amended 6-9-2009 by Ord. No.
316]
         (b)   The total charge for the total volume of waste shall be
determined in accordance with the following formula:
   Total Charge = Q + (0.001 Q (BOD5 in ppm - 250)
   (0.001 Q (SS in ppm - 300)
   For purposes of the above formula:
   Q = Billing Unit Charge or Metered Quantity Discharge
   SS = Suspended Solids
   BOD5 = Biochemical Oxygen Demand
      (2)   The strength of the sanitary wastes shall be determined at
intervals deemed advisable by this Township or as may be requested by the owner
of the particular improved property. The collection and analysis of waste
samples for determination shall be supervised by a registered professional
engineer approved by the Board of Supervisors. All costs for waste sampling,
collection and analysis shall be paid by the owner who desires that the waste
be sampled and analyzed. The analysis of all waste samples collected shall be
made in accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the
Examination of Water and Sewage, as published by the American Public Health
Association.
   H.   Changes in flat-rate classifications. If the use or classification of
any improved property shall change during any billing period, the sewer rental
or charge shall be adjusted by the Board of Supervisors, by proration on a
monthly basis to the nearest calendar month, with a credit or charge, as shall
be appropriate under the circumstances, being made on the statement for the
next succeeding billing period.
   I.   Additional flat-rate classifications and modifications of flat-rate
classifications. The Board of Supervisors reserves the right, from time to
time, to establish additional flat-rate classifications and to establish rates
therefor; and the Board of Supervisors further reserves the right, from time to
time, to alter, modify, revise and/or amend flat-rate classifications and the
rates applicable thereto.
   J.   Multiple unit rate. Each dwelling unit, commercial establishment,
institutional establishment or industrial establishment located in a multiple
unit discharging sanitary sewage directly or indirectly into the sewer system
shall be billed as a separate entity or unit, irrespective of whether or not
such separate entity or unit, has separate toilet or waste facilities and
irrespective of whether or not such separate entity or unit has a separate
connection to a sewer, and the applicable sewer rental or charge for such
separate entity or unit shall be computed in accordance with the applicable
classification and rate set forth in this section as though such separate
entity or unit constituted a separate improved property.
   K.   Special agreement. Notwithstanding any provision in this article to the
contrary, the Board of Supervisors shall have the right, based upon good
reasons and circumstances existing, to enter into special agreements with the
owner of any approved property constituting an industrial establishment with
respect to terms and conditions upon which sanitary sewage and/or industrial
wastes may be discharged into the sewer system and with respect to payments of
sewer rentals or charges in connection therewith. In such event, such service
and payments with respect thereto shall be governed by terms and conditions of
such special agreement.
[Amended 3-22-1922 by Ord. No. 169; 7-12-1988 by Ord. No. 172; 5-8-1990 by Ord.
No. 197]
 110-38 TIME AND METHOD OF PAYMENT.
   A.   Sewer rentals or charges imposed by this article shall be payable
quarterly.
   B.   All bills with respect to sewer rentals or charges shall be rendered
quarterly on the first day of January, April, July and October of each year for
service during the preceding calendar quarter ending December 31, March 31,
June 30 and September 30, respectively. [Amended 10-13-1987 by Ord. No. 165]
   C.   Sewer rentals or charges shall be due and payable on the billing date
as provided in Subsection (B) of this section and the amount computed in
accordance with this article shall constitute the net bill. If sewer rentals or
charges are not paid within 30 calendar days after the billing date, an
additional sum of 10% shall be added to the such net bill, which net bill, plus
such additional sum, shall constitute the gross bill. Payment made or mailed
and postmarked on or before the last day of such 30 calendar day period shall
constitute payment within such period. If the end of such 30 calendar-day
period shall fall on a legal holiday or on a Sunday, payment made on or mailed
and postmarked on the next succeeding business day which is not a legal holiday
shall constitute payment within such period.
   D.   Whenever service to any improved property shall begin after the first
day or shall terminate before the last day of any quarterly billing period,
sewer rentals or charges for such period shall be prorated equitably, if
appropriate, for that portion of the quarterly billing period during which such
improved property was served by the sewer system.
   E.   Every owner of improved property which is connected to the sewer system
initially shall provide the Board of Supervisors with and thereafter shall keep
the Board of Supervisors advised of his or her correct address. Failure of any
person to receive quarterly bills for sewer rentals or charges shall not be
considered an excuse for nonpayment nor shall such failure result in an
extension of the period of time during which the bill shall be payable.
[Amended 10-13-1987 by Ord. No. 165]
 110-39 LIENS FOR SEWER RENTALS; FILING AND COLLECTION OF LIENS.
   A.   Sewer rentals or charges imposed by this article shall be a lien on the
improved property connected to and served by the sewer system; and any such
sewer rentals or charges which are not paid within 60 days after each quarterly
billing date applicable to the particular improved property shall be filed as a
lien against the improved property so connected to and served by the sewer
system, which lien shall be collected in the manner provided by law for the
filing and collecting of municipal claims. All delinquent bills shall be
collected by this Township in any manner permitted by law.
   B.   Added Fees and Charges to Unpaid Claims.
      (1)   Fees to be Added to the Unpaid Claims. The Township hereby approves
the following fee schedule for the collection of the Unpaid Claims, which fees
shall be added to the Unpaid Claims.
         (a)   Notice Expense. A charge, not to exceed $40.00 plus postage,
shall be added to the Unpaid Claims for providing notice of delinquency
pursuant to 7106 of the Act. The Township may hire a private company to perform
this service and add the amount of this charge to the Unpaid Claims.
         (b)   Legal Fees.
Initial review and sending first demand $160.00
letter
File lien and prepare satisfaction      $250.00
Prepare Writ of Scire Facias            $250.00
Obtain re-issued Writ                   $30.00
Prepare and mail letter under Pa.       $30.00
R.C.P. 237.1
Prepare Motion for Alternate Service    $250.00
Prepare Request for Production of       $50.00
Documents in preparation for trial
Prepare Pre-Trial Memorandum            $150.00
Prepare Motion for Judgment for Want of
Sufficient Affidavit of Defense         $150.00
pursuant to 53 P.S. 7271
Prepare Default Judgment                $175.00
Prepare Writ of Execution               $800.00
Attendance at sale; review schedule of
distribution and resolve distribution   $400.00
issues
Continue sheriff sale                   $50.00
Prepare Petition to Assess Damages      $50.00
Prepare Petition for Free and Clear     $400.00
Sale
Services not covered above              At an hourly rate between $60.00
                                        $275.00 per hour
 
         (c)   Collection Fees.
 
Prepare and Provide Notice Pursuant to 53 P.S. 7106 $40.00 plus postage charges
Guaranteed payoff fee                               $25.00
Bookkeeping fee for payment plan of 3 months or     $25.00
less
Bookkeeping fee for payment plan of more than 3     $50.00
months
Handling fee for returned check                     Bank charge, if any
[Added 8-12-2014 by Ord. No. 334]
      (2)   Costs to be Added to the Unpaid Claims. In addition to the fees set
forth in Subsection (B)(1) above, the reasonable and necessary out-of-pocket
charges, costs, expenses, commissions and fees incurred in collection,
including, but not limited to, postage, title searches, prothonotary fees and
charges, and sheriff fees, shall be added to the Unpaid Claims. [Added 8-12-
2014 by Ord. No. 334]
      (3)   Credit Card and Debit Card Charges. The Township and any attorney
or private collector collecting the Unpaid Claims on behalf of the Township are
hereby authorized to accept payment of the Unpaid Claims by credit card or
debit card. Where payment is made by credit card or debit card, any fees
charged by the credit card or debit card company and/or the credit card or
debit card servicing agent shall be charged immediately to the credit card or
debit card used to make payment. This applies to credit card or debit card
payments made by mail, telephone, over the internet, or in person. [Added 8-12-
2014 by Ord. No. 334]
      (4)   Interest. Interest will be assessed upon the Unpaid Claims at a
rate of 10% per annum and added to the Unpaid Claims. [Added 8-12-2014 by Ord.
No. 334]
      (5)   Collection Procedures. The following collection procedures are
hereby established in accordance with the Act:
         (a)   At least thirty (30) days prior to assessing or imposing
attorney fees in connection with the collection of an Unpaid Claim account, the
Township or its designee shall mail or cause to be mailed, by certified mail,
return receipt requested, a notice of such intention to the property owner or
other entity liable for the account (the Property Owner ).
         (b)   If the certified mail notice is undelivered, then, at least ten
(10) days prior to assessing or imposing such attorney fees, the Township or
its designee shall mail or cause to be mailed, by first class mail, a second
notice to the Property Owner.
         (c)   All notices required by this Ordinance shall be mailed to the
Property Owner s last known post office address as recorded in the records or
other information of the Township or such other address obtained by the
Township from the county tax assessment office.
         (d)   Each notice as described above shall include the following:
            [1]   The type of municipal claim or other charge, the year that it
became due and the amount owed, including penalty and interest;
            [2]   A statement of the Township s intent to impose or assess
attorney fees no earlier than thirty (30) days after receipt of the first
notice, or no earlier than ten (10) days after receipt of the second notice;
            [3]   The manner in which the assessment or imposition of attorney
fees may be avoided by payment of the account; and
            [4]   The place of payment for accounts and the name and telephone
number of the Township s representative designated as responsible for
collection matters.
[Added 8-12-2014 by Ord. No. 334]
      (6)   Related Action. The proper officials of the Township are hereby
authorized and empowered to take such additional action as they may deem
necessary or appropriate to implement Section 110-39. [Added 8-12-2014 by Ord.
No. 334]
 110-40 PROHIBITED WASTES; INDUSTRIAL WASTE DISCHARGE.
   A.   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any cooling water
or unpolluted industrial or commercial process water into any sewer.
   B.   Except as otherwise provided in this article, no person shall discharge
or cause to be discharged any of the following described wastes or waters into
the sewer system:
      (1)   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 100 F.
      (2)   Any water or waste containing more than 50 parts per million of
fats, oils or greases.
      (3)   Any gasoline, benzene, naptha, fuel oil, solvent or other flammable
or explosive liquid, solid or gas which, by reason of its nature or quality,
may cause fire or explosion or which, in any other way, may be injurious to
persons or the sewer system or the sewage treatment plant.
      (4)   Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance which, either singly or
by interaction with other wastes, shall be capable of creating a public
nuisance or hazard to life or of preventing entry into any sewer or the sewage
treatment plant for maintenance and repair.
      (5)   Any garbage, except properly chopped garbage.
      (6)   Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags,
bones, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, paunch manure, butchers offal or any
other solid or viscous substance which shall be capable of causing obstruction
to the flow in any sewer system or the sewage treatment plant.
      (7)   Any water or waste having pH (as determined by the Board of
Supervisors) lower than 5.0 or higher than 9.0 or having any corrosive property
capable of causing damage or hazard to structures or equipment of the sewer
system or the sewage treatment plant or to personnel engaged in operation and
maintenance thereof.
      (8)   Any water or waste containing any toxic substance so that it will
exceed state, federal or other validly existing requirements for the receiving
stream.
      (9)   Any water or waste containing total solids of such character and
quantity that unusual attention or expense shall be required to handle such
water or waste at the sewage treatment plant for sewage treatment processes.
      (10)   Any drainage from building construction.
      (11)   Any stormwater, either from street or gutter inlets or from roof
or other rainwater connections, surface or subsurface water, exhaust water,
stream or other unpolluted drainage.
      (12)   Any sanitary waste containing any substance or having any
characteristic that violates provisions of the treatment agreement or that is
prohibited by the Borough of Greencastle or the Greencastle, Franklin County,
Authority, from being discharged to the sewage treatment facilities of such
borough or such Authority during any period when wastes are being so discharged
for treatment by the Township from the sewer system.
      (13)   Any water or waste prohibited by any permit issued by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the United States of America or any board,
agency, department or commission of either of the foregoing.
   C.   Industrial waste discharge.
      (1)   No person shall discharge or permit to be discharged into the sewer
system any industrial waste which would impair, impede, affect, interfere with
or endanger the sewer system, or any part thereof, or the functioning of the
processes of the sewage treatment plant.
      (2)   No permit shall be issued for a connection, nor shall any
connection be made to the sewer system for the purpose of discharging
industrial waste therein, until and unless the Board of Supervisors shall have
first determined that such industrial waste to be discharged into the sewer
system is or has been rendered, by pretreatment or otherwise, reasonably
harmless and would not impair, impede, affect, interfere with or endanger the
sewer system or any part thereof or the functioning of the processes of the
sewage treatment plant. Plans and specifications and other pertinent
information relating to any proposed discharge and preliminary treatment of
industrial waste shall be submitted to the Board of Supervisors and no
construction of such treatment facilities shall be commenced, nor shall
industrial wastes be discharged into the sewer system, until the Board of
Supervisors shall have issued an industrial waste permit approving such
facilities and the proposed discharge. Such permit shall be in addition to any
other permits required for connection to the sewer system and the applicant
shall reimburse the Board of Supervisors for the engineering fees and other
costs incurred in reviewing the application, in addition to connection charges
or fees payable in respect to the proposed connection.
   D.   The Board of Supervisors reserves the right to refuse permission to
connect to the sewer system, to compel discontinuance of use of the sewer
system or to compel pretreatment of industrial wastes in order to prevent
discharges deemed harmful or to have a deleterious effect upon any portion of
the sewer system or of the sewage treatment plant.
   E.   Equalization tank. Any improved property discharging 50,000 gallons or
more of sanitary sewage and/or industrial wastes per day into the sewer system
and having large variations in the rate of discharge of such within a twenty-
four-hour period shall install suitable tanks for equalizing the rate of
discharge uniformly over the entire twenty-four-hour period. The average rate
of discharge during any twenty-four-hour period shall not be exceeded by more
than 50% at any time.
   F.   Control manholes. Any person who shall discharge sanitary wastes into
the sewer system, when required by the Board of Supervisors, shall contract and
thereafter properly maintain, at his or her own expense, a suitable control
manhole to facilitate observation, measurement and sampling by the Board of
Supervisors. Any such control manhole, when required by the Board of
Supervisors, shall be constructed in an accessible, safe, suitable and
satisfactory location in accordance with plans approved by the Board of
Supervisors prior to commencement of construction.
   G.   Sewage sampling. Sanitary sewage and/or industrial wastes being
discharged into the sewer system shall be subject to periodic sampling,
inspection and determination of character and concentration. Such sampling,
inspection and determination shall be made by the Board of Supervisors as
frequently as may be deemed necessary. Representative samples for a full
working day shall be obtained by taking hourly samples and compositing them in
accordance with the flow at the time of sampling. Sewage sampling facilities
shall be accessible to the Board of Supervisors at all times.
   H.   Analysis. The Board of Supervisors shall be responsible for analysis of
the samples of sewage wastes, at such intervals as this Board of Supervisors
shall determine. Laboratory methods used in the analysis of samples of sewage
wastes shall be those set forth in the latest edition of Standard Methods for
the Examination of Water and Sewage as published by the American Public Health
Association.
   I.   Changes in type of wastes. Any owner of an improved property who is
discharging or permitting to be discharged sewage wastes into the sewer system
and who contemplates a change in the operations, processes or other activities
conducted on such improved property that will alter the type of wastes
discharged into the sewer system shall notify the Board of Supervisors, in
writing, at least 10 days prior to consummation of such change. Such
notification shall not be presumed a permission to discharge the wastes.
   J.   Nothing contained in this section shall be construed as prohibiting any
special agreement or arrangement between the Board of Supervisors and any
person whereby sewage wastes of unusual strength or character may be admitted
into the sewer system by the Board of Supervisors either before or after
preliminary treatment.
 110-41 RIGHT OF ACCESS; INSPECTION.
[Amended 5-27-2014 by Ord. No. 331]
   The Board of Supervisors shall have the right of access at reasonable times
to any part of any improved property served by the sewer system as shall be
required for purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and
testing and for performance of other functions relating to service rendered by
the Board of Supervisors through the sewer system. The Township also has the
right to enter the property and disconnect the property from sewer service
pursuant to Section
110-45(B) of this Chapter.
 110-42 RESPONSIBILITY OF OWNERS OF IMPROVED PROPERTY.
   The owner of each improved property connected to the sewer system shall be
responsible for all acts of tenants or other occupants of such improved
property insofar as such acts shall be governed by provisions of this article.
 110-43 FAILURE OF OWNER TO PROVIDE INFORMATION; RENTAL ESTIMATES.
   If the owner of any nonresidential improved property (including any school
or similar institution) shall fail to provide this Township with complete
information required to compute the sewer rental or charge to such
nonresidential improved property, this Township may estimate a reasonable
applicable sewer rental or charge for such nonresidential improved property and
such estimated sewer rental or charge shall be the actual sewer rental or
charge payable until the required information is filed. Provided, however, that
no rebates will be paid by this Township if the information filed reveals a
lower indicated sewer rental or charge than that estimated by this Township.
 110-44 ADOPTION OF ADDITIONAL RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The Board of Supervisors reserves the right to adopt, from time to time,
such additional rules and regulations as it shall deem necessary and proper in
connection with use and operation of the sewer system, which rules and
regulations shall be, shall become and shall be construed as part of this
article.
 110-45 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
[Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 246; 5-27-2014 by Ord. No. 331]
   A.   This article shall be enforced by action brought before a District
Justice in the same manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses
under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure. Any person who violates or
permits the violation of this article shall, upon conviction in a summary
proceeding, be punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000 or by imprisonment
for a term not exceeding 90 days. Each day or portion thereof that such
violation continues, or is permitted to continue, shall constitute a separate
offense. Each section of this article that is violated shall also constitute a
separate offense.
   B.   This Article may also be enforced by the Township of Antrim
disconnecting users of the sewer system from the sewer system for failure to
pay their bills provided that the following procedure is complied with:
      (1)   Upon failure of a user to pay the sewer bill within thirty (30)
days of the due date, a written notice shall be sent to the user advising the
user that if their delinquent sewer bill is not paid within sixty (60) days of
the notice the Township shall disconnect the user from the sewer system.
      (2)   The notice shall also advise the user that if they believe the bill
is wrong, or they have a just defense for failing to pay their sewer bill, they
have the right to request a hearing with the Township Manager/Administrator
within fifteen (15) days of the date of the notice.
      (3)   The notice shall also advise the user that if they believe the bill
is wrong, or they have a just defense for failing to pay the sewer bill, they
have the right to request a hearing before the Township Board of Supervisors
within forty-five (45) days of the date of the notice.
      (4)   A second notice shall also be sent to the user thirty (30) days
before the date set for terminating the sewer service. This notice shall again
advise the user that if their bill is not paid within thirty (30) days their
sewer service shall be terminated. The notice shall also advise the user that
he/she has the right to request a hearing before the Township Board of
Supervisors within fifteen (15) days of the date of the notice if the user
believes the bill is in error, or the user has a just defense for not paying
the bill.
      (5)   Both notices shall be sent by certified mail, restricted delivery,
return receipt requested. In addition, copies of both notices shall be sent by
regular United States mail and copies of both notices shall be conspicuously
posted on the front door of building to be disconnected at or near the time the
notices are sent. Said posting of the property shall be excused if the owner or
inhabitant of the building refuses to allow said posting to take place.
      (6)   If a user requests a hearing before the Township of Antrim Board of
Supervisors and after the hearing before the Township Board of Supervisors, it
is determined that the user shall be disconnected from the sewer system for
failing to pay the sewer bill, the user shall have the right to appeal the
decision of the Township of Antrim Board of Supervisors within thirty (30) days
after entry of the decision as provided in 42 Pa. C.S.A. Section 5572 (relating
to entry of order). If the user does not timely appeal an unfavorable decision
of the Board of Supervisors then he/she shall be disconnected from the sewer
system at the expiration of the time period for filing the appeal to the
Franklin County Court of Common Pleas. The user shall not have the right to
appeal the decision of the Township Manager/Administrator to the Franklin
County Court of Common Pleas. If the user disagrees with the decision of the
Township Manager/Administrator he/she shall have the right to request a hearing
before the Township Board of Supervisors. The user shall not be disconnected
from the sewer system during the pendency of the appeal to the Franklin County
Court of Common Pleas if the user does the following: a) Provides the Township
with a written statement under oath or affirmation averring that the bill is in
error or the user has a just defense for not paying the bill and that the
statement is not executed for the purposes of delay; and b) the user pays into
an escrow account established by Township an amount equal to the disputed sewer
rental arrearage and further pays into the escrow account, in a timely manner,
the sewer rental bills that become due until a decision is made by the Franklin
County Court of Common Pleas. If the decision of the Franklin County Court of
Common Pleas is in favor of the user, the money placed in the escrow account,
plus interest, shall be paid to the user. If the decision is in favor of the
Township of Antrim, the moneys plus interest shall be paid to the Township.
      (7)    Prior to disconnecting sewer service in a residential building as
defined under The Utility Service Tenants Rights Act , (68 P.S. 399.1 et seq.)
the Township shall comply with the provisions of that act, if applicable.
      (8)   If requested, the hearing before the Township Manager/Administrator
shall be an informal hearing. If requested, the hearing before the Township of
Antrim Board of Supervisor shall be held pursuant to the Administrative Law and
Procedure law as set forth in 2 Pa. C.S.A. Sections 551 555.
ARTICLE V WATER WELL REGULATIONS
[Adopted 5-26-1998 by Ord. No. 252]
 110-46 SHORT TITLE.
   This article shall be known and may be cited as the Water Well Regulations
to the Code of the Township of Antrim.
 110-47 PURPOSE.
   The intention of this article is to ensure and protect the quality and
suitability of domestic water supply and to secure and maintain the minimum
required isolation distances between water supplies and sewage disposal systems
or other sources of contamination.
 110-48 APPLICATION.
   A.   This article shall apply to all wells which have not been completed or
which are not in operation or in an inoperable condition at the time of passage
of this article.
   B.   This article shall further apply to the reconstruction, major repair
and other changes to existing wells, when, in the opinion of the inspecting
officer, such reconstruction, major repair and other changes may affect the
quality and suitability of the water supply on the property upon which the well
is constructed or on surrounding properties.
 110-49 STANDARDS.
   The following standards shall apply:
   A.   Location. Drilled and driven wells shall be located at a point free
from flooding at the following minimum distances to existing or possible future
sources of pollution:
Minimum Distance
Source (feet)
Minimum Distance
Source                                                    (feet)
Storm drains                                              25
Drains carrying domestic sewage or industrial wastes      50
Septic or holding tanks                                   50
Surface/subsurface sewage disposal fields                 100
Sewage seepage pits, cesspools                            100
Privies                                                   50
Fuel tanks                                                As approved
Other (ditches, streams, barnyards, rainwater pits, etc.) As approved
Additional location restrictions
   Driveways                                           10
   Principal structure/dwelling                        20
   Property lines                                      10
 
   B.   Source of water. The source of supply shall be from a water-bearing
formation drawn not less than 100 feet from the ground surface, with at least
20 feet of properly grouted well casing, and from no formation which is subject
to pollution.
   C.   Construction.
      (1)   The well shall have a watertight and durable wrought iron, steel or
other type of approved casing with a nominal thickness of 3/16 (0.1875) inches
and 6 5/8 inches outside diameter. The sections shall be joined together by
threaded couplings, joints, by welding or any other watertight approved joint
or coupling.
      (2)   Twenty feet from the finishing grade and in any case shall be
extended 10 feet into bedrock or other impervious strata. Driven wells shall be
provided with a drive shoe or other effective casing seal.
      (3)   The casing shall be sealed effectively against entrance of water
from water-bearing formations, which are subject to pollution, through which
the casing may pass. If casings of smaller diameter are used in the lower
portions of the well, effective watertight seals shall be provided between the
casings where they telescope. In such instances, sections of casing shall
telescope for a minimum distance of four feet.
      (4)   The top of the well casing shall extend a minimum of eight to 12
inches above the finished grade of the lot so that contaminated water or other
substances cannot enter the well through the annular opening at the top of the
well casing, wall or pipe sleeve.
      (5)   Every potable water well shall be equipped with an overlapping
cover of the top of the well casing or pipe sleeve. Covers shall extend
downward at least two inches over the outside of the well casing or wall. All
well caps shall indicate well driller s main, depth of well and depth of
casing.
      (6)   Where pump sections or discharged pipes enter or leave a well
through the side of the casing, the circle of contact shall be watertight. The
use of plastic/nylon adapters for this purpose is not acceptable. A brass
pitless adapter with brass connectors or equivalent are required.
      (7)   All potable water wells and springs shall be constructed so that
surface drainage will be diverted away from the well or spring.
      (8)   Any pump room or any enclosure around the well pump shall be
drained and protected from freezing by heating or other approved means. Where
pumps are installed in basements, they shall be mounted on a block or shall not
be less than 18 inches above the basement floor. Well pits shall be prohibited.
   D.   Water service. Size of water service pipe. The minimum diameter of
water service pipe shall be 3/4 inch separation of water service and building
sewer/drain water service pipe shall be installed 12 inches above sewer drains.
 110-50 REPAIRS; RECONSTRUCTION.
   A.   Drilled wells. Any restoration/repair of wells with casing terminating
below grade shall be raised above grade to eight to 12 inches minimum.
   B.   Springs. Before rehabilitation shall begin on an existing spring, a
report shall be made to determine the advisability of said reconstruction,
which shall include, as a minimum, quality and quantity of water. Springs for
new construction are not considered an adequate water supply and will not be
considered as valid for the issuance of a land use permit. Reconstructed
springs shall be completely enclosed by walls and a cover of reinforced
concrete or equally durable watertight material. The cover shall have a firm
foundation so as to effectively prevent settling. The uphill wall shall be so
constructed as to prevent entrance of surface water. Where manhole covers are
used, the manholes shall be at least 24 inches in diameter. It shall extend at
least three inches above the surrounding ground surface and be covered by an
impervious durable cover of concrete, steel or equivalent material which
overlaps the manhole vertically by at least two inches. The manhole shall be
kept secured by bolting, locking or equivalent means, and shall be kept so
secured. [Amended 8-25-2009 by Ord. No. 317]
   C.   Abandoned water supplies. Wells, springs, cisterns and water storage
tanks which are no longer in use shall be removed, filled or otherwise
maintained in a condition such as to prevent access by unauthorized persons or
animals, to prevent accidental injury and to effectively prevent pollution of
groundwater. Abandoned wells shall be completely filled with cement or equal
impervious material.
 110-51 PERMITS.
   A.   Permits shall be issued on a form provided by the Township of Antrim,
which shall be executed by the duly authorized inspecting officer. All permits
shall be issued to the property owners or their duly authorized representative/
well driller.
   B.   All permits shall be in effect as of the date of issuance and shall
remain in effect for a period of six months. In the event that water supply
construction under the permit has not been completed at the expiration of six
months from the date of issuance, the permit shall expire.
   C.   Inspection. Upon completion of construction, or at such other time as
the Township inspecting officer may deem appropriate, the inspecting officer
shall perform a final inspection of the well/water supply to determine whether
there has been compliance with the permit issued.
   D.   Approval. Upon completion of the inspection, the inspecting officer
shall:
      (1)   Issue an approval of operation upon the original permit; or
      (2)   Deny such approval due to noncompliance with the permit issued, in
which event written reasons for such denial shall be noted on the original
permit.
 110-52 REPORTS REQUIRED.
   A.   Driller s report. A report for each well shall be prepared by the
driller and shall be submitted to the Township of Antrim for evaluation and
approval. The well report shall contain the following pertinent information:
      (1)   Owner of property.
      (2)   Date of completion.
      (3)   Depth of well.
      (4)   Well driller.
      (5)   Type and size of casing.
      (6)   Type of test pump used.
      (7)   Address and lot number.
      (8)   Depth of casing.
      (9)   Static water level.
      (10)   Yield in gallons/minimum.
      (11)   Pump output in gallons/minimum.
   B.   Owner s report. Subsequent to house construction, but prior to
occupancy, the owner/contractor shall initiate appropriate action to have the
on-site water supply tested by a certified laboratory and provide to the
Township of Antrim a laboratory report containing the following information:
      (1)   Total coliform.
      (2)   Iron.
      (3)   Hardness: equivalent calcium carbonates.
      (4)   Fecal coliform.
      (5)   Nitrates.
   C.   A request for an extension to a permit must be submitted to the
Township, in writing, 10 days before the expiration date of the permit.
Extensions are limited to 30 days. Subsequent requests must be accompanied by
an application for a new permit with the appropriate fee.
   D.   In the event that a permit expires and construction has not begun, an
application for a new permit must be submitted with the appropriate fee.
   E.   Expiration of a permit during construction will result in the landowner
being prosecuted in accordance with the violations provision of this article.
 110-53 ENFORCEMENT; VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
   A.   This article shall be enforced by an action brought before a District
Justice in the same manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses
under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure. The Municipal Solicitor may
assume charge of the prosecution without the consent of the District Attorney
as required under Pa. R. Crim. P. No. 83(c) (relating to trial in summary
cases). Any person who violates or permits a violation of this article, shall,
upon conviction in a summary proceeding, be punishable by a fine of not more
than $1,000 or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 90 days.
   B.   This article also may be enforced by the Township of Antrim through an
action in equity brought in the Court of Common Pleas of Franklin County,
Pennsylvania.
   C.   For the purpose of this article, each day or portion thereof that such
violation continues, or is permitted to continue, shall constitute a separate
offense. In addition, a violation of each section of this article shall
constitute a separate offense.
 110-54 SEVERABILITY.
   The provisions of this article shall be severable, and if any of its
provisions shall be held to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such
unconstitutionality, illegality or invalidity shall not affect the validity of
any of the remaining provisions of this article.
 110-55 LIABILITY.
   No responsibility or liability for the construction of any well/water supply
shall be deemed to be assumed or accepted by the Township of Antrim or its
officers, agents or employees by virtue of the terms of this article or
otherwise.
ARTICLE VI PRIVY REGULATIONS
[Adopted 5-26-1998 by Ord. No. 251]
 110-56 PURPOSE.
   It is hereby declared that the enactment of this article is necessary for
the protection, benefit and preservation of the health, safety and welfare of
the inhabitants of this municipality.
 110-57 DEFINITIONS.
   Unless the context specifically and clearly indicates otherwise, the
meanings of terms used in this article shall be as follows:
AUTHORITY
Supervisors of Antrim Township, Franklin County, Pennsylvania.
IMPROVED PROPERTY
Any property within the Township upon which there is erected a structure
intended for continuous or periodic habitation, occupancy or use by human
beings or animals and from which structure sewage shall or may be discharged.
MUNICIPALITY
Antrim Township, Franklin County, Pennsylvania.
OWNER
Any person vested with ownership, legal or equitable, sole or partial, of any
property located in the Township.
PERSON
Any individual, partnership, company, association, corporation or other group
or entity.
PRIVY
A watertight receptacle, whether permanent or temporary, which receives and
retains sewage where water under pressure or piped wastewater is not available
and is designed and constructed to facilitate the ultimate disposal of the
sewage at another site.
SEWAGE
Any substance that contains any of the waste products or excrement or other
discharge from the bodies of human beings or animals and any noxious or
deleterious substance being harmful or inimical to the public health or to
animal or aquatic life or to the use of water for domestic water supply or for
recreation or any substance which constitutes pollution under the Clean Streams
Law (35 P.S. 691.1 et seq.).
 110-58 RIGHTS AND PRIVILEGES GRANTED.
   The Authority is hereby authorized and empowered to undertake within the
Township the control of privy use and methods of sewage collection,
transportation and disposal therefrom.
 110-59 APPROVAL REQUIRED.
   The collection and transportation of all sewage from any improved property
utilizing a privy shall be done solely by or under the direction and control of
the Authority, and the disposal thereof shall be made only at such site or
sites as may be approved by the Department of Environmental Protection of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
 110-60 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   From and after the effective date of this article, no person shall set up,
place, install, locate, have or make available for use any privy, as herein
defined, except in accordance with this article and unless a permit shall be
obtained and maintained for the same as herein provided.
 110-61 ADOPTION OF RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The Authority is hereby authorized and empowered to adopt by resolution such
rules and regulations concerning sewage as it shall deem necessary from time to
time to effectuate the purposes herein. All such rules and regulations adopted
by the Authority shall be in conformity with the provisions herein, all other
ordinances of the Township and all applicable laws and applicable rules and
regulations of administrative agencies of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
 110-62 PROCEDURE FOR PERMIT APPLICATION.
   Application for a privy permit shall be made in writing to the Township on
forms supplied by the Township, which shall set forth, at a minimum, the name
and address of the owner and site location.
 110-63 ESTABLISHMENT OF RATES AND CHARGES.
   The Authority shall have the right and power to fix, charge and set rates
and assessments and collect said charges in the Township in accordance with a
schedule of charges to be adopted by resolution from time to time.
 110-64 CONDITIONS APPLICABLE TO PERMIT.
   A.   The property owner must show that site and soil suitability testing of
the lot has been conducted by the Sewage Enforcement Officer and that the site
meets all Title 25, Chapter 73 (Standards for Sewage Disposal Facilities),
requirements for the ultimate sewage disposal by an approved on-lot system if
water under pressure or piped wastewater becomes available to the lot.
   B.   At such time as water under pressure becomes available, the property
owner must remove the privy and replace the privy with an approved on-lot
system.
   C.   The conditions of use described in Subsection (A) above do not apply
to:
      (1)   A privy to be used on an isolated lot which is one acre or larger
and is not nor likely to be served by water under pressure in the future.
      (2)   Temporary use of portable retention tanks where their use is
proposed at construction sites or at the site of public gatherings and
entertainment.
   D.   Other specific conditions for use of privies may be incorporated in the
application and permit for the proposed use of a privy.
   E.   The Authority shall have the right of inspection at all reasonable
times for property operation, maintenance and content disposal.
 110-65 DUTIES OF IMPROVED PROPERTY OWNER.
   The owner of an improved property that utilizes a privy shall:
   A.   Maintain the privy in conformance with this article or any ordinance of
this Township, the provisions of any applicable law and the rules and
regulations of the Authority and any administrative agency of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania.
   B.   Permit only the Authority or its agent to collect, transport and
dispose of the contents therein.
   C.   Abandon the privy consistent with applicable public health and
environmental standards and obtain a permit for and install an approved on-lot
system meeting Chapter 73 standards in the event that water under pressure or
piped wastewater becomes available to the property.
   D.   Permit the Authority to enter upon lands to inspect the privy for
proper operation, maintenance and contents of disposal.
 110-66 ENFORCEMENT; VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
   A.   This article shall be enforced by an action brought before a District
Justice in the same manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses
under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure. The Municipal Solicitor may
assume charge of the prosecution without the consent of the District Attorney
as required under Pa. R. Crim. P. No. 83(c) (Relating to Trial in Summary
Cases). Any person who violates or permits a violation of this article shall,
upon conviction in a summary proceeding, be punishable by a fine of not more
than $1,000 or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 90 days.
   B.   This article also may be enforced by the Township of Antrim through an
action in equity brought in the Court of Common Pleas of Franklin County,
Pennsylvania.
   C.   For the purpose of this article, each day or portion thereof that such
violation continues, or is permitted to continue, shall constitute a separate
offense. In addition, a violation of each section of this article shall
constitute a separate offense.
 110-67 ABATEMENT OF NUISANCES.
   In addition to any other remedies provided in this article, any use of a
privy in a manner inconsistent with this article shall constitute a nuisance
and may be abated by the municipality or the Authority and other appropriate
equitable or legal relief from a court of competent jurisdiction may be
obtained by the Authority.
ARTICLE VII MUNICIPAL MANAGEMENT OF ON-LOT SUBSURFACE SEWAGE DISPOSAL
[Adopted 5-26-1998 by Ord. No. 253]
 110-68 SHORT TITLE; INTRODUCTION; PURPOSE.
   A.   This article shall be known and may be cited as Municipal Management of
On-Lot Subsurface Sewage Disposal Facilities.
   B.   The purpose of this article is to provide for the inspection,
maintenance and rehabilitation of on-lot sewage disposal systems; to further
permit the municipality to intervene in situations which are public nuisances
or hazards to the public health; and to establish penalties and appeal
procedures necessary for the proper administration of a sewage management
program.
 110-69 DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACT 537
The Act of January 24, 1966, P.L. 1535, as amended, 35 P.S. 750.1 et seq.,
known as the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act.
AUTHORIZED AGENT
A certified sewage enforcement officer, code enforcement officer, professional
engineer, plumbing inspector, municipal secretary or any other qualified or
licensed person who is delegated by the municipality to function within
specified limits as the agent of the municipality to carry out the provisions
of this article.
BOARD
The Board of Supervisors of Antrim Township, Franklin County, Pennsylvania.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER (CEO)
An individual employed by the municipality to administer and enforce other
ordinances in the municipality.
COMMUNITY SEWAGE SYSTEM
Any system, whether publicly or privately owned, for the collection of sewage
from two or more lots, and the treatment and/or disposal of the sewage on one
or more lots or at any other site.
DEPARTMENT
The Department of Environmental Protection of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
(DEP).
INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE SYSTEM
A system of piping, tanks or other facilities serving a single lot and
collecting and disposing of sewage in whole or in part into the soil or into
any waters of this commonwealth.
MALFUNCTION
A condition which occurs when an on-lot sewage disposal system discharges
sewage onto the surface of the ground, into groundwaters of this commonwealth,
into surface waters of this commonwealth, backs up into the building connected
to the system or otherwise causes a nuisance hazard to the public health or
pollution of groundwater or surface water or contamination of public or private
drinking water wells.
MUNICIPALITY
Antrim Township, Franklin County, Pennsylvania.
ON-LOT SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM
Any system for disposal of sewage involving pretreatment and subsequent
disposal of the clarified sewage into the soil for final treatment disposal;
including both individual sewage systems and community sewage systems.
PERSON
Any individual, association, public or private corporation for profit or not
for profit, partnership, firm, trust, estate, department, board, bureau or
agency of the commonwealth, political subdivision, municipality, district,
authority or any other legal entity whatsoever which is recognized by law as
the subject of rights and duties. Whenever used in any clause prescribing and
imposing a penalty or imposing a fine or imprisonment, the term person shall
include the members of an association, partnership or firm and the officers of
any local agency or municipal, public or private corporation for profit or not
for profit.
REHABILITATION
Work done to modify, alter, repair, enlarge or replace an existing on-lot
sewage disposal system.
REPLACEMENT AREA
A portion of a lot or a developed property, sized to allow the installation of
a subsurface sewage disposal area, which is reserved to allow that installation
in the event of the malfunction of the originally installed on-lot sewage
disposal system.
SEWAGE
Any substance that contains any of the waste products or excrement or other
discharge from the bodies of human beings or animals and any noxious or
deleterious substances being harmful or inimical to the public health, or to
animal or aquatic life, or to the use of water for domestic water supply or for
recreation or which constitutes pollution under the Act of June 22, 1937 (P.L.
1987, No. 394), known as the Clean Streams Law, being 35 P.S. 691.1 et seq., as
amended.
SEWAGE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER (SEO)
The official of the local agency who issues and reviews permit applications and
conducts such investigations and inspections as are necessary to implement Act
537 and the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder.
SEWAGE MANAGEMENT DISTRICT
Any area or areas of a municipality for which a sewage management program is
recommended by the municipality s adopted Plan.
SEWAGE MANAGEMENT PROGRAM
A comprehensive set of legal and administrative requirements encompassing the
requirements of this article and other administrative requirements adopted by
the municipality to effectively enforce and administer this article.
SEWAGE PLAN
A plan for the provision of adequate sewage disposal systems, adopted by the
municipality and approved by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection, as described in, and required by, the Pennsylvania Sewage
Facilities Act.
SUBDIVISION
The division or redivision of a lot, tract or other parcel of land into two or
more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land, including changes in
existing lot lines. The enumerating of lots shall include as a lot that portion
of the original tract or tracts remaining after other lots have been subdivided
therefrom.
 110-70 APPLICABILITY.
   From the effective date of this article, its provisions shall apply in any
portion of the municipality identified in the municipality s Act 537 Official
Sewage Facilities Plan as a sewage management district. Within such an area or
areas, the provisions of this article shall apply to all persons owning any
property serviced by an on-lot sewage disposal system and to all persons
installing or rehabilitating on-lot sewage disposal systems. If necessary, the
entire municipality may be identified as a sewage management district.
 110-71 PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.
   A.   No person shall install, construct or request bid proposals for
construction or alter an individual sewage system or community sewage system or
construct or request bid proposals for construction or install or occupy any
building or structure for which an individual sewage system or community sewage
system is to be installed without first obtaining a permit indicating that the
site and the plans and specifications of such system are in compliance with the
provisions of the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act, being 35 P.S. 750.1 et
seq., and the regulations adopted pursuant to that Act.
   B.   No system or structure designated to provide individual or community
sewage disposal shall be covered from view until approval to cover the same has
been given by the municipal sewage enforcement officer.
   C.   The municipality may require applicants for sewage permits to notify
the municipality s certified sewage enforcement officer of the schedule for
construction of the permitted on-lot sewage disposal system so that inspection
(s) in addition to the final inspection required by Act 537 may be scheduled
and performed by the municipality s certified sewage enforcement officer.
   D.   No land use or occupancy permit shall be issued by the municipality or
its code enforcement officer for a new building which will contain sewage-
generating facilities until a valid sewage permit has been obtained from the
municipality s certified sewage enforcement officer. [Amended 8-25-2009 by Ord.
No. 317]
   E.   No land use or occupancy permit shall be issued and no work shall begin
on any alteration or conversion of any existing structure, if said alteration
or conversion will result in the increase or potential increase of sewage flows
from the structure, until the municipality s code enforcement officer and the
structure s owner receive from the municipality s sewage enforcement officer
either a permit for alteration or a replacement of the existing sewage disposal
system or written notification that such a permit will not be required. The
certified sewage enforcement officer shall determine whether the proposed
alteration or conversion of the structure will result in increased sewage
flows. [Amended 8-25-2009 by Ord. No. 317]
   F.   Sewage permits may be issued only by a certified sewage enforcement
officer employed by the municipality for that express purpose. The Department
of Environmental Protection shall be notified by the municipality as to the
identity of its currently employed certified sewage enforcement officer.
   G.   No sewage permit may be issued unless proof is provided that the owner
of record has owned the lot since May 15, 1972, or that Act 537 planning for
that lot has been provided by the municipality.
   H.   No final Act 247 approval on a subdivision plan may begin until Act 537
planning is approved by the municipality and DEP.
 110-72 REPLACEMENT AREAS.
   A.   Any revisions to the municipality s Official Sewage Facilities Plan, or
exceptions thereto, which are prepared pursuant to the applicable regulations
of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection for subdivision or
development of land within an identified sewage management district shall
provide for the testing, identification and reservation of an area of each lot
or developed property suitable for the installation of a replacement on-lot
sewage disposal system. This requirement is in addition to the testing,
identification and reservation of an area for the primary sewage disposal
system.
   B.   No permit shall be issued for any proposed new on-lot sewage disposal
system on any newly created or subdivided property in any sewage management
district unless and until a replacement area is tested, identified and
reserved.
 110-73 INSPECTIONS.
   A.   Any on-lot sewage disposal system may be inspected by the municipality
s authorized agent at any reasonable time as of the effective date of this
article.
   B.   The inspection may include a physical tour of the property, the taking
of samples from surface water, wells, other groundwater sources, the sampling
of the contents of the sewage disposal system itself and/or the introduction of
a traceable substance into the interior plumbing of the structure served to
ascertain the path and ultimate destination of wastewater generated in the
structure.
   C.   The municipality s authorized agent shall have the right to enter upon
land for the purpose of inspections described above.
   D.   The municipality and its authorized agent shall inspect systems known
to be, or alleged to be, malfunctioning. Should said inspections reveal that
the system is indeed malfunctioning, the municipality and its authorized agent
shall take action to require the correction of the malfunction. If total
correction is not technically or financially feasible in the opinion of the
authorized agent and a representative of the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection, then action by the property owner to mitigate the
malfunction shall be required.
   E.   There may arise geographic areas within the municipality where numerous
on-lot sewage disposal systems are malfunctioning. A resolution of these area-
wide problems may necessitate detailed planning and a municipally sponsored
revision to that area s Act 537 Official Sewage Facilities Plan. When a DEP
authorized Official Sewage Facilities Plan revision has been undertaken by the
municipality, mandatory repair or replacement of individual malfunctioning
sewage disposal systems within the study area may be delayed, at the discretion
of the municipality, pending the outcome of the plan revision process. However,
the municipality may compel immediate corrective action whenever a malfunction,
as determined by municipal officials and the Pennsylvania DEP, represents a
serious public health or environmental threat.
 110-74 OPERATION.
   Only normal domestic wastes shall be discharged into any on-lot sewage
disposal system. The following shall not be discharged into the system:
    A.   Industrial waste.
   B.   Automobile oil and other nondomestic oil.
   C.   Toxic or hazardous substances or chemicals, including but not limited
to pesticides, disinfectants, acids, paints, paint thinners, herbicides,
gasoline and other solvents.
   D.   Clean surface or ground water, including water from roof or cellar
drains, springs, basement sump pumps and French drains.
 110-75 MAINTENANCE.
   A.   Any person owning a building served by an on-lot sewage disposal system
which contains a septic tank shall have the septic tank pumped by a qualified
pumper/hauler within one year of the effective date of this article. Receipts
from the pumper/hauler shall be submitted to the municipality within the
prescribed one-year pumping period. The Antrim Township Municipal Authority
shall be considered a qualified pumper/hauler if it is providing such services.
All septic tank pumpers/ haulers shall be licensed by the Township and shall
submit written reports to the Township on all pumping as to the condition of
the tank.
   B.   After the initial one-year pumping period, all septic tanks shall be
subject to inspection every three years. At such time as the solid buildup
reaches 1/3 to 1/2 of the tank, all tanks shall be pumped. At no time shall the
depth of the scum be below the depth of the outlet baffle. If this condition
should occur, then the tank shall immediately be pumped.
   C.   The required pumping frequency may be increased at the discretion of
the authorized agent if the septic tank is undersized, if solids build up in
the tank is above average, if the hydraulic load on the system increases
significantly above average, if a garbage grinder is used in the building, if
the system malfunctions or for other good cause shown. If any person can prove
that their system tank had been pumped within three years of the one-year
anniversary of the effective date of this article, that person shall be exempt
from the initial one-year pumping requirement.
 110-76 SYSTEMS REHABILITATION.
   A.   No person shall operate and maintain an on-lot sewage disposal system
in such a manner that it malfunctions. All liquid wastes, including kitchen and
laundry wastes and water softener backwash, shall be discharged to a treatment
tank. No sewage system shall discharge untreated or partially treated sewage to
the surface of the ground or into the waters of the commonwealth unless a
permit to discharge has been obtained from the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection.
   B.   The municipality shall issue a written notice of violation to any
person who is the owner of a property in the municipality which is found to be
served by a malfunctioning on-lot sewage disposal system or which is
discharging raw or partially treated sewage without a permit.
   C.   Within seven days of notification by the municipality that a
malfunction has been identified, the property owner shall make application to
the municipality s certified sewage enforcement officer for a permit to repair
or replace the malfunctioning system. Within 30 days of initial notification by
the municipality, construction of the permitted repair or replacement shall
commence. Within 60 days of the original notification by the municipality, the
construction shall be completed unless seasonal or unique conditions mandate a
longer period, in which case the municipality shall set an extended completion
date.
   D.   The municipality s certified sewage enforcement officer shall have the
authority to require the repair of any malfunction by the following methods:
cleaning, repair or replacement of components of the existing system, adding
capacity or otherwise altering or replacing the system s treatment tank,
expanding the existing disposal area, replacing the existing disposal area,
replacing a gravity distribution system with a pressurized system, replacing
the system with a holding tank, other alternatives as appropriate for the
specific site.
   E.   In lieu of, or in combination with the remedies described in Subsection
(D) above, the municipal sewage enforcement officer may require the
installation of water conservation equipment and the institution of water
conservation practices in structures served. Water-using devices and appliances
in the structure may be required to be retrofitted with water-saving
appurtenances or they may be required to be replaced by water-conserving
devices and appliances. Wastewater generation in the structure may also be
reduced by requiring changes in water usage patterns in the structure served.
The use of laundry facilities may be limited to one load per day or
discontinued altogether, etc.
   F.   In the event that the rehabilitation measures in Subsections (A)
through (E) are not feasible or do not prove effective, the municipality may
require the owner to apply to the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection for a permit to install an individual spray irrigation treatment
system or a single residence treatment and discharge system. Upon receipt of
said permit, the owner shall complete construction of the system within 30
days.
   G.   Should none of the remedies described above prove totally effective in
eliminating the malfunction of an existing on-lot sewage disposal system, the
property owner is not absolved of responsibility for that malfunction. The
municipality may require whatever action is necessary to lessen or mitigate the
malfunction to the extent that it feels necessary.
 110-77 LIENS.
   The municipality, upon written notice from the municipal sewage enforcement
officer that an imminent health hazard exists due to failure of a property
owner to maintain, repair or replace an on-lot sewage disposal system as
provided under the terms of this article, shall have the authority to perform,
or contract to have performed, the work required by the certified sewage
enforcement officer. The owner shall be charged for the work performed, and, if
necessary, a lien shall be entered therefor in accordance with law.
 110-78 DISPOSAL OF SEPTAGE.
   A.   All septage originating within the municipal sewage management district
shall be disposed of at sites or facilities approved by the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection. Approved sites or facilities shall
include the following: septage treatment facilities, wastewater treatment
plants, composting sites and approved farmlands.
   B.   Septage of pumpers/haulers operating within the municipal sewage
management district shall operate in a manner consistent with the provisions of
the Pennsylvania Solid Waste Management Act (Act 97 of 1980, 35 P.S. 6018.101
through 6018.1003).
 110-79 ADMINISTRATION.
   The municipality shall establish all administrative procedures necessary to
properly carry out the provisions of this article. The municipality may
establish a fee schedule, and subsequently collect fees, to cover the costs to
the municipality of administering this program.
 110-80 APPEALS.
   A.   Appeals from decisions of the municipality or its authorized agents
under this article shall be made to the Board of Supervisors in writing within
30 days from the date of the decision in question.
   B.   The appellant shall be entitled to a hearing before the Board of
Supervisors at its next regularly scheduled meeting, if the appeal is received
at least 14 days prior to that meeting. If the appeal is received within 14
days of the next regularly scheduled meeting, the appeal shall be heard at the
subsequent meeting. The municipality shall thereafter affirm, modify or reverse
the aforesaid decision. The hearing may be postponed for a good cause shown by
the appellant or the municipality. Additional evidence may be introduced at the
hearing, provided that it is submitted with the written notice of appeal.
   C.   A decision shall be rendered in writing within 30 days of the date of
the hearing. If a decision is not rendered within 30 days, the release sought
by the appellant shall be deemed granted.
 110-81 ENFORCEMENT; VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
   A.   This article shall be enforced by an action brought before a District
Justice in the same manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses
under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure. The Municipal Solicitor may
assume charge of prosecution without the consent of the District Attorney as
required under Pa. R. Crim. P. No. 83(c) (Relating to Trial in Summary Cases).
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this article shall, upon
conviction in a summary proceeding, be punishable by a fine of up to $1,000 or
imprisonment for a period not to exceed 90 days.
   B.   This article also may be enforced by the Township of Antrim through an
action in equity brought in the Court of Common Pleas of Franklin County,
Pennsylvania.
   C.   For the purpose of this article, each day of a continuing violation
shall be considered a new and additional violation of this article. In
addition, a violation of each section of this article shall constitute a
separate offense.
 110-82 REPEALER.
   All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent with the provisions of
this article are hereby repealed to the extent of such inconsistency.
 110-83 SEVERABILITY.
   If any section or clause of this article shall be adjudged invalid, such
adjudication shall not affect the validity of the remaining provisions, which
shall be deemed severable therefrom.
CHAPTER 111: PRETREATMENT
   Article
      
I.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
II.   GENERAL SEWER USE REQUIREMENTS
      
III.   PRETREATMENT OF WASTEWATER
      
IV.   INDIVIDUAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMITS (WWDP)
      
V.   INDIVIDUAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT ISSUANCE
      
VI.   REPORTING REQUIREMENTS
      
VII.   COMPLIANCE MONITORING
      
VIII.   CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
      
IX.   PUBLICATION OF USERS IN SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE
      
X.   ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES
      
XI.   JUDICIAL ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES
      
XII.   SUPPLEMENTAL ENFORCEMENT ACTION
      
XIII.   APPEAL PROCEDURES AND ENFORCEMENT RESPONSE PLAN
      
XIV.   AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSES TO DISCHARGE VIOLATIONS
      
XV.   WASTEWATER TREATMENT RATES
      
XVI.   MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Antrim 4-8-
2008 by Ord. No. 311. Amendments noted where applicable.]
Section
Article I: General Provisions
   
111-1   Purpose and Policy
   
111-2   Administration
   
111-3   Abbreviations
   
111-4   Definitions
Article II: General Sewer Use Requirements
   
111-5   Prohibited Discharge Standards
   
111-6   National Categorical Pretreatment Standards
   
111-7   State Pretreatment Standards
   
111-8   Local Limits
   
111-9   The Township of Antrim s Right of Revision
   
111-10   Dilution
Article III: Pretreatment of Wastewater
   
111-11   Pretreatment Facilities
   
111-12   Additional Pretreatment Measures
   
111-13   Accidental Discharge/Slug Discharge Control Plans
   
111-14   Hauled Wastewater
Article IV: Individual Wastewater Discharge Permits (WWDP)
   
111-15   Wastewater Analysis
   
111-16   Individual Wastewater Discharge Permit Requirements
   
111-17   Individual Wastewater Discharge Permitting: Existing Connections
   
111-18   Individual Wastewater Discharge Permitting: New Connections
   
111-19   Individual Wastewater Discharge Permit Application Contents
   
111-20   (reserved)
   
111-21   Application Signatories and Certifications
   
111-22   Individual Wastewater Discharge Permit Decisions
Article V: Individual Wastewater Discharge Permit Issuance
   
111-23   Individual Wastewater Discharge Permit Duration
   
111-24   Individual Wastewater Discharge Permit Contents
   
111-25   Permit Issuance
   
111-26   Permit Modification
   
111-27   Individual Wastewater Discharge Permit Transfer
   
111-28   Individual Wastewater Discharge Permit Revocation
   
111-29   Individual Wastewater Discharge Permit Reissuance
   
111-30   Regulation of Waste Received from Other Jurisdictions
Article VI: Reporting Requirements
   
111-31   Baseline Monitoring Reports
   
111-32   Compliance Schedule Progress Reports
   
111-33   Reports on Compliance with Categorical Pretreatment Standard Deadline
   
111-34   Periodic Compliance Reports
   
111-35   Reports of Changed Conditions
   
111-36   Reports of Potential Problems
   
111-37   Reports from Unpermitted Users
   
111-38   Notice of Violation/Repeat Sampling and Reporting
   
111-39   Discharge of Hazardous Waste
   
111-40   Analytical Requirements
   
111-41   Sample Collection
   
111-42   Date of Receipt of Reports
   
111-43   Recordkeeping
   
111-44   Certification Statements
Article VII: Compliance Monitoring
   
111-45   Right of Entry: Inspection and Sampling
Article VIII: Confidential Information
   
111-46   Confidential Information
Article IX: Publication of Users in Significant Noncompliance
   
111-47   Publication of users in Significant Noncompliance
Article X: Administrative Enforcement Remedies
   
111-48   Notification of Violation
   
111-49   Consent Orders
   
111-50   Show Cause Hearing
   
111-51   Compliance Orders
   
111-52   Cease and Desist Orders
   
111-53   Emergency Suspensions
   
111-54   Termination of Discharge
Article XI: Judicial Enforcement Remedies
   
111-55   Injunctive Relief
   
111-56   Civil Penalties
   
111-57   Criminal Prosecution
   
111-58   Remedies Nonexclusive
Article XII: Supplemental Enforcement Action
   
111-59   Payment of Outstanding Fees and Penalties
   
111-60   Water Supply Severance
Article XIII: Appeal Procedures and Enforcement Response Plan
   
111-61   Right to Appeal
Article XIV: Affirmative Defenses to Discharge Violations
   
111-62   Upset
   
111-63   Prohibited Discharge Standards
   
111-64   Bypass
Article XV: Wastewater Treatment Rates
   
111-65   Wastewater Treatment Rates
Article XVI: Miscellaneous Provisions
   
111-66   Pretreatment Charges and Fees
   
111-67   Surcharges
   
111-68   Miscellaneous Regulations
ARTICLE I GENERAL PROVISIONS
 111-1 PURPOSE AND POLICY.
   This Chapter sets forth uniform requirements for Users of the Publicly Owned
Treatment Works for the Township of Antrim, Franklin County and enables the
Township of Antrim to comply with all applicable State and Federal laws;
including the Clean Water Act (33 United States Code [U.S.C.] section 1251 et
seq.) and the General Pretreatment Regulations (Title 40 of the Code of Federal
Regulations [CFR] Part 403). The objectives of this Chapter are:
   A.   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the Publicly Owned
Treatment Works that will interfere with its operation;
   B.   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the Publicly Owned
Treatment Works that will pass through the Publicly Owned Treatment Works,
inadequately treated, into receiving waters, or otherwise be incompatible with
the Publicly Owned Treatment Works;
   C.   To protect both Publicly Owned Treatment Works personnel who may be
affected by wastewater and sludge in the course of their employment and the
general public;
   D.   To promote reuse and recycling of industrial wastewater and sludge from
the Publicly Owned Treatment Works;
   E.   To provide for fees for the equitable distribution of the cost of
operation, maintenance, and improvement of the Publicly Owned Treatment Works;
and
   F.   To enable Antrim to comply with its National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System permit conditions, sludge use and disposal requirements, and
any other Federal or State laws to which the Publicly Owned Treatment Works is
subject
   This Chapter shall apply to all Users of the Publicly Owned Treatment Works.
This Chapter authorizes the issuance of individual wastewater discharge
permits; provides for monitoring, compliance, and enforcement activities;
establishes administrative review procedures; requires User reporting; and
provides for the setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs
resulting from the program established herein.
 111-2 ADMINISTRATION.
   Except as otherwise provided herein, the Antrim Township Board of
Supervisors (ATBOS) shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of
this chapter. Any powers granted to or duties imposed upon the Antrim Township
Board of Supervisors may be delegated by the Antrim Township Board of
Supervisors to the Antrim Township Municipal Authority (ATMA) or a Duly
Authorized Antrim Township employee.
 111-3 ABBREVIATIONS.
   The following abbreviations, when used in this Chapter, shall have the
designated meanings:
   BOD Biochemical Oxygen Demand
   BMP Best Management Practice
   BMR Baseline Monitoring Report
   CFR Code of Federal Regulations
   CIU Categorical Industrial User
   GOD Chemical Oxygen Demand
   EPA U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
   gpd gallons per day
   IU Industrial User
   mg/l milligrams per liter
   NPDES National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
   NSCIU Nonsignificant Categorical Industrial User
   POTW Publicly Owned Treatment Works
   PPM parts per million
   RCRA Resource Conservation and Recovery Act
   SIU Significant Industrial User
   SNC Significant Noncompliance
   TSS Total Suspended Solids
   U.S.C. United States Code
 111-4 DEFINITIONS.
   Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following terms and
phrases, as used in this ordinance, shall have the meanings hereinafter
designated.
ACT or THE ACT
The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as
amended, 33 U.S.C. section 1251 et seq.
ANTRIM TOWNSHIP BOARD OF SUPERVISORS (ATBOS)
Elected board for the Township of Antrim Pennsylvania who leases the operations
and maintenance of the POTW from the Antrim Township Municipal Authority.
AUTHORITY or ATMA
Antrim Township Municipal Authority (ATMA), a municipal authority incorporated,
organized, and existing under provisions of the Municipality Authorities Act,
being 53 Pa. C.S. 5601 et seq., as amended and supplemented, acting by and
through its Board or, in appropriate cases, acting by and through its
authorized representative.
AUTHORIZED or DULY AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE of the USER
      (1)   If the User is a corporation:
         (a)   The president, secretary, treasurer, or a vice-president of the
corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who
performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the corporation; or
         (b)   The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or
operating facilities, provided the manager is authorized to make management
decisions that govern the operation of the regulated facility including having
the explicit or implicit duty of making major capital investment
recommendations, and initiate and direct other comprehensive measures to assure
long-term environmental compliance with environmental laws and regulations; can
ensure that the necessary systems are established or actions taken to gather
complete and accurate information for individual wastewater discharge permit
requirements; and where authority to sign documents has been assigned or
delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures.
      (2)   If the User is a partnership or sole proprietorship: a general
partner or proprietor, respectively.
      (3)   If the User is a Federal, State, or local governmental facility: a
director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation
and performance of the activities of the government facility, or their
designee.
      (4)   If the entity is a Limited liability company: a member or manager
who is authorized to act on behalf of the limited liability company.
      (5)   The individuals described in paragraphs 1 through 4, above, may
designate a Duly Authorized Representative if the authorization is in writing,
the authorization specifies the individual or position responsible for the
overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or having
overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, and the
written authorization is submitted to the Township.
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND or BOD
The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter
under standard laboratory procedures for five (5) days at 20 degrees
centigrade, usually expressed as a concentration (e.g., mg/l).
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES or BMPs
Means schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance
procedures, and other management practices to implement the prohibitions listed
in Section 111-5(A) and (B) [40 CFR 403.5(a)(1) and (b)]. BMPs include
treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control plant
site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw
materials storage.
TOWNSHIP or ATBOS
The Antrim Township Board of Supervisors (ATBOS) or, in appropriate cases, its
authorized representatives.
BYPASS DISCHARGE
The intentional diversion of waste streams from any portion of a Nonresidential
User s Treatment facility.
CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD or CATEGORICAL STANDARD
Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by EPA in
accordance with sections 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. section 1317)
that apply to a specific category of Users and that appear in 40 CFR Chapter I,
Subchapter N, Parts 405-471.
CATEGORICAL USER
An Industrial User subject to a categorical Pretreatment Standard or
categorical Standard.
CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND or COD
A measure of the oxygen required to oxidize all compounds, both organic and
inorganic, in water.
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT
Any room, group of rooms, building or enclosure connected directly or
indirectly to the sewer system and used or intended for use in the operation of
one (1) business enterprise for the sale and distribution of any product,
commodity, article or service.
CONTROL AUTHORITY
Antrim Township.
   [Added 9-27-2016 by Ord. No. 349]
DAILY MAXIMUM
The arithmetic average of all effluent samples for a pollutant collected during
a calendar day.
DAILY MAXIMUM LIMIT
The maximum allowable discharge limit of a pollutant during a calendar day.
Where Daily Maximum Limits are expressed in units of mass, the daily discharge
is the total mass discharged over the course of the day. Where Daily Maximum
Limits are expressed in terms of a concentration, the daily discharge is the
arithmetic average measurement of the pollutant concentration derived from all
measurements taken that day.
DOMESTIC WASTES or DOMESTIC WASTEWATER
Wastes produced from noncommercial or nonindustrial activities, and which
result from normal human living processes, which are of substantially similar
origin and strength to those typically produced in Residential Establishments,
including wastes from sanitary conveniences.
DWELLING UNIT
Any room, group of rooms, house trailer, building or other enclosure connected
directly or indirectly to the sewer system and occupied or intended for
occupancy as separate living quarters by a family or other group of persons
living together or by a person living alone.
ENFORCEMENT RESPONSE PLAN (ERP)
Acts as a guide to staff of the enforcement action warranted against the IU
based on the seriousness of the violation.
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY or EPA
The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the Regional
Water Protection Division Director, the Regional Administrator, or other duly
authorized official of said agency.
EQUIVALENT DWELLING UNIT (EDU)
That part of a residential or Nonresidential Establishment with flows equal to
251 gallons per day.
   [Amended 5-13-2014 by Resolution No. 263; 9-27-2016 by Ord. No. 349]
EXISTING SOURCE
Any source of discharge that is not a New Source.
GARBAGE
Solid wastes resulting from preparation, cooking and dispensing of food and
from handling, storage and sale of produce.
GRAB SAMPLE
A sample that is taken from a wastestream without regard to the flow in the
wastestream and over a period of time not to exceed fifteen (15) minutes.
INDEPENDENT PA DEP CERTIFIED WASTEWATER LABORATORY
A laboratory that meets the intent and requirements of 25 Pa. Code Chapter 252.
INDIRECT DISCHARGE or DISCHARGE
The introduction of pollutants into the POTW from any nondomestic source.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE or INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER
Any solid, liquid or gaseous substance or form of energy rejected or escaping
in the course of any nonresidential, industrial, commercial, institutional,
manufacturing, trade or business process or in the course of the development,
recovery or processing of natural resources, as distinct from sanitary sewage
and which is not otherwise classifiable as domestic wastewater.
INSTANTANEOUS LIMIT
The maximum concentration of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time,
determined from the analysis of any discrete or composited sample collected,
independent of the industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling event.
INTERFERENCE
A discharge that, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from
other sources, inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or
operations or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and therefore, is a cause
of a violation of Antrim Township s NPDES permit or of the prevention of sewage
sludge use or disposal in compliance with any of the following statutory/
regulatory provisions or permits issued thereunder, or any more stringent State
or local regulations: section 405 of the Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act,
including Title II commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and
Recovery Act (RCRA); any State regulations contained in any State sludge
management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the Solid Waste Disposal
Act; the Clean Air Act; the Toxic Substances Control Act; and the Marine
Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act.
LOCAL LIMIT
Specific discharge limits developed and enforced by Antrim Township upon
industrial or commercial facilities to implement the general and specific
discharge prohibitions listed in 40 CFR 403.5(a)(1) and (b).
MEDICAL WASTE
Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood products,
pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding, surgical wastes,
potentially contaminated laboratory wastes, and dialysis wastes.
MONTHLY AVERAGE
The sum of all daily discharges measured during a calendar month divided by the
number of daily discharges measured during that month.
MONTHLY AVERAGE LIMIT
The highest allowable average of daily discharges over a calendar month,
calculated as the sum of all daily discharges measured during a calendar month
divided by the number of daily discharges measured during that month.
MULTIPLE UNIT
Any improved property in which there is located more than one (1) dwelling
unit; residential establishment, Nonresidential Establishment, commercial
establishment, industrial establishment or institutional establishment, or any
combination thereof.
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) PERMIT
A permit issued to control the discharge of pollutants from point sources into
the navigable waters, the contiguous zone and the oceans pursuant to Section
402 of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1342).
   [Added 9-27-2016 by Ord. No. 349]
NEW SOURCE
      (1)   Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which there
is (or may be) a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced
after the publication of proposed Pretreatment Standards under section 307(c)
of the Act that will be applicable to such source if such Standards are
thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that:
         (a)   The building, structure, facility, or installation is
constructed at a site at which no other source is located; or
         (b)   The building, structure, facility, or installation totally
replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of
pollutants at an Existing Source; or
         (c)   The production or wastewater generating processes of the
building, structure, facility, or installation are substantially independent of
an Existing Source at the same site. In determining whether these are
substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility
is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility
is engaged in the same general type of activity as the Existing Source, should
be considered.
      (2)   Construction on a site at which an Existing Source is located
results in a modification rather than a New Source if the construction does not
create a new building, structure, facility, or installation meeting the
criteria of Section (1)(b) or (c) above but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds
to existing process or production equipment.
      (3)   Construction of a New Source as defined under this paragraph has
commenced if the owner or operator has:
         (a)   Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous onsite
construction program
            [1]   any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or
equipment; or
            [2]   significant site preparation work including clearing,
excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities which
is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source
facilities or equipment; or
         (b)   Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase
of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation
within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be
terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility,
engineering, and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation
under this paragraph.
NONCONTACT COOLING WATER
Water used for cooling that does not come into direct contact with any raw
material, intermediate product, waste product, or finished product.
OWNER
Any person vested with ownership, legal or equitable, sole or partial, of any
improved property.
PASS THROUGH
A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the United States in quantities
or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges
from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the
Authority s NPDES permit, including an increase in the magnitude or duration of
a violation.
PERSON
Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, corporation,
association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity, or any
other legal entity; or their legal representatives, agents, or assigns. This
definition includes all Federal, State, and local governmental entities.
pH
A measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a solution, expressed in standard
units.
POINT OF DISCHARGE
Actual discharge location for IU into the Antrim Township sewer system.
POLLUTANT
Dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash, sewage,
garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, Medical Wastes, chemical wastes, biological
materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock,
sand, cellar dirt, municipal, agricultural and industrial wastes, and certain
characteristics of wastewater (e.g., pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color,
BOD, COD, toxicity, or odor).
POTW (PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS), SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT, or TREATMENT
SYSTEM
As appropriate, all the sewage treatment facilities, structures, and equipment
owned by the Authority and operated by the Township for the collection,
conveyance, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of wastewater including any
works that are an integral part of the treatment process or, with respect to
any period during which wastes discharged into the sewer system are being
transported for treatment pursuant to the treatment agreement, to the sewage
treatment facilities of the Borough of Greencastle, Franklin County,
Pennsylvania, and/or other Greencastle, Franklin County Authority.
PRETREATMENT
The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or
the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater prior to, or
in lieu of, introducing such pollutants into the POTW. This reduction or
alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical, or biological processes; by
process changes; or by other means, except by diluting the concentration of the
pollutants unless allowed by an applicable Pretreatment Standard.
PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS
Any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment imposed on a
User, other than a Pretreatment Standard.
PRETREATMENT STANDARDS or STANDARDS
Pretreatment Standards shall mean prohibited discharge standards, categorical
Pretreatment Standards, and Local Limits.
PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS or PROHIBITED DISCHARGES
Absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances; these
prohibitions appear in Section
111-5 of this Chapter.
PROPERLY CHOPPED GARBAGE
Garbage that has been chopped to such a degree that all its particles will be
carried freely under normal sewer flow conditions, with no particle greater
than one half (1/2) inch in any dimension.
SEPTIC TANK WASTE
Any sewage from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers,
trailers, and septic tanks.
SEWAGE
Human excrement and gray water (household showers, dishwashing operations,
etc.).
SEWER
Any pipe, main or conduit constituting a part of the sewer system and used or
usable for collection and transportation of sanitary sewage and industrial
wastes.
SEWER SYSTEM
All facilities, as of any particular time, for collecting, pumping,
transporting, treating and disposing of wastewater to be acquired and/or to be
constructed and to be owned by the Authority and to be leased to the Township
for maintenance, operation and use.
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER
Except as provided in paragraphs (3) and (4) of this Section, a Significant
Industrial User is:
      (1)   An Industrial User subject to categorical Pretreatment Standards;
or
      (2)   An Industrial User that:
         (a)   Discharges an average of twenty-five thousand (25,000) gpd or
more of process wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling
and boiler blowdown wastewater);
         (b)   Contributes a process wastestream which makes up five (5)
percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the
POTW treatment plant; or
         (c)   Is designated as such by Antrim Township on the basis that it
has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW s operation or for
violating any Pretreatment Standard or Requirement.
      (3)   The Township may determine that an Industrial User subject to
categorical Pretreatment Standards is a Non-Significant Categorical Industrial
User rather than a Significant Industrial User on a finding that the Industrial
User never discharges more than 100 gallons per day (gpd) of total categorical
wastewater (excluding sanitary, non-contact cooling and boiler blowdown
wastewater, unless specifically included in the Pretreatment Standard) and the
following conditions are met:
         (a)   The Industrial User, prior to the Township s finding, has
consistently complied with all applicable categorical Pretreatment Standards
and Requirements;
         (b)   The Industrial User annually submits the certification statement
required in Section
111-44(B) [see 40 CFR 403.12(q)], together with any additional information
necessary to support the certification statement; and
         (c)   The Industrial User never discharges any untreated concentrated
wastewater.
      (4)   Upon a finding that a User meeting the criteria in Subsection (2)
of this part has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW s
operation or for violating any Pretreatment Standard or Requirement, the
Township, may at any time, on its own initiative or in response to a petition
received from an Industrial User, and in accordance with procedures in 40 CFR
403.8(f)(6), determine that such User should not be considered a Significant
Industrial User.
SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE or SNC
An IU that has violated Pretreatment Standards and/or Pretreatment Requirements
and such violation(s) meet one or more of the criteria set forth in Article IX
of this Chapter and in 40 CFR 403.8(f)(2)(viii).
   [Amended 9-27-2016 by Ord. No. 349]
SLUG LOAD OR SLUG DISCHARGE
Any discharge at a flow rate or concentration, which could cause a violation of
the prohibited discharge standards in
111-5 of this Chapter. A Slug Discharge is any Discharge of a non-routine,
episodic nature, including but not limited to an accidental spill or a non-
customary batch Discharge, which has a reasonable potential to cause
Interference or Pass Through, or in any other way violate the POTW s
regulations, Local Limits or Permit conditions.
STORMWATER
Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation, and
resulting from such precipitation, including snowmelt.
TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS or SUSPENDED SOLIDS
The total suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in,
water, wastewater, or other liquid, and that is removable by laboratory
filtering.
TOWNSHIP
The Township of Antrim, Franklin County, Pennsylvania, a municipal subdivision
of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, acting by and through its Board of
Supervisors, or in appropriate cases, acting by and through its Authorized
Representatives.
TOXIC SUBSTANCE
Any substance that would have a negative impact or would be considered harmful
to human, animal or plant life including, but not limited to, copper, cyanide,
chromium, beryllium, cadmium, lead, nickel, tin and zinc ions, and any phenolic
bodies, radioactive isotopes, petro chemical compounds, or biocides.
TOXICITY TESTING
A procedure to determine the toxicity of a chemical or an effluent using living
organisms. A toxicity test measures the degree of effect on exposed test
organisms of a specific chemical or effluent.
TREATMENT AGREEMENT
A certain agreement for treatment of wastewater, dated February 21, 1972,
between the township and the Borough of Greencastle, Franklin County,
Pennsylvania, and the Greencastle, Franklin County Authority, including all
amendments and/or supplements thereto, which may be entered into from time to
time, pursuant to which the township and/or the Authority may discharge from
the sewer system to facilities of such borough and/or such Authority, sanitary
sewage and industrial wastes for treatment and disposal.
TREATMENT COST
A calculated cost ($) per pound per day (lb/day) for the treatment of specified
pollutants by the Antrim Township WWTP based on annual operating costs and
other associated costs (regulatory impacts and cost of living increase etc.).
These costs may be formulated by the Authority or Township engineer as deemed
necessary and set by resolution of the Board of Supervisors.
UPSET CONDITIONS
An exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary
noncompliance with Categorical Pretreatment Standards because of factors beyond
the reasonable control of the Industrial User. An Upset does not include
noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed
treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventative
maintenance, or careless or improper operation.
USER or INDUSTRIAL USER
A source of indirect discharge.
WASTEWATER
Liquid and water-carried industrial wastes and sewage from residential
dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing facilities, and
institutions, whether treated or untreated, which are contributed to the POTW.
WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT or TREATMENT PLANT
That portion of the POTW which is designed to provide treatment of municipal
sewage and industrial waste.
ARTICLE II GENERAL SEWER USE REQUIREMENTS
 111-5 PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS.
   A.   General Prohibitions. No User shall introduce or cause to be introduced
into the POTW any pollutant or wastewater which causes Pass Through or
Interference. These general prohibitions apply to all Users of the POTW whether
or not they are subject to categorical Pretreatment Standards or any other
National, State, or local Pretreatment Standards or Requirements.
   B.   Specific Prohibitions. No User shall introduce or cause to be
introduced into the POTW the following pollutants, substances, or wastewater:
      (1)   Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the POTW,
including, but not limited to, wastestreams with a closed-cup flashpoint of
less than 140 degrees F (60 degrees C) using the test methods specified in 40
CFR 261.21;
      (2)   Wastewater having a pH less than 5.0 or more than 9.0, or otherwise
causing corrosive structural damage to the POTW or equipment;
      (3)   Any solid or substances that may cause obstruction to flow in the
Sewer System or be detrimental to treatment system operation. These substances
include, but are not limited to: ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings,
metal, glass, feathers, tar, wood, paunch manure, hair, plastics, rag, and
paper products, other than toilet tissue;
      (4)   Any wastewater containing any garbage or solids that could cause
obstruction of flow in the POTW resulting in Interference but in no case solids
or garbage greater than one half inch (1/2 ) in any dimension;
      (5)   Pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.),
released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which,
either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, will cause Interference
with the POTW;
      (6)   Wastewater having a temperature greater than 150 degrees F (65
degrees C), or which will inhibit biological activity in the treatment plant
resulting in Interference, but in no case wastewater which causes the
temperature at the introduction into the treatment plant to exceed 100 degrees
F (37.8 degrees C);
      (7)   Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral
oil origin, in amounts that will cause Interference or Pass Through;
      (8)   Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or
fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and
safety problems;
      (9)   Trucked or hauled pollutants.
      (10)   Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids, or other wastewater
which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to
create a public nuisance or a hazard to life, or to prevent entry into the
sewers for maintenance or repair;
      (11)   Wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by the
treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes, leachate, and
vegetable tanning solutions, which consequently imparts color to the treatment
plant s effluent, thereby violating Antrim s NPDES permit;
      (12)   Wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes except in
compliance with applicable State or Federal regulations;
      (13)   Storm Water, surface water, ground water, artesian well water,
roof runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate, deionized
water, Noncontact Cooling Water, and unpolluted wastewater, unless specifically
authorized by the Township;
      (14)   Any pollutant that will cause any product of the treatment system
such as residues, sludges, or scums to be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse
or to interfere with the reclamation process. In no case shall a substance
discharged to the treatment system cause the sludge produced to be in
noncompliance with disposal criteria, guidelines or regulations developed under
405 of the Clean Water Act; or any criteria, guidelines or regulations
affecting sludge use or disposal developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal
Act, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, or State Criteria
applicable to the sludge management method being used;
      (15)   Medical Wastes, except as specifically authorized by the Township
in a wastewater discharge permit;
      (16)   Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity,
either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, to injure or interfere
with any wastewater treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or
animals, to create a toxic effect in the receiving waters of the treatment
system, or to exceed the limitations set forth in the Federal Categorical
Pretreatment Standard. A toxic pollutant shall include but not be limited to
any pollutant identified pursuant to the 307(a) of the Clean Water Act;
      (17)   Detergents, surface-active agents, or other substances that might
cause excessive foaming in the POTW;
      (18)   Fats, oils, or greases of animal or vegetable origin in
concentrations greater than 50 ppm by weight;
      (19)   Any wastewater containing pollutants of such character or quantity
that special and unusual attention is required for their handling;
      (20)   Any sanitary waste containing any substance or having any
characteristic that violates provisions of the treatment agreement or that is
prohibited by the Borough of Greencastle or the Greencastle Franklin County
Authority from being discharged to the sewage treatment facilities of such
borough or such Authority during any period when wastes are being so discharged
for treatment by the Township from the sewer system;
      (21)   Any water or waste prohibited by any permit issued by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the United States of America or any board,
agency, department or commission of either of the foregoing.
   Pollutants, substances, or wastewater prohibited by this Section shall not
be processed or stored in such a manner that they could be discharged to the
POTW.
   In addition to the above prohibitions, dilution shall not be used as a
substitute for pretreatment.
 111-6 NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS.
   Users must Comply with the categorical Pretreatment Standards found at 40
CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405 471.
   A.   Where a categorical Pretreatment Standard is expressed only in terms of
either the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in wastewater, the Township
may impose equivalent concentration or mass limits in accordance with Section
111-6(E) and
111-6(F). [Note: See 40 CFR 403.6(c)]
   B.   When the limits in a categorical Pretreatment Standard are expressed
only in terms of mass of pollutant per unit of production, the Township may
convert the limits to equivalent limitations expressed either as mass of
pollutant discharged per day or effluent concentration for purposes of
calculating effluent limitations applicable to individual Industrial Users.
[Note: See 40 CFR 403.6(c)(2)]
   C.   When wastewater subject to a categorical Pretreatment Standard is mixed
with wastewater not regulated by the same Standard, the Township shall impose
an alternate limit in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(e).
   D.   A CIU may obtain a net/gross adjustment to a categorical Pretreatment
Standard in accordance with the following paragraphs of this Article. [Note:
See 40 CFR 403.15]
      (1)   Categorical Pretreatment Standards may be adjusted to reflect the
presence of pollutants in the Industrial User s intake water in accordance with
this Article. Any Industrial User wishing to obtain credit for intake
pollutants must make application to the Township. Upon request of the
Industrial User, the applicable Standard will be calculated on a net basis
(i.e., adjusted to reflect credit for pollutants in the intake water) if the
requirements of paragraph (2) of this Article are met.
      (2)   Criteria.
         (a)   Either (i) The applicable categorical Pretreatment Standards
contained in 40 CFR subchapter N specifically provide that they shall be
applied on a net basis; or (ii) The Industrial User demonstrates that the
control system it proposes or uses to meet applicable categorical Pretreatment
Standards would, if properly installed and operated, meet the Standards in the
absence of pollutants in the intake waters.
         (b)   Credit for generic pollutants such as biochemical oxygen demand
(BOD), total suspended solids (TSS), and oil and grease should not be granted
unless the Industrial User demonstrates that the constituents of the generic
measure in the User s effluent are substantially similar to the constituents of
the generic measure in the intake water or unless appropriate additional limits
are placed on process water pollutants either at the outfall or elsewhere.
         (c)   Credit shall be granted only to the extent necessary to meet the
applicable categorical Pretreatment Standard(s), up to a maximum value equal to
the influent value. Additional monitoring may be necessary to determine
eligibility for credits and compliance with Standard(s) adjusted under this
Article.
         (d)   Credit shall be granted only if the User demonstrates that the
intake water is drawn from the same body of water as that into which the POTW
discharges. The Township may waive this requirement if it finds that no
environmental degradation will result.
   E.   When a categorical Pretreatment Standard is expressed only in terms of
pollutant concentrations, an Industrial User may request that the Township
convert the limits to equivalent mass limits. The determination to convert
concentration limits to mass limits is within the discretion of the Township.
The Township may establish equivalent mass limits only if the Industrial User
meets all the conditions set forth in Sections
111-6(E)(1)(a) through
111-6(E)(1)(e) below.
      (1)   To be eligible for equivalent mass limits, the Industrial User
must:
         (a)   Employ, or demonstrate that it will employ, water conservation
methods and technologies that substantially reduce water use during the term of
its individual wastewater discharge permit;
         (b)   Currently use control and treatment technologies adequate to
achieve compliance with the applicable categorical Pretreatment Standard, and
not have used dilution as a substitute for treatment;
         (c)   Provide sufficient information to establish the facility s
actual average daily flow rate for all wastestreams, based on data from a
continuous effluent flow monitoring device, as well as the facility s long-term
average production rate. Both the actual average daily flow rate and the long-
term average production rate must be representative of current operating
conditions;
         (d)   Not have daily flow rates, production levels, or pollutant
levels that vary so significantly that equivalent mass limits are not
appropriate to control the Discharge; and
         (e)   Have consistently complied with all applicable Categorical
Pretreatment Standards during the period prior to the industrial User s request
for equivalent mass limits.
      (2)   An Industrial User subject to equivalent mass limits must:
         (a)   Maintain and effectively operate control and treatment
technologies adequate to achieve compliance with the equivalent mass limits;
         (b)   Continue to record the facility s flow rates through the use of
a continuous effluent flow monitoring device;
         (c)   Continue to record the facility s production rates and notify
the Township whenever production rates are expected to vary by more than 20
percent from its baseline production rates determined in paragraph
111-6(F) of this Article. Upon notification of a revised production rate, the
Township will reassess the equivalent mass limit and revise the limit as
necessary to reflect changed conditions at the facility; and
         (d)   Continue to employ the same or comparable water conservation
methods and technologies as those implemented pursuant to paragraph
111-6(E)(1)(a) of this Article so long as it discharges under an equivalent
mass limit.
      (3)   When developing equivalent mass limits, the Township:
         (a)   Will calculate the equivalent mass limit by multiplying the
actual average daily flow rate of the regulated process(es) of the Industrial
User by the concentration-based Daily Maximum and Monthly Average Standard for
the applicable categorical Pretreatment Standard and the appropriate unit
conversion factor;
         (b)   Upon notification of a revised production rate, will reassess
the equivalent mass limit and recalculate the limit as necessary to reflect
changed conditions at the facility; and
         (c)   May retain the same equivalent mass limit in subsequent
individual wastewater discharger permit terms if the Industrial User s actual
average daily flow rate was reduced solely as a result of the implementation of
water conservation methods and technologies, and the actual average daily flow
rates used in the original calculation of the equivalent mass limit were not
based on the use of dilution as a substitute for treatment pursuant to Section
111-10. The Industrial User must also be in compliance with Section
111-64 regarding the prohibition of bypass.
   F.   The Township may convert the mass limits of the Categorical
Pretreatment Standards of 40 CFR Parts 414, 419, and 455 to concentration
limits for purposes of calculating limitations applicable to individual
Industrial Users. The conversion is at the discretion of the Township.
[Note: When converting such limits to concentration limits, the Township will
use the concentrations listed in the applicable subparts of 40 CFR Parts 414,
419, and 455 and document that dilution is not being substituted for treatment
as prohibited by Section
111-10 of this Chapter (see 40 CFR 403.6(d)). In addition, the Township will
document how the equivalent limits were derived for any changes from
concentration to mass limits, or vice versa, and make this information publicly
available (see 40 CFR 403.6(c)(7)).]
   G.   Once included in its permit, the Industrial User must comply with the
equivalent limitations developed in this Article, Section
111-6 in lieu of the promulgated categorical Standards from which the
equivalent limitations were derived. [Note: See 40 CFR 403.6(c)(7)]
   H.   Many categorical Pretreatment Standards specify one limit for
calculating maximum daily discharge limitations and a second limit for
calculating maximum Monthly Average, or 4-day average, limitations. Where such
Standards are being applied, the same production or flow figure shall be used
in calculating both the average and the maximum equivalent limitation. [Note:
See 40 CFR 403.6(c)(8)]
   I.   Any Industrial User operating under a permit incorporating equivalent
mass or concentration limits calculated from a production-based Standard shall
notify the Township within two (2) business days after the User has a
reasonable basis to know that the production level will significantly change
within the next calendar month. Any User not notifying the Township of such
anticipated change will be required to meet the mass or concentration limits in
its permit that were based on the original estimate of the long term average
production rate. [Note: See 40 CFR 403.6(c)(9)]
 111-7 STATE PRETREATMENT STANDARDS.
   Users must comply with the Environmental Protection Agency regulations as
codified in 40 Code of Federal Regulations, Part 403.
 111-8 LOCAL LIMITS.
   A.   The Township is authorized to establish Local Limits pursuant to 40 CFR
403.5(c).
   B.   Local Limits for pollutants of concern, as set forth in Schedule A, the
same being incorporated herein by this reference, shall be amended after EPA
approval by ordinance of the Township of Antrim to protect against Pass Through
and Interference, and to protect the sludge quality. Local Limits may be
allocated on an individual basis to the Industrial Users and defined through
Wastewater Discharge Permits issued pursuant to Article IV and Article V of
this Ordinance. The Township may continue to develop these limits as necessary
and effectively enforce such limits. [Amended 6-9-2009 by Ord. No. 316; 4-14-
2015 by Ord. No. 341; 9-27-2016 by Ord. No. 349; 2-25-2020 by Ord. No. 354; 9-
14-2021 by Ord. No. 360]
Schedule A
Schedule A
   Antrim Township Local Limits
   AKA Maximum Allowable Industrial Loadings (MAIL)
The following Maximum Allowable Industrial Loadings (MAILs) are developed to
protect against pass through and interference, and to protect sludge quality.
Individual limitations may be allocated to the Industrial Users as needed
through Wastewater Discharge Permits issued to the Industrial Users in
accordance with Article IV and Article V of Chapter 111. The following limits
apply at the point where the wastewater is discharged to the POTW.
   Paramet   Daily Maximum MAIL1, Lbs/Day
Arsenic      0.2786
BOD          1997
Cadmium      0.0786
Chloride     2,342
Chromium Tot 1.218
Chromium Hex 3.396
Copper       1.028
Cyanide      0.5904
Lead         0.4374
Manganese    21.47
Mercury      0.0162
Molybdenum   0.3152
Nickel       1.212
Phenol       17.34
Phosphorus   58.09
Selenium     0.559
Silver       0.8707
TN           214
TSS          1110
Zinc         1.160
1 MAIL is defined as the Maximum Allowable Industrial Loading.
 
   C.   The Township may develop Best Management Practices (BMPs), by ordinance
or in individual wastewater discharge permits, to implement Local Limits and
the requirements of Section
111-5.
 111-9 THE TOWNSHIP OF ANTRIM S RIGHT OF REVISION.
   The Township of Antrim reserves the right to establish, by ordinance or in
individual wastewater discharge permits, more stringent Standards or
Requirements on discharges to the POTW consistent with the purpose of this
Chapter. The Township reserves the right to adopt additional rules and
regulations or modify existing rules and regulations as deemed necessary and
proper in connection with the use and operation of the sewer system.
 111-10 DILUTION.
   No User shall ever increase the use of process water, or in any way attempt
to dilute a discharge, as a partial or complete substitute for adequate
treatment to achieve compliance with a discharge limitation unless expressly
authorized by an applicable Pretreatment Standard or Requirement. The Township
may impose mass limitations on Users who are using dilution to meet applicable
Pretreatment Standards or Requirements or in other cases when the imposition of
mass limitations is appropriate.
ARTICLE III PRETREATMENT OF WASTEWATER
 111-11 PRETREATMENT FACILITIES.
   Users shall provide wastewater treatment as necessary to comply with this
Chapter and shall achieve compliance with all categorical Pretreatment
Standards, Local Limits, and the prohibitions set out in
111-5 of this Chapter within the time limitations specified by EPA, the State,
or the Township, whichever is more stringent. Any facilities necessary for
compliance shall be provided, operated, and maintained at the User s expense;
Detailed plans describing such facilities and operating procedures shall be
submitted to the Township for review, and shall be acceptable to the Township
before such facilities are constructed. The review of such plans and operating
procedures shall in no way relieve the User from the responsibility of
modifying such facilities as necessary to produce a discharge acceptable to the
Township under the provisions of this Chapter.
 111-12 ADDITIONAL PRETREATMENT MEASURES.
   At the Township s discretion the following additional pretreatment measures
may be required of Users:
   A.   Whenever deemed necessary, the Township may require Users to restrict
their discharge during peak flow periods, designate that certain wastewater be
discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/or consolidate points of
discharge, separate sewage wastestreams from industrial wastestreams, and such
other conditions as may be necessary to protect the POTW and determine the User
s compliance with the requirements of this Chapter.
   B.   The Township may require any person discharging into the POTW to
install and maintain, on their property and at their expense, a suitable
storage and flow-control facility to ensure equalization of flow. An individual
wastewater discharge permit may be issued solely for flow equalization.
   C.   Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the
opinion of the Township, they are necessary for the proper handling of
wastewater containing excessive amounts of grease and oil, or sand; except that
such interceptors shall not be required for residential users. All interception
units shall be of a type and capacity approved by the Township, shall comply
with Section
110-20(F) and shall be so located to be easily accessible for cleaning and
inspection. Such interceptors shall be inspected, cleaned, and repaired in
accordance with Section
110-20(F) by the User at their expense.
   D.   Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may be
required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection meter.
 111-13 ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGE/SLUG DISCHARGE CONTROL PLANS.
   The Township shall evaluate whether each SIU needs an accidental discharge/
slug discharge control plan or other action to control Slug Discharges. The
Township may require any User to develop, submit for approval, and implement
such a plan or take such other action that may be necessary to control Slug
Discharges. Alternatively, The Township may develop such a plan for any User.
An accidental discharge/slug discharge control plan shall address, at a
minimum, the following:
   A.   Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch
discharges;
   B.   Description of stored chemicals and Safety Data Sheets; [Amended 9-27-
2016 by Ord. No. 349]
   C.   Procedures for immediately notifying the Township of any accidental or
Slug Discharge, as required by Section
111-36 of this Chapter; and
   D.   Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or Slug
Discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and
maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and
unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building
of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic
pollutants, including solvents, and/or measures and equipment for emergency
response.
 111-14 HAULED WASTEWATER.
   Hauled wastewater shall not be discharged into the POTW in any way. Hauled
Waste is prohibited.
ARTICLE IV INDIVIDUAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMITS (WWDP)
 111-15 WASTEWATER ANALYSIS.
   When requested by the Township, a User shall submit information on the
nature and characteristics of its wastewater within 60 days of the request
accompanied by the applicable review fee(s). The analysis shall be conducted by
an Independent PA DEP certified wastewater laboratory at such intervals as the
Township shall determine. Laboratory methods used in the analysis of samples of
sewage wastes shall be those set forth in the latest edition of Standard
Methods for the Examination of Water and Sewage as published by the American
Public Health Association. All costs associated with obtaining samples and
analysis shall be paid for by the User of the sewer system. The IU must update
the analysis periodically, or when any change is made within the IU, or as
requested by the Township. The Township, at their discretion, may prepare a
form for such analysis.
 111-16 INDIVIDUAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT REQUIREMENT.
   A.   No Significant Industrial User shall discharge wastewater into the POTW
without first obtaining an individual wastewater discharge permit from the
Township except that a Significant Industrial User that has filed a timely
application pursuant to Section
111-17 of this Chapter may continue to discharge for the time period specified
therein.
   B.   The Township may require other Users to obtain individual wastewater
discharge permits as necessary to carry out the purposes of this Chapter.
   C.   Any violation of the terms and conditions of an individual wastewater
discharge permit shall be deemed a violation of this Chapter and subjects the
wastewater discharge permittee to the sanctions set out in Articles X through
XII of this Chapter. Obtaining an individual wastewater discharge permit does
not relieve a permittee of its obligation to comply with all Federal and State
Pretreatment Standards or Requirements or with any other requirements of
Federal, State, and local law.
 111-17 INDIVIDUAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMITTING: EXISTING CONNECTIONS.
   Any User required to obtain an individual wastewater discharge permit who
was discharging wastewater into the POTW prior to the effective date of this
Chapter and who wishes to continue such discharges in the future, shall, within
60 days after said date, apply to the Township for an individual wastewater
discharge permit in accordance with Section
111-19 of this Chapter, and shall not cause or allow discharges to the POTW to
continue after their wastewater discharge permit has been issued except in
accordance with their wastewater discharge permit. IUs with existing agreements
or that are subject to testing regulations in place before the enactment of
this Chapter shall remain subject to such agreements or regulations until their
wastewater discharge permit is issued. After permit issuance the User shall
comply with the wastewater discharge permit.
 111-18 INDIVIDUAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMITTING: NEW CONNECTIONS.
   Any User required to obtain an individual wastewater discharge permit who
proposes to begin or recommence discharging into the POTW must obtain such
permit prior to the beginning or recommencing of such discharge. An application
for this individual wastewater discharge permit, in accordance with Section
111-19 of this Chapter, must be filed at least 60 days prior to the date upon
which any proposed discharge will begin or recommence. No discharge shall
commence until a wastewater discharge permit is obtained.
 111-19 INDIVIDUAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT APPLICATION CONTENTS.
   A.   All Users required to obtain an individual wastewater discharge permit
must submit a permit application in the form prescribed by the Township. The
Township may require Users to submit all or some of the following information
as part of a permit application: [Amended 9-27-2016 by Ord. No. 349]
      (1)   Identifying Information.
         (a)   The name and address of the facility, including the name of the
operator and owner.
         (b)   Contact information, description of activities, facilities, and
plant production processes on the premises;
      (2)   Environmental Permits. A list of any environmental control permits
held by or for the facility.
      (3)   Description of Operations.
         (a)   A brief description of the nature, average rate of production
(including each product produced by type, amount, processes, and rate of
production), and standard industrial classifications of the operation(s)
carried out by such User. This description should include a schematic process
diagram, which indicates points of discharge to the POTW from the regulated
processes.
         (b)   Types of wastes generated, and a list of all raw materials and
chemicals used or stored at the facility which are, or could accidentally or
intentionally be, discharged to the POTW;
         (c)   Number and type of employees, hours of operation, and proposed
or actual hours of operation;
         (d)   Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum
per day);
         (e)   Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and
details to show all sewers, floor drains, and appurtenances by size, location,
and elevation, and all points, of discharge;
      (4)   Time and duration of discharges;
      (5)   The location for monitoring all wastes covered by the permit;
      (6)   Flow Measurement. Information showing the measured average daily
and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated process
streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of the combined
wastestream formula set out in Section
111-6(C) (40 CFR 403.6(e)).
      (7)   Measurement of Pollutants.
         (a)   The categorical Pretreatment Standards applicable to each
regulated process and any new categorically regulated processes for Existing
Sources.
         (b)   The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and
concentration, and/or mass, where required by the Standard or by the Township
of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process.
         (c)   Instantaneous, Daily Maximum, and long-term average
concentrations, or mass, where required, shall be reported.
         (d)   The sample shall be representative of daily operations and shall
be analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in Section
111-40 of this Chapter. Where the Standard requires compliance with a BMP or
pollution prevention alternative, the User shall submit documentation as
required by the Township or the applicable Standards to determine compliance
with the Standard.
         (e)   Sampling must be performed in accordance with procedures set out
in Section
111-41 of this Chapter.
      (8)   Any requests for a monitoring waiver (or a renewal of an approved
monitoring waiver) for a pollutant neither present nor expected to be present
in the discharge based on Section
111-34(B) [40 CFR 403.12(e)(2)].
      (9)   Any other information as may be deemed necessary by the Township to
evaluate the permit application.
   B.   Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and will be
returned to the User for revision.
 111-20 (RESERVED).
 111-21 APPLICATION SIGNATORIES AND CERTIFICATIONS.
   A.   All wastewater discharge permit applications, User reports and
certification statements must be signed by an Authorized Representative of the
User and contain the certification statement in Section
111-44(A).
   B.   If the designation of an Authorized Representative is no longer
accurate because a different individual or position has responsibility for the
overall operation of the facility or overall responsibility for environmental
matters for the company, a new written authorization satisfying the
requirements of this Section must be submitted to the Township prior to or
together with any reports to be signed by an Authorized Representative.
   C.   A facility determined to be a Non-Significant Categorical Industrial
User by the Township must annually submit the signed certification statement in
Section
111-44(B). [Note: See 40 CFR 403.3(v)(2)]
 111-22 INDIVIDUAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT DECISIONS.
   The Township will evaluate the data furnished by the User and may require
additional information. The Township will evaluate the application and may
require additional information. Failure to provide such additional information
in a timely fashion shall be grounds for permit denial. Within 90 days of
receipt of a complete permit application the Township will determine whether to
issue an individual wastewater discharge permit. The Township may deny any
application for an individual wastewater discharge permit.
ARTICLE V INDIVIDUAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT ISSUANCE
 111-23 INDIVIDUAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT DURATION.
   A.   An individual wastewater discharge permit shall be issued for a
specified time period, not to exceed five (5) years from the effective date of
the permit. An individual wastewater discharge permit may be issued for a
period less than five (5) years, at the discretion of the Township. Each
individual wastewater discharge permit will indicate a specific date upon which
it will expire.
   B.   The IU must apply for permit reissuance by submitting a completed
application in accordance with
111-19 at least sixty (60) days prior to the expiration of the existing permit.
   C.   The terms and conditions of an existing permit shall be deemed to
continue in effect, pending a decision on a reissued permit, if:
      (1)   The Nonresidential Establishment filed a timely application that is
complete and;
      (2)   The Township, through no fault of the IU, does not issue a new
permit with an effective date on or before the expiration date of the existing
permit, and;
      (3)   EPA consents to such extension, with EPA consent reflected in its
approval of the Rates, Rules and Regulations provision herein.
 111-24 INDIVIDUAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT CONTENTS.
   An individual wastewater discharge permit shall include such conditions as
are deemed reasonably necessary by the Township to prevent Pass Through or
Interference, protect the quality of the water body receiving the treatment
plant s effluent, protect worker health and safety, facilitate sludge
management and disposal, and protect against damage to the POTW.
   A.   Individual wastewater discharge permits shall include, but not be
limited to, the following:
      (1)   A statement that indicates the wastewater discharge permit issuance
date, expiration date and effective date; [Note: See Section
111-23]
      (2)   A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is
nontransferable;
      (3)   Effluent limits, including Best Management Practices, based on
applicable Pretreatment Standards;
      (4)   Self monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and record-
keeping requirements. These requirements shall include an identification of
pollutants (or best management practice) to be monitored, sampling location,
sampling frequency, and sample type based on Federal, State, and local law.
      (5)   The process for seeking a waiver from monitoring for a pollutant
neither present nor expected to be present in the Discharge in accordance with
Section
111-34(B). [Note: See 40 CFR 403.12(e)(2).]
      (6)   A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for
violation of Pretreatment Standards and Requirements, and any applicable
compliance schedule. Such schedule may not extend the time for compliance
beyond that required by applicable Federal, State, or local law.
      (7)   Requirements to control Slug Discharge, if determined by the
Township to be necessary.
      (8)   Any grant of the monitoring waiver by the Township [Section
111-34(B)] must be included as a condition in the User s permit.
   B.   Individual wastewater discharge permits may contain, but shall not be
limited to, the following conditions:
      (1)   Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of
discharge, and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization;
      (2)   Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology,
pollution control, or construction of appropriate containment devices, designed
to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the
treatment works;
      (3)   Requirements for the development and implementation of spill
control plans or other special conditions including management practices
necessary to adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated, or nonroutine
discharges;
      (4)   Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to
reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW;
      (5)   The unit charge or schedule of User charges and fees for the
management of the wastewater discharged to the POTW;
      (6)   Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and
sampling facilities and equipment, including flow measurement devices;
      (7)   A statement that compliance with the individual wastewater
discharge permit does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for
compliance with all applicable Federal and State Pretreatment Standards,
including those which become effective during the term of the individual
wastewater discharge permit; and
      (8)   Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the Township to ensure
compliance with this Chapter, and State and Federal laws, rules, and
regulations.
 111-25 PERMIT ISSUANCE.
   A.   A draft permit will be issued after all required data has been received
by the Township. The applicant shall then be allowed a thirty (30) day comment/
appeal period. Upon the expiration of the comment period the Township shall
issue or deny the permit.
   B.   Failure to comment or appeal the draft permit within the thirty (30)
day comment period will result in the IU waiving its right to appeal the terms
of the permit at a later date.
   C.   Industrial Users compliance with the permit shall not relieve the IU
from complying with all applicable laws, regulations, and ordinances
promulgated by government agencies, nor shall issuance of a permit be construed
as a representation by the Township that discharge permitted therein complies
with such laws, regulations, and ordinances.
   D.   Permits are issued solely to govern the discharge of wastewater into
the sewer system, as between the IU and the Township, and shall not be
construed to benefit any third party.
 111-26 PERMIT MODIFICATION.
   The Township may modify an individual wastewater discharge permit for good
cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons:
   A.   To incorporate any new or revised Federal, State, or local Pretreatment
Standards or Requirements;
   B.   To address significant alterations or additions to the User s
operation, processes, or wastewater volume or character since the time of the
individual wastewater discharge permit issuance;
   C.   A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent
reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge;
   D.   Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to
the Authority s POTW, Township personnel, contamination of sludge or the
receiving waters;
   E.   Violation of any terms or conditions of the individual wastewater
discharge permit;
   F.   Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in
the wastewater discharge permit application or in any required reporting;
   G.   Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical Pretreatment
Standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13;
   H.   To correct typographical or other errors in the individual wastewater
discharge permit.
 111-27 INDIVIDUAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT TRANSFER.
   Permits are issued to a specific operation. A wastewater discharge permit
shall not be assigned or transferred or sold to a new owner, new user,
different premises, or a new or changed operation without the written approval
of the Township. Transfers without written consent from the Township shall
result in a void permit as of the date of the transfer.
 111-28 INDIVIDUAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT REVOCATION.
   The Township may revoke or terminate an individual wastewater discharge
permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons:
   A.   Failure to notify the Township of significant changes to the wastewater
prior to the changed discharge;
   B.   Failure to provide prior notification to the Township of changed
conditions pursuant to Section
111-35 of this Chapter;
   C.   Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in
the wastewater discharge permit application;
   D.   Falsifying self-monitoring reports and certification statements;
   E.   Tampering with monitoring equipment;
   F.   Refusing to allow the Township timely access to the facility premises
and records;
   G.   Failure to meet effluent limitations;
   H.   Failure to pay fines;
   I.   Failure to pay sewer charges;
   J.   Failure to meet compliance schedules;
   K.   Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater discharge
permit application;
   L.   Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of business ownership
of a permitted facility; or
   M.   Violation of any Pretreatment Standard or Requirement, or any terms of
the wastewater discharge permit or this Chapter.
   Individual wastewater discharge permits shall be voidable upon cessation of
operations or transfer of business ownership. All individual wastewater
discharge permits issued to a User are void upon the issuance of a new
individual wastewater discharge permit to that User.
 111-29 INDIVIDUAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT REISSUANCE.
   The IU must apply for permit reissuance in accordance with
111-23(B) and (C).
 111-30 REGULATION OF WASTE RECEIVED FROM OTHER JURISDICTIONS.
   A.   If another municipality, or User located within another municipality,
contributes wastewater to the POTW, the Township shall enter into an
intermunicipal agreement with the contributing municipality.
   B.   Prior to entering into an agreement required by paragraph (A), above,
the Township shall request the following information from the contributing
municipality:
      (1)   A description of the quality and volume of wastewater discharged to
the POTW by the contributing municipality;
      (2)   An inventory of all Users located within the contributing
municipality that are discharging to the POTW; and
      (3)   Such other information as the Township may deem necessary.
   C.   An intermunicipal agreement, as required by paragraph (A), above, shall
contain the following conditions:
      (1)   A requirement for the contributing municipality to adopt a sewer
use ordinance which is at least as stringent as this Chapter and Local Limits,
including required Baseline Monitoring Reports (BMRs) which are at least as
stringent as those set out in Section
111-8 of this Chapter. The requirement shall specify that such ordinance and
limits must be revised as necessary to reflect changes made to the Township of
Antrim s
Chapter 111 or Local Limits;
      (2)   A requirement for the contributing municipality to submit a revised
User inventory on at least an annual basis;
      (3)   A provision specifying which pretreatment implementation
activities, including individual wastewater discharge permit issuance,
inspection and sampling, and enforcement, will be conducted by the contributing
municipality; which of these activities will be conducted by the Township; and
which of these activities will be conducted jointly by the contributing
municipality and the Township;
      (4)   A requirement for the contributing municipality to provide the
Township with access to all information that the contributing municipality
obtains as part of its pretreatment activities;
      (5)   Limits on the nature, quality, and volume of the contributing
municipality s wastewater at the point where it discharges to the POTW;
      (6)   Requirements for monitoring the contributing municipality s
discharge;
      (7)   A provision ensuring the Township access to the facilities of Users
located within the contributing municipality s jurisdictional boundaries for
the purpose of inspection, sampling, and any other duties deemed necessary by
the Township; and
      (8)   A provision specifying remedies available for breach of the terms
of the intermunicipal agreement.
      (9)   A provision that allows the Township of Antrim to impose and
enforce Pretreatment regulations directly against the contributing IU in the
event the other Municipality refuses or fails to do so in a timely manner.
ARTICLE VI REPORTING REQUIREMENTS
 111-31 BASELINE MONITORING REPORTS.
   A.   Within either one hundred eighty (180) days after the effective date of
a Categorical Pretreatment Standard, or the final administrative decision on a
category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing
Categorical Industrial Users currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge
to the POTW shall submit to the Township a report which contains the
information listed in paragraph (B), below. At least ninety (90) days prior to
commencement of their discharge, New Sources, and sources that become
Categorical Industrial Users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable
categorical Standard, shall submit to the Township a report which contains the
information listed in paragraph (B), below. A New Source shall report the
method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable categorical
Standards. A New Source also shall give estimates of its anticipated flow and
quantity of pollutants to be discharged.
   B.   Users described above shall submit the information set forth below.
      (1)   All information required in Section
111-19(A)(1)(a), Section
111-19(A)(2), Section
111-19(A)(3)(a), and Section
111-19(A)(6). [Note: See 40 CFR 403.12(b)(1)-(7)]
      (2)   Measurement of pollutants.
         (a)   The User shall provide the information required in Section
111-19(A)(7).
         (b)   The User shall take a minimum of one representative sample to
compile that data necessary to comply with the requirements of this paragraph.
         (c)   Samples should be taken immediately downstream from pretreatment
facilities if such exist or immediately downstream from the regulated process
if no pretreatment exists. If other wastewaters are mixed with the regulated
wastewater prior to pretreatment the User should measure the flows and
concentrations necessary to allow use of the combined wastestream formula in 40
CFR 403.6(e) to evaluate compliance with the Pretreatment Standards. Where an
alternate concentration or mass limit has been calculated in accordance with 40
CFR 403.6(e) this adjusted limit along with supporting data shall be submitted
to the Control Authority;
         (d)   Sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with
Section
111-40 and
111-41;
         (e)   The Township may allow the submission of a baseline report which
utilizes only historical data so long as the data provides information
sufficient to determine the need for industrial pretreatment measures;
         (f)   The baseline report shall indicate the time, date and place of
sampling and methods of analysis, and shall certify that such sampling and
analysis is representative of normal work cycles and expected pollutant
Discharges to the POTW.
      (3)   Compliance Certification. A statement, reviewed by the User s
Authorized Representative as defined in Section
111-4 and certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether
Pretreatment Standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not,
whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional
pretreatment is required to meet the Pretreatment Standards and Requirements.
      (4)   Compliance Schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be
required to meet the Pretreatment Standards, the shortest schedule by which the
User will provide such additional pretreatment and/or O&M must be provided. The
completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date
established for the applicable Pretreatment Standard. A compliance schedule
pursuant to this Article must meet the requirements set out in Section
111-32 of this Chapter.
      (5)   Signature and Report Certification. All baseline monitoring reports
must be certified in accordance with Section
111-44(A) of this Chapter and signed by an Authorized Representative as defined
in Section
111-4.
 111-32 COMPLIANCE SCHEDULE PROGRESS REPORTS.
   The following conditions shall apply to the compliance schedule required by
Section
111-31(B)(4) of this Chapter:
   A.   The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates for
the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and
operation of additional pretreatment required for the User to meet the
applicable Pretreatment Standards (such events include, but are not limited to,
hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans, executing contracts
for major components, commencing and completing construction, and beginning and
conducting routine operation);
   B.   No increment referred to above shall exceed nine (9) months;
   C.   The User shall submit a progress report to the Township no later than
fourteen (14) days following each date in the schedule and the final date of
compliance including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the
increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and, if appropriate, the steps
being taken by the User to return to the established schedule; and
   D.   In no event shall more than nine (9) months elapse between such
progress reports to the Township.
 111-33 REPORTS ON COMPLIANCE WITH CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD DEADLINE.
   Within ninety (90) days following the date for final compliance with
applicable categorical Pretreatment Standards, or in the case of a New Source
following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any
User subject to such Pretreatment Standards and Requirements shall submit to
the Township a report containing the information described in Section
111-19(A)(6) and (7) and
111-31(B)(2) of this Chapter. For Users subject to equivalent mass or
concentration limits established in accordance with the procedures in Section
111-6 [Note: See 40 CFR 403.6(c)], this report shall contain a reasonable
measure of the User s long-term production rate. For all other Users subject to
categorical Pretreatment Standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant
discharge per unit of production (or other measure of operation), this report
shall include the User s actual production during the appropriate Sampling
period. All compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with
Section
111-44(A) of this Chapter. All sampling will be done in conformance with
Section
111-41.
 111-34 PERIODIC COMPLIANCE REPORTS.
[Note: All SIUs are required to submit periodic compliance reports even if they
have been designated a Non-Significant Categorical Industrial User under the
provisions of Section
111-34(C).]
   A.   Except as specified in Section
111-34(C), all Industrial Users (including SIUs and Categorical Users) must, at
a frequency determined by the Township submit no less than twice per year (June
and December or on dates specified) reports indicating the nature,
concentration of pollutants in the discharge which are limited by Pretreatment
Standards and the measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the
reporting period. In cases where the Pretreatment Standard requires compliance
with a Best Management Practice (BMP) or pollution prevention alternative, the
User must submit documentation required by the Township or the Pretreatment
Standard necessary to determine the compliance status of the User.
   B.   The Township may authorize an Industrial User subject to a categorical
Pretreatment Standard to forego sampling of a pollutant regulated by a
categorical Pretreatment Standard if the Industrial User has demonstrated
through sampling and other technical factors that the pollutant is neither
present nor expected to be present in the Discharge, or is present only at
background levels from intake water and without any increase in the pollutant
due to activities of the Industrial User. [see 40 CFR 403.12(e)(2)] This
authorization is subject to the following conditions:
      (1)   The waiver may be authorized where a pollutant is determined to be
present solely due to sanitary wastewater discharged from the facility provided
that the sanitary wastewater is not regulated by an applicable categorical
Standard and otherwise includes no process wastewater.
      (2)   The monitoring waiver is valid only for the duration of the
effective period of the individual wastewater discharge permit, but in no case
longer than 5 years. The User must submit a new request for the waiver before
the waiver can be granted for each subsequent individual wastewater discharge
permit. See Section
111-19(A)(8).
      (3)   In making a demonstration that a pollutant is not present, the
Industrial User must provide data from at least one sampling of the facility s
process wastewater prior to any treatment present at the facility that is
representative of all wastewater from all processes.
      (4)   The request for a monitoring waiver must be signed in accordance
with Section
111-44, and include the certification statement in
111-44(A) (40 CFR 403.6(a)(2)(ii)).
      (5)   Non-detectable sample results may be used only as a demonstration
that a pollutant is not present if the EPA approved method from 40 CFR Part 136
with the lowest minimum detection level for that pollutant was used in the
analysis.
      (6)   Any grant of the monitoring waiver by the Township must be included
as a condition in the User s permit. The reasons supporting the waiver and any
information submitted by the User in its request for the waiver must be
maintained by the Township for 3 years after expiration of the waiver.
      (7)   Upon approval of the monitoring waiver and revision of the User s
permit by the Township, the Industrial User must certify on each report with
the statement in Section
111-44(C) below, that there has been no increase in the pollutant in its
wastestream due to activities of the Industrial User.
      (8)   In the event that a waived pollutant is found to be present or is
expected to be present because of changes that occur in the User s operations,
the User must immediately: Comply with the monitoring requirements of Section
111-34(A), or other more frequent monitoring requirements imposed by the
Township, and notify the Township.
      (9)   This provision does not supersede certification processes and
requirements established in categorical Pretreatment Standards, except as
otherwise specified in the categorical Pretreatment Standard.
   C.   The Township may reduce the requirement for periodic compliance reports
[see Section
111-34(A) (40 CFR 403.12(e)(1))] to a requirement to report no less frequently
than once a year, unless required more frequently in the Pretreatment Standard
or by the EPA, where the Categorical Industrial User s total categorical
wastewater flow does not exceed any of the following:
      (1)   Greater than 0.01 percent of the POTW s design dry-weather
hydraulic capacity of the POTW treatment plant, or 5,000 GPD, whichever is
smaller, as measured by a continuous effluent flow monitoring device unless the
Industrial User discharges in batches;
      (2)   Greater than 0.01 percent of the POTW s design dry-weather organic
capacity of the POTW treatment plant; and
      (3)   Greater than 0.01 percent of the maximum allowable headworks
loading for any pollutant regulated by the applicable Federal Categorical
Pretreatment Standard for which approved Local Limits are developed, in
accordance with
111-8 of this Ordinance.
   Reduced reporting is not available to Industrial Users that have in the last
two (2) years been in Significant Noncompliance, as defined in Article IX of
this Chapter. In addition, reduced reporting is not available to an Industrial
User with daily flow rates, production levels, or pollutant levels that vary so
significantly that, in the opinion of the Township, decreasing the reporting
requirement for this Industrial User would result in data that are not
representative of conditions occurring during the reporting period. [Amended 9-
27-2016 by Ord. No. 349]
   D.   All periodic compliance reports must be signed and certified in
accordance with Section
111-44(A) of this Chapter.
   E.   All wastewater samples must be representative of the User s discharge.
Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be properly
operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all times. The
failure of a User to keep its monitoring facility in good working order shall
not be grounds for the User to claim that sample results are unrepresentative
of its discharge.
   F.   If a User subject to the reporting requirement in this section monitors
any regulated pollutant at the appropriate sampling location more frequently
than required by the Township, using the procedures prescribed in Section
111-41 of this Chapter, the results of this monitoring shall be included in the
report. [Note: See 40 CFR 403.12(g)(6)]
 111-35 REPORTS OF CHANGED CONDITIONS.
   Each User must notify the Township of any significant changes to the User s
operations or system which might alter the nature, quality, or volume of its
wastewater at least thirty (30) days before the change.
   A.   Township may require the User to submit such information as may be
deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including the submission of
a wastewater discharge permit application under Section
111-19 of this Chapter.
   B.   The Township may issue an individual Wastewater discharge permit under
Section
111-29 of this Chapter or modify an existing wastewater discharge permit under
Section
111-26 of this Chapter in response to changed conditions or anticipated changed
conditions.
 111-36 REPORTS OF POTENTIAL PROBLEMS.
   A.   In the case of any discharge, including, but not limited to, accidental
discharges, discharges of a nonroutine, episodic nature, a noncustomary batch
discharge, a Slug Discharge or Slug Load, that might cause potential problems
for the POTW, the User shall immediately telephone and notify the Township of
the incident. This notification shall include the location of the discharge,
type of waste, concentration and volume, if known, and corrective actions taken
by the User.
   B.   Within five (5) days following such discharge, the User shall, unless
waived by Township, submit a detailed written report describing the cause(s) of
the discharge and the measures to be taken by the User to prevent similar
future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the User of any
expense, loss, damage, or other liability which might be incurred as a result
of damage to the POTW, natural resources, or any other damage to person or
property; nor shall such notification relieve the User of any fines, penalties,
or other liability which may be imposed pursuant to this Chapter.
   C.   A notice shall be permanently posted on the User s bulletin board or
other prominent place advising employees who to call in the event of a
discharge described in paragraph (A), above. Employers shall ensure that all
employees, who could cause such a discharge to occur, are advised of the
emergency notification procedure.
   D.   Significant Industrial Users are required to notify the Township
immediately of any changes at its facility affecting the potential for a Slug
Discharge.
 111-37 REPORTS FROM UNPERMITTED USERS.
   All Users not required to obtain an individual wastewater discharge permit
shall provide appropriate reports to the Township as the Township may require.
 111-38 NOTICE OF VIOLATION/REPEAT SAMPLING AND REPORTING.
   If sampling performed by a User indicates a violation, the User must notify
the Township within twenty-four (24) hours of becoming aware of the violation.
The User shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of
the repeat analysis to the Township within thirty (30) days after becoming
aware of the violation. Resampling by the Industrial User is not required if
the Township performs sampling at the User s facility at least once a month, or
if the Township performs sampling at the User s facility between the time when
the initial sampling was conducted and the time when the User or the Township
receives the results of this sampling, or if the Township has performed the
sampling and analysis in lieu of the Industrial User. All costs incurred by the
Township for such testing shall be reimbursed to the Township by the User.
 111-39 DISCHARGE OF HAZARDOUS WASTE.
   No user shall discharge or allow for the possibility of a discharge of
Hazardous Waste to be introduced in any way to the POTW or any part thereof.
 111-40 ANALYTICAL REQUIREMENTS.
   All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted as
part of a wastewater discharge permit application or report shall be performed
by an Independent PADEP certified wastewater laboratory in accordance with the
techniques prescribed in 40 CFR Part 136 and amendments thereto, unless
otherwise specified in an applicable categorical Pretreatment Standard. If 40
CFR Part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the
pollutant in question, or where the EPA determines that the Part 136 sampling
and analytical techniques are inappropriate for the pollutant in question,
sampling and analyses shall be performed by using validated analytical methods
as set forth in the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of
Water and Sewage as published by the American Public Health Association. All
costs associated with obtaining samples and analysis shall be paid for by the
User of the sewer system.
 111-41 SAMPLE COLLECTION.
   Samples collected to satisfy reporting requirements must be based on data
obtained through appropriate sampling and analysis performed during the period
covered by the report, based on data that is representative of conditions
occurring during the reporting period.
   A.   Except as indicated in Section (B) and (C) below, the User must collect
wastewater samples using 24-hour flow-proportional composite sampling
techniques, unless time-proportional composite sampling or grab sampling is
authorized by the Township. Where time-proportional composite sampling or grab
sampling is authorized by the Township, the samples must be representative of
the discharge. Using protocols (including appropriate preservation) specified
in 40 CFR Part 136 and appropriate EPA guidance, multiple grab samples
collected during a 24-hour period may be composited prior to the analysis as
follows: for cyanide, total phenols, and sulfides the samples may be composited
in the laboratory or in the field; for volatile organics and oil and grease,
the samples may be composited in the laboratory. Composite samples for other
parameters unaffected by the compositing procedures as documented in approved
EPA methodologies may be authorized by the Township, as appropriate. In
addition, grab samples may be required to show compliance with Instantaneous
Limits. [Note: See 40 CFR 403.12(g)(3)]
   B.   Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, total phenols,
sulfides, and volatile organic compounds must be obtained using grab collection
techniques.
   C.   For sampling required in support of baseline monitoring and 90-day
compliance reports required in
111-31 and
111-33 [40 CFR 403.12(b) and (d)], a minimum of four (4) grab samples must be
used for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide and volatile
organic compounds for facilities for which historical sampling data do not
exist; for facilities for which historical sampling data are available, the
Township may authorize a lower minimum. For the reports required by Section
111-34 (40 CFR 403.12(e) and 403.12(h)), the Industrial User is required to
collect the number of grab samples necessary to assess and assure compliance
with applicable Pretreatment Standards and Requirements. [Note: see 40 CFR
403.12(g)(4).]
 111-42 DATE OF RECEIPT OF REPORTS.
   Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the date
postmarked. For reports, which are not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail
facility serviced by the United States Postal Service, the date of receipt of
the report shall govern.
 111-43 RECORDKEEPING.
   Users subject to the reporting requirements of this Chapter shall retain,
and make available for inspection and copying, all records of information
obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this Chapter, any
additional records of information obtained pursuant to monitoring activities
undertaken by the User independent of such requirements, and documentation
associated with Best Management Practices established under Section
111-8(C). Records shall include the date, exact place, method, and time of
sampling, and the name of the person(s) taking the samples; the dates analyses
were performed; who performed the analyses; the analytical techniques or
methods used; and the results of such analyses. These records shall remain
available for a period of at least three (3) years. This period shall be
automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning the User
or the Township, or where the User has been specifically notified of a longer
retention period by the Township.
 111-44 CERTIFICATION STATEMENTS.
   A.   Certification of Permit Applications, User Reports and Initial
Monitoring Waiver. The following certification statement is required to be
signed and submitted by Users submitting permit applications in accordance with
Section
111-21; Users submitting baseline monitoring reports under Section
111-31(B)(5) [Note: See 40 CFR 403.12(1)]; Users submitting reports on
compliance with the categorical Pretreatment Standard deadlines under Section
111-33 [Note: See 40 CFR 403.12(d)]; Users submitting periodic compliance
reports required by Section
111-34(A) (D) [Note: See 40 CFR 403.12(e) and (h)], and Users submitting an
initial request to forego sampling of a pollutant on the basis of Section
111-34(B)(4) [Note: See 40 CFR 403.12(e)(2)(iii)]; the following certification
statement must be signed by an Authorized Representative as defined in Section
111-4:
I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were
prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed
to assure that qualified personnel properly gathered and evaluated the
information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage
the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the
information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and
belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant
penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine
and imprisonment for knowing violations.
   B.   Annual Certification for Non-Significant Categorical Industrial Users.
A facility determined to be a Non-Significant Categorical Industrial User by
the Township as defined in subsection (3) under the definition of Significant
Industrial User in Section
111-4 and
111-21(C) [Note: See 40 CFR 403.3(v)(2)] must annually submit the following
certification statement signed by an Authorized or Duly Authorized
Representative of the User as defined in Section
111-4 in accordance with the signatory requirements as stated therein [Note:
See 40 CFR 403.12(1)]. This certification must accompany an alternative report
required by the Township:
   Based on my inquiry of the person or persons directly responsible for
managing compliance with the categorical Pretreatment Standards under 40 CFR
_____, I certify that, to the best of my knowledge and belief that during the
period from ________, ________ to ________, ________ [months, days, year]:
      (a)   The facility described as _____________________ [facility name] met
the definition of a Non-Significant Categorical Industrial User as described in
111-4 subsection (3) under Significant Industrial User; [Note: See 40 CFR 403.3
(v)(2)]
      (b)   The facility complied with all applicable Pretreatment Standards
and requirements during this reporting period; and
      (c)   The facility never discharged more than 100 gallons of total
categorical wastewater on any given day during this reporting period.
This compliance certification is based on the following information.
_________________________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________________________
   C.   Certification of Pollutants Not Present. Users that have an approved
monitoring waiver based on Section
111-34(B) must certify on each report with the following statement that there
has been no increase in the pollutant in its wastestream due to activities of
the User: [Note: See 40 CFR 403.12(e)(2)(v)]
   Based on my inquiry of the person or persons directly responsible for
managing compliance with the Pretreatment Standard for 40 CFR _______ [specify
applicable National Pretreatment Standard part(s)], I certify that, to the best
of my knowledge and belief, there has been no increase in the level of
_________ [list pollutant(s)] in the wastewaters due to the activities at the
facility since filing of the last periodic report under Section
111-34(A).
ARTICLE VII COMPLIANCE MONITORING
 111-45 RIGHT OF ENTRY: INSPECTION AND SAMPLING.
   The Township shall have the right to enter the premises of any User to
determine whether the User is complying with all requirements of this Chapter
and any individual wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder. Users
shall allow the Township ready access to all parts of the premises for the
purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and copying, and the
performance of any additional duties.
   A.   Where a User has security measures in force which require proper
identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the User shall
make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon presentation
of suitable identification, the Township shall be permitted to enter without
delay for the purposes of performing specific responsibilities.
   B.   The Township shall have the right to set up on the User s property, or
require installation of, such devices as are necessary to conduct Sampling and/
or metering of the User s operations.
   C.   The Township may require the User to install monitoring equipment as
necessary. The facility s sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained
at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the User at its own
expense. All devices used to measure wastewater flow and quality shall be
calibrated at least once a year to ensure their accuracy.
   D.   Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the
facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the User
at the written or verbal request of the Township and shall not be replaced. The
costs of clearing such access shall be born by the User.
   E.   Unreasonable delays in allowing the Township access to the User s
premises shall be a violation of this Chapter.
ARTICLE VIII CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
 111-46 CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION.
   Information and data on a User obtained from reports, surveys, wastewater
discharge permit applications, individual wastewater discharge permits, and
monitoring programs, and from the Township s inspection and sampling
activities, shall be available to the public without restriction, unless the
User specifically requests, and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of
the Township, that the release of such information would divulge information,
processes, or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets
under applicable State law. Any such request must be asserted at the time of
submission of the information or data. Each page containing confidential
information shall be stamped confidential. When requested and demonstrated by
the User furnishing a report that such information should be held confidential,
the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes
shall not be made available for inspection by the public, but shall be made
available immediately upon request to governmental agencies for uses related to
the NPDES program or pretreatment program, and in enforcement proceedings
involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and
characteristics and other effluent data, as defined at 40 CFR 2.302 shall not
be recognized as confidential information and shall be available to the public
without restriction.
ARTICLE IX PUBLICATION OF USERS IN SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE
 111-47 PUBLICATION OF USERS IN SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE.
   The Township shall publish annually, in a newspaper of general circulation
that provides meaningful public notice within the jurisdictions served by the
POTW, a list of the Users which, at any time during the previous twelve (12)
months, were in Significant Noncompliance with applicable Pretreatment
Standards and Requirements. The term Significant Noncompliance shall be
applicable to all Significant Industrial Users (or any other Industrial User
that violates paragraphs (C), (D) or (H) of this Section) and shall mean:
   A.   Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as
those in which sixty-six percent (66%) or more of all the measurements taken
for the same pollutant parameter taken during a six- (6-) month period exceed
(by any magnitude) a numeric Pretreatment Standard or Requirement, including
Instantaneous Limits as defined in Article I; [Note: see 40 CFR 403.3(1)]
   B.   Technical Review Criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in
which thirty-three percent (33%) or more of wastewater measurements taken for
each pollutant parameter during a six (6) month period equals or exceeds the
product of the numeric Pretreatment Standard or Requirement including
Instantaneous Limits, as defined by Article I multiplied by the applicable
criteria (1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease, and 1.2 for all other
pollutants except pH); [Note: see 40 CFR 403.3(1)]
   C.   Any other violation of a Pretreatment Standard or Requirement as
defined by Article II (Daily Maximum, long-term average, Instantaneous Limit,
or narrative standard) that the Township determines has caused, alone or in
combination with other discharges, Interference or Pass Through, including
endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public; [Note: see 40
CFR 403.3(1)]
   D.   Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to
the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the Township s exercise of
its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge;
   E.   Failure to meet, within ninety (90) days of the scheduled date, a
compliance schedule milestone contained in an individual wastewater discharge
permit or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction,
or attaining final compliance;
   F.   Failure to provide within forty-five (45) days after the due date, any
required reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance
with Categorical Pretreatment Standard deadlines, periodic self-monitoring
reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules;
   G.   Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or
   H.   Any other violation(s), which may include a violation of Best
Management Practices, which the Township determines will adversely affect the
operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program.
ARTICLE X ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES
 111-48 NOTIFICATION OF VIOLATION.
   When the Township finds that a User has violated, or continues to violate,
any provision of this Chapter, an individual wastewater discharge permit, or
order issued hereunder, or any other Pretreatment Standard or Requirement, the
Township may serve upon that User a written Notice of Violation. Within thirty
(30) days of the receipt of such notice, an explanation of the violation and a
plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include
specific required actions, shall be submitted by the User to the Township.
Submission of such a plan in no way relieves the User of liability for any
violations occurring before or after receipt of the Notice of Violation.
Nothing in this Article shall limit the authority of the Township to take any
action, including emergency actions or any other enforcement action, without
first issuing a Notice of Violation.
 111-49 CONSENT ORDERS.
   The Township may enter into Consent Orders, assurances of compliance, or
other similar documents establishing an agreement with any User responsible for
noncompliance. Such documents shall include specific action to be taken by the
User to correct the noncompliance within a time period specified by the
document. Such documents shall have the same force and effect as the
administrative orders issued pursuant to Sections
111-51 and
111-52 of this Chapter and shall be judicially enforceable.
 111-50 SHOW CAUSE HEARING.
   The Township may order a User which has violated, or continues to violate,
any provision of this Chapter, an individual wastewater discharge permit, or
order issued hereunder, or any other Pretreatment Standard or Requirement, to
appear before the Township and show cause why the proposed enforcement action
should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the User specifying the time and
place for the meeting, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such
action, and a request that the User show cause why the proposed enforcement
action should not be taken. The notice of the meeting shall be served
personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at
least ten (10) days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served on any
Authorized Representative of the User as defined in Section
111-4 and required by Section
111-21(A). A show cause hearing shall not be a bar against, or prerequisite
for, taking any other action against the User.
 111-51 COMPLIANCE ORDERS.
   When the Township finds that a User has violated, or continues to violate,
any provision of this Chapter, an individual wastewater discharge permit, or
order issued hereunder, or any other Pretreatment Standard or Requirement, the
Township may issue an order to the User responsible for the discharge directing
that the User come into compliance within a specified time. If the User does
not come into compliance within the time provided, sewer service may be
discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices, or other related
appurtenances are installed and properly operated. Compliance orders also may
contain other requirements to address the noncompliance, including additional
self-monitoring and management practices designed to minimize the amount of
pollutants discharged to the sewer. A compliance order may not extend the
deadline for compliance established for a Pretreatment Standard or Requirement,
nor does a compliance order relieve the User of liability for any violation,
including any continuing violation. Issuance of a compliance order shall not be
a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the User.
 111-52 CEASE AND DESIST ORDERS.
   When the Township finds that a User has violated, or continues to violate,
any provision of this Chapter, an individual wastewater discharge permit, or
order issued hereunder, or any other Pretreatment Standard or Requirement, or
that the User s past violations are likely to recur, the Township may issue an
order to the User directing it to cease and desist all such violations and
directing the User to:
   A.   Immediately comply with all requirements; and
   B.   Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to
properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting
operations and/or terminating the discharge. Issuance of a cease and desist
order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other
action against the User.
 111-53 EMERGENCY SUSPENSIONS.
   The Township may immediately suspend a User s discharge, after informal
notice to the User, whenever such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or
threatened discharge, which reasonably appears to present, or cause an imminent
or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons. The Township
may also immediately suspend a User s discharge, after notice and opportunity
to respond, that threatens to interfere with the operation of the POTW, or
which presents, or may present, an endangerment to the environment.
   A.   Any User notified of a suspension of its discharge shall immediately
stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a User s failure to
immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the Township may take
such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer
connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW, its receiving stream, or
endangerment to any individuals. The Township may allow the User to recommence
its discharge when the User has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the
Township that the period of endangerment has passed, unless the termination
proceedings in Section
111-54 of this Chapter are initiated against the User.
   B.   A User that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge
presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement,
describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to
prevent any future occurrence, to the Township prior to the date of any show
cause or termination hearing under Sections
111-50 or
111-54 of this Chapter.
Nothing in this Section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing prior to
any Emergency Suspension under this Article.
 111-54 TERMINATION OF DISCHARGE.
   In addition to the provisions in Section
111-28 of this Chapter, any User who violates the following conditions is
subject to discharge termination:
   A.   Violation of individual wastewater discharge permit conditions;
   B.   Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and
characteristics of its discharge;
   C.   Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater
volume, constituents, and characteristics prior to discharge;
   D.   Refusal of reasonable access to the User s premises for the purpose of
inspection, monitoring, or sampling; or
   E.   Violation of the Pretreatment Standards in Article II of this Chapter.
   Such User will be notified of the proposed termination of its discharge and
be offered an opportunity to show cause under Section
111-50 of this Chapter why the proposed action should not be taken. Exercise of
this option by the Township shall not be a bar to, or a prerequisite for,
taking any other action against the User.
ARTICLE XI JUDICIAL ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES
 111-55 INJUNCTIVE RELIEF.
   When the Township finds that a User has violated, or continues to violate,
any provision of this Chapter, an individual wastewater discharge permit, or
order issued hereunder, or any other Pretreatment Standard or Requirement, the
Township may petition the Court of Common Pleas through the Township s Attorney
for the issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, which
restrains or compels the specific performance of the individual wastewater
discharge permit, order, or other requirement imposed by this Chapter on
activities of the User. The Township may also seek such other action as is
appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief, including a requirement for the
User to conduct environmental remediation. A petition for injunctive relief
shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action
against a User.
 111-56 CIVIL PENALTIES.
   A.   A User who has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this
Chapter, an individual wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder,
or any other Pretreatment Standard or Requirement shall be liable to the
Township for a maximum civil penalty of $25,000.00 per violation, per day. In
the case of a monthly or other long-term average discharge limit, penalties
shall accrue for each day during the period of the violation.
   B.   The Township may recover reasonable attorneys fees, court costs, and
other expenses associated with enforcement activities, including sampling and
monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual damages incurred by the
Township.
   C.   In determining the amount of civil liability, the Court shall take into
account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent
of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration of the violation,
any economic benefit gained through the User s violation, corrective actions by
the User, the compliance history of the User, and any other factor as justice
requires.
   D.   Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a bar against, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against a User.
 111-57 CRIMINAL PROSECUTION.
   A.   A User who willfully or negligently violates any provision of this
Chapter, an individual wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder,
or any other Pretreatment Standard or Requirement shall, upon conviction, be
guilty of a summary offense, punishable by a fine of not more than One Thousand
Dollars ($1,000.00) per violation, per day, or imprisonment for not more than
ninety (90) days, or both.
   B.   A User who willfully or negligently introduces any substance into the
POTW which causes personal injury or property damage shall, upon conviction, be
guilty of a summary offence and be subject to a fine of not more than One
Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00) per day per violation, or be subject to
imprisonment for not more than ninety (90) days, or both. This penalty shall be
in addition to any other cause of action for personal injury or property damage
available under State law.
   C.   A User who knowingly makes any false statements, representations, or
certifications in any application, record, report, plan, or other documentation
filed, or required to be maintained, pursuant to this Chapter, individual
wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or who falsifies,
tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method
required under this Chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of
not more than One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00) per violation, per day, or
imprisonment for not more than ninety (90) days, or both.
 111-58 REMEDIES NONEXCLUSIVE.
   The remedies provided for in this Chapter are not exclusive. The Township
may take any, all, or any combination of these actions against a noncompliant
User. Enforcement of pretreatment violations will generally be in accordance
with the Township s enforcement response plan. However, the Township may take
other action against any User when the circumstances warrant. Further, the
Township is empowered to take more than one enforcement action against any
noncompliant User.
ARTICLE XII SUPPLEMENTAL ENFORCEMENT ACTION
 111-59 PAYMENT OF OUTSTANDING FEES AND PENALTIES.
   The Township may decline to issue or reissue an individual wastewater
discharge permit to any User who has failed to pay any outstanding fees, fines
or penalties incurred as a result of any provision of this Chapter, a previous
individual wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder. In instances
where enforcement action requires sewer service to be terminated, the user
shall remain responsible for their quarterly sewer rent. After permission to
reconnect has been obtained from the Township the User shall be required to pay
all fees in place at that time associated with reconnecting to the sewer
system.
 111-60 WATER SUPPLY SEVERANCE.
   Whenever a User has violated or continues to violate any provision of this
Chapter, an individual wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder,
or any other Pretreatment Standard or Requirement, water service to the User
may be severed. Service will recommence, at the User s expense, only after the
User has satisfactorily demonstrated its ability to comply.
ARTICLE XIII APPEAL PROCEDURES AND ENFORCEMENT RESPONSE PLAN
 111-61 RIGHT TO APPEAL.
   A.   Any user that has been issued a Notice of Violation, Compliance Order,
Cease and Desist Order, Emergency Suspension Notice, Termination of Discharge
Notice, Refusal to Issue Permit Notice under
111-59 or severance of water service under
111-60 has the right to appeal either the amount of the penalty or the fact of
the violation. Said appeal must be filed within thirty (30) days of receipt of
the Notice or Violation. The appeal shall be filed pursuant to Pennsylvania
Administrative Law and Procedure as set forth in 2 Pa. C.S. 551 et. seq.
   B.   Failure of the User to appeal the penalty contesting either the fact of
the violation or the amount of the penalty within the thirty (30) days of
receipt of the Notice or Order will result in the waiver of the user s legal
rights to contest the violation or the amount of the Penalty.
   The Township hereby adopts the attached Enforcement Response Plan. This
Enforcement Response Plan sets forth responses for various violations or acts
of noncompliance by users, provides for the guidance of the Township s staff,
and does not create legal rights or obligations, or limit the enforcement
discretion of the Township
ARTICLE XIV AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSES TO DISCHARGE VIOLATIONS
 111-62 UPSET.
   A.   For the purposes of this Chapter, upset means an exceptional incident
in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with Categorical
Pretreatment Standards because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the
User. An upset does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by
operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate
treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper
operation.
   B.   An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought
for noncompliance with categorical Pretreatment Standards if the requirements
of paragraph (C), below, are met.
   C.   A User who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall
demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs, or other
relevant evidence that:
      (1)   An upset occurred and the User can identify the cause(s) of the
upset;
      (2)   The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and
workman-like manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance
procedures; and
      (3)   The User has submitted the following information to the Township
within twenty-four (24) hours of becoming aware of the upset. When the
information is provided orally, a written submission must be provided within
five (5) days.
         (a)   A description of the indirect discharge and cause of
noncompliance;
         (b)   The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times or,
if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to
continue; and
         (c)   Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate, and
prevent recurrence of the noncompliance.
   D.   In any enforcement proceeding, the User seeking to establish the
occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof.
   E.   Users shall have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any
claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance with
categorical Pretreatment Standards.
   F.   Users shall control production of all discharges to the extent
necessary to maintain compliance with categorical Pretreatment Standards upon
reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is
restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement
applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power
of the treatment facility is reduced, lost, or fails.
 111-63 PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS.
   A User shall have an affirmative defense to an enforcement action brought
against it for noncompliance with the general prohibitions in Section
111-5(A) of this Chapter or the specific prohibitions in Sections
111-5(B) of this Chapter if it can prove that it did not know, or have reason
to know, that its discharge, alone or in conjunction with discharges from other
sources, would cause Pass Through or Interference and that either:
   A.   A Local Limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the User was in
compliance with each limit directly prior to, and during, the Pass Through or
Interference; or
   B.   No Local Limit exists, but the discharge did not change substantially
in nature or constituents from the User s prior discharge when the Township was
regularly in compliance with its NPDES permit, and in the case of Interference,
was in compliance with applicable sludge use or disposal requirements.
 111-64 BYPASS.
   A.   For the purposes of this Section,
      (1)   Bypass means the intentional diversion of wastestreams from any
portion of a User s treatment facility.
      (2)   Severe property damage means substantial physical damage to
property, damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to become
inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can
reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property
damage does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production.
   B.   A User may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause Pretreatment
Standards or Requirements to be violated, but only if it also is for essential
maintenance to assure efficient operation. These bypasses are not subject to
the provision of paragraphs (C) and (D) of this Section.
   C.   Bypass Notifications
      (1)   If a User knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall
submit prior notice to the Township, at least ten (10) days before the date of
the bypass, if possible.
      (2)   A User shall submit oral notice to the Township of an unanticipated
bypass that exceeds applicable Pretreatment Standards within twenty-four (24)
hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission shall
also be provided within five (5) days of the time the User becomes aware of the
bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the bypass and
its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times, and, if
the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to
continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent
reoccurrence of the bypass. The Township may waive the written report on a
case-by-case basis if the oral report has been received within twenty-four (24)
hours.
   D.   Bypass
      (1)   Bypass is prohibited, and the Township may take an enforcement
action against a User for a bypass, unless
         (a)   Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury,
or severe property damage;
         (b)   There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the
use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or
maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not
satisfied if adequate back-up equipment should have been installed in the
exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred
during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventive maintenance; and
         (c)   The User submitted notices as required under paragraph (C) of
this section.
      (2)   The Township may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering
its adverse effects, if the Township determines that it will meet the three
conditions listed in paragraph (D)(1) of this Section.
ARTICLE XV WASTEWATER TREATMENT RATES
 111-65 WASTEWATER TREATMENT RATES.
   All sewer rates are set as specified in
Chapter 110 of the Code of the Township of Antrim Pennsylvania. Equivalent
Dwelling Units (EDUs) shall remain to be determined as specified in Chapter
110-37(B).
ARTICLE XVI MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
 111-66 PRETREATMENT CHARGES AND FEES.
   The Board of Supervisors intends to recover the cost of administering this
Chapter and any associated requirements from the Users of the treatment system
to whom the requirements of this Chapter apply. The Board of Supervisors may
adopt by resolution charges and fees which may include but are not limited to:
   A.   Fees for wastewater discharge permit applications including the cost of
processing such applications;
   B.   Fees for monitoring, inspection, and surveillance procedures including
the cost of collection and analyzing a User s discharge, and reviewing
monitoring reports and certification statements submitted by Users;
   C.   Fees for reviewing and responding to accidental discharge procedures
and construction;
   D.   Fees for filing appeals;
   E.   Fees to recover administrative and legal costs [not included in Section
111-66(B)] associated with the enforcement activity taken by the Township to
address IU noncompliance; and
   F.   Other fees as the Board of Supervisors may deem necessary to carry out
the requirements contained herein. These fees relate solely to the matters
covered by this Chapter and are separate from all other fees chargeable by the
Board of Supervisors.
 111-67 SURCHARGES.
   All Users discharging to the POTW are subject to a surcharge for excessive
discharge of certain pollutants or discharge in excess of their daily maximum
discharge. This charge determines the cost incurred by the POTW to treat the
pollutant or gallons being discharged beyond the User s permitted limit. This
is an additional charge and does not relieve the User of other fees or charges
they may owe. Exercise of this option by the Township shall not be a bar to, or
a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the User.
   A.   Surcharges shall be assessed for all local limits, O&G, and TC.
   B.   The total additional charge (surcharge) for the total volume of
wastewater exceeding the set limits shall be determined in accordance with the
following formula:
Total Additional Charge (Surcharge)
= Q   + [Treatment Cost Q (L in ppm - Limit) 8.34]
+ [Treatment Cost Q (O&G in ppm - Limit) 8.34]
+ [Treatment Cost Q (TC - Limit) 8.34]
For the purpose of the above surcharge formula Q = Billing Unit Charge or
Metered Quantity Discharge. For the purpose of the above surcharge L = Local
Limit pollutant present in the TU waste stream. The above formula shall be
applied to every established Local Limit, O&G, and TC using the specified
treatment cost that is set forth by resolution of the Board of Supervisors.
   This Total Additional Charge (Surcharge) is in addition to the normal
quarterly charge.
   C.   The total additional charge (surcharge) for the daily maximum discharge
(peak flow) over the set limit shall be determined in accordance with the
following formula:
Daily Maximum Discharge Surcharge calculation:
Surcharge cost =
(Metered Flow for Day Daily maximum permitted discharge flow) x (8.34) x
[concentration L in PPM measured (monthly/quarterly/annually) Local Limits
concentration PPM] x Treatment Cost per pound per day for Local Limit.
   +
(Metered Flow for Day Daily maximum permitted discharge flow) x (8.34) x
[concentration O&G PPM measured (monthly/quarterly/annually) Local Limits
concentration O&G PPM] x Treatment Cost per pound per day for O&G
   +
(Metered Flow for Day Daily maximum permitted discharge flow) x (8.34) x
[concentration TC PPM measured (monthly/quarterly/annually) Local Limits
concentration TC PPM] x Treatment Cost per pound per day for TC
The above formula shall be applied to every established Local Limit using the
specified treatment cost that is set forth by resolution of the Board of
Supervisors.
This Total Additional Charge (Surcharge) is in addition to the normal quarterly
charge.
 111-68 MISCELLANEOUS REGULATIONS.
   A.   All Pretreatment Systems, proposed or in operation, shall be reviewed
by the Township s engineer and shall meet the Antrim Township Municipal
Authority Sanitary Sewer Construction Specification.
   B .   All costs incurred by such reviews of pretreatment systems shall be
reimbursed to the Township by the User.
   C.   Any required pretreatment of wastewater, to a level acceptable to the
Township, shall be provided, operated, and maintained at the IU s expense.
CHAPTER 112 CHAPTER 113: RESERVED
CHAPTER 114: SMOKE DETECTORS
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Antrim 5-9-
1991 by Ord. No. 210. Amendments noted where applicable.]
Section
   
114-1   Definitions
   
114-2   Installation in residential occupancy unit required
   
114-3   Placement
   
114-4   Alternative
   
114-5   Installation and maintenance
   
114-6   Violations and penalties
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarms - See
Ch. 45.
Open burning - See
Ch. 59.
Construction codes - See
Ch. 65.
 114-1 DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
RESIDENTIAL OCCUPANCY
The occupancy or use of a building or structure or any portion thereof by
persons for whom sleeping accommodations are provided, including, but not
limited to, one- and two-family dwellings, lodging or rooming houses,
dormitories, apartment buildings, townhouses, condominiums, hotels, motels and
single-family attached and detached dwellings.
 114-2 INSTALLATION IN RESIDENTIAL OCCUPANCY UNIT REQUIRED.
   It shall be the responsibility of the owner of each new and existing
occupied residential occupancy unit to install Underwriters Laboratories (UL)
approved smoke detectors in each such residential occupancy unit as hereinafter
provided. Said smoke detectors shall be capable of sensing visible or invisible
particles of combustion and providing a suitable audible alarm thereof;
further, they shall be installed by June 6, 1991.
 114-3 PLACEMENT.
   A.   At least one smoke detector shall be installed to protect each sleeping
area. A sleeping area is defined as the area or areas of the family living unit
in which the bedrooms (or sleeping rooms) are located.
   B.   At least one smoke detector shall be installed at the top of each
stairway leading up to an occupied area.
 114-4 ALTERNATIVE.
   As an alternative to self-contained smoke detectors, a UL-approved fire
detection system may be installed.
 114-5 INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE.
   A.   In new residential occupancy units it is preferred that smoke detectors
be wired (hard wired) to the building s power supply. However, a monitored
battery supply unit is acceptable for installations in new or existing
residential occupancy units.
   B.   It shall be the responsibility of the tenants or residents to maintain
smoke detectors. Such maintenance shall include keeping smoke detector units
serviceable by replacing batteries when necessary or by keeping them connected
to an electrical source so that they remain capable of transmitting an audible
signal in the presence of smoke.
 114-6 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
   A.   Any person or persons, firm or corporation violating the provisions of
this chapter shall be ordered to comply with said chapter within five days.
   B.   This chapter shall be enforced by action brought before a District
Justice in the same manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses
under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure. Any person who violates or
permits the violation of this chapter shall, upon conviction in a summary
proceeding, be punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000 or by imprisonment
for a term not exceeding 90 days. Each day or portion thereof that such
violation continues, or is permitted to continue, shall constitute a separate
offense. Each section of this chapter that is violated shall also constitute a
separate offense. [Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 246]
   C.   Any person who tampers with a smoke detector or other fire protection
system shall, upon conviction in a summary proceeding, be punishable by a fine
of not more than $1,000 or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days.
Each day or portion thereof that such violation continues, or is permitted to
continue, shall constitute a separate offense. [Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No.
246]
CHAPTER 115 CHAPTER 117: RESERVED
CHAPTER 118: SOLID WASTE
   Article
      
I.   SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING
      
II.   LANDFILLS
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Antrim as
indicated in article histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
Section
Article I: Solid Waste and Recycling
   
118-1   Scope
   
118-2   Purpose
   
118-3   Terminology
   
118-4   Prohibited Activities
   
118-5   Presumption of ownership
   
118-6   Agricultural activities
   
118-7   Preparation and storage of municipal waste
   
118-8   Collection required; hours of collection
   
118-9   Transportation of municipal waste
   
118-10   Public containers
   
118-11   Disposal of leaf waste
   
118-12   Disposal of wild animal carcass
   
118-13   Separation of recyclables
   
118-14   Removal of recyclables from residential properties
   
118-15   Removal of recyclables from multifamily housing properties
   
118-16   Removal of recyclables from commercial, municipal and institutional
properties and community activities
   
118-17   Recycling reports for multifamily housing properties
   
118-18   Recycling reports for commercial, municipal and institutional
establishments and community activities
   
118-19   Collection by unauthorized person
   
118-20   General regulations for Collectors
   
118-21   Licensed Haulers to remove recyclable materials
   
118-22   Acceptance of unlawfully disposed of recyclables prohibited
   
118-23   Removal of bulky items by Licensed Haulers
   
118-24   Missed pickup
   
118-25   Complaints regarding collection
   
118-26   Community-oriented charitable activities
   
118-27   Violation and penalties
Article II: Landfills
   
118-28   Title
   
118-29   Definitions and word usage
   
118-30   Conditions
   
118-31   General regulation
   
118-32   Location of landfills within the Township
   
118-33   Buffer zone; fencing; planting
   
118-34   Hours of operation
   
118-35   Dirt and debris from trucks
   
118-36   Landfill application; approval
   
118-37   Escape of municipal and residual waste
   
118-38   Liability insurance required
   
118-39   Responsibility for cleanup and policing
   
118-40   Inspection; right of entry
   
118-41   Violations and penalties
   
118-42   Declaration of nuisance
   
118-43   Conflicts with other provisions
GENERAL REFERENCES
Open burning - See
Ch. 59.
Zoning - See
Ch. 150.
ARTICLE I SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING
[Adopted 12-12-2017 by Ord. No. 351]
 118-1 SCOPE.
   This Article shall govern and control all aspects of the collection,
storage, transportation, processing and disposal of municipal waste and
recycling in Antrim Township. It contains regulations applicable to haulers of
municipal waste, Collectors of recyclables, individuals, commercial, municipal
and institutional establishments and community activities.
 118-2 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this Article is to protect the health, safety and welfare of
the residents of the Township of Antrim by regulating the collection, storage,
transportation, removal, recycling, dumping, depositing and disposal of solid
waste materials by:
   A.   Instituting a comprehensive solid waste management program.
   B.   Establishing a mandatory solid waste recycling program in accordance
with the Pennsylvania Municipal Waste Planning, Recycling and Waste Reduction
Act.
 118-3 TERMINOLOGY.
   A.   In this Article, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the
singular shall include the plural, the plural shall include the singular and
the masculine shall include the feminine and neuter.
   B.   The definitions contained in the Solid Waste Management Act (35 P.S.
6018.101 et seq.), the Municipal Waste Planning, Recycling and Waste Reduction
Act (53 P.S. 4000.101 et seq.), and regulations promulgated pursuant to those
acts, are applicable to this Chapter.
   C.   As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
   AGENT
One who performs an act for his or her immediate family or for another person
gratuitously (without any form of monetary or material compensation).
   AGRICULTURAL WASTE
Poultry and livestock manure, or residual materials in liquid or solid form
generated in the production and marketing of poultry, livestock, fur bearing
animals, and their products, provided that such agricultural waste is not
hazardous. The term includes the residual materials generated in producing,
harvesting, and marketing of all agronomic, horticultural, aquacultural and
silvicultural crops or commodities grown on what are usually recognized and
accepted as farms, forests, or other agricultural lands. (The term also
includes materials in liquid or solid form generated in the production and
marketing of fish or fish hatcheries.)
   ALUMINUM CANS
Empty, all-aluminum beverage and food containers.
   APPLICANT
A person desirous of being licensed as a hauler or of being issued a recyclable
collection permit, as the case may be.
   AUTHORIZED COLLECTOR
A Licensed Hauler (as defined herein); a recyclable collection permittee (as
defined herein); or a person who, being so authorized by the terms of this
Article, removes municipal waste or recyclables from his or her own premises,
as owner of the building or commercial, municipal or institutional
establishment or community activity conducted therein, or as an agent (as
defined herein) of another person.
   BIMETALLIC CANS
Empty food or beverage containers consisting of both steel and aluminum.
   BULKY ITEMS
Large items of solid waste including, but not limited to, appliances,
furniture, large auto parts, trees, branches or stumps which may require
special handling due to their size shape or weight.
   CARCASS
A dead animal body, in parts or whole, with or without the hide.
   COLLECTOR
Any individual, partnership, firm, corporation or other business who collects,
for removal from premises, municipal waste or recyclables. Collectors shall
maintain a valid license or authorization by the State for such collection
except when the Collector is the owner or tenant of the property.
   COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT
Any establishment engaged in non-manufacturing or non-processing business,
including, but not limited to, stores, markets, offices, restaurants, shopping
centers, and theaters.
   COMMUNITY ACTIVITY
An activity or event sponsored or organized by a public or private nonprofit
organization for recreational, educational, cultural or civic purposes, which
may be attended by members of the public, whether or not an entrance or
participation fee is charged.
   COMPOSTING
The process by which organic solid waste is biologically decomposed under
controlled anaerobic or aerobic conditions to yield a humus-like product.
   COMPOSTING FACILITY
A facility using land for processing of municipal waste by composting.
   CORRUGATED PAPER
Structural paper material with an inner core shaped in rigid parallel furrows
and ridges, of the type normally used to make packaging cartons and boxes.
   CURBSIDE COLLECTION
A method of collection of residentially generated recyclables and municipal
waste by which the owners or occupants of certain residential properties may
dispose of their recyclables by placing them at curbside (along the street) or
within the private right-of-way fronting along their property or which provides
access to the property at times designated by the Antrim Township Supervisors
or the Collector for collection and removal by an authorized Collector for
delivery to a recycling center.
   DISPOSAL
The incineration, deposition, injection, dumping, spilling, leaking or placing
of municipal waste into or on the land or water in a manner such that the
municipal waste or a constituent thereof enters the environment, is emitted
into the air or is discharged to the waters of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
   DISPOSAL AREA
Any site, location, area, building, structure, transfer station or premises to
be used for municipal waste disposal.
   DWELLING UNIT
One or more rooms used for living and sleeping purposes and having a kitchen
with fixed cooking facilities arranged for occupancy by one family or a single
person.
   FOOD PROCESSING WASTE
Residual materials in liquid or solid form generated in the slaughtering of
poultry and livestock or in the processing and converting of fish, seafood,
milk, meat, and eggs to food products; it also means residual materials
generated in the processing, converting, or manufacturing of fruits,
vegetables, crops and other commodities into marketable food items.
   FOOD PROCESSING WASTES USED FOR AGRICULTURAL PURPOSES
The use of food processing wastes in normal farming operations as defined in
this section.
   GARBAGE
All putrescible animal and vegetable matter resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
   GLASS CONTAINERS
All empty food and beverage jars or bottles made from silica or sand, soda ash
and limestone, the product being transparent or translucent (either clear,
green or brown); excluding, however, blue glass, flat glass, plate glass, glass
commonly known as window glass, automotive glass and ceramic and porcelain
products.
   HIGH-GRADE OFFICE PAPER
Any white paper other than newsprint, magazines or other chemically coated
paper or corrugated paper, of the type commonly used for letter writing
stationery, note paper, plain paper, photocopying machines, computer printers,
and other general-purpose paper, whether or not any printed or written matter
is contained thereon.
   INDUSTRIAL ESTABLISHMENT
Any establishment engaged in manufacturing, or processing, including, but not
limited to factories, foundries, mills, processing plants, refineries, mines
and slaughterhouses.
   INSTITUTIONAL ESTABLISHMENT
Of or pertaining to any establishment engaged in service to persons, including
but not limited to hospitals, nursing homes, orphanages, schools, universities,
churches and social or fraternal societies and organizations.
   LANDLORD
The owner of property or such owner s authorized agent or representative.
   LEAF WASTE
Leaves, garden residues, shrubbery and tree trimmings (less than four feet in
length and two inches in diameter), and similar material, but not including
grass clippings.
   LEAF COMPOSTING FACILITY
A facility for composting vegetative material, including leaves, garden residue
and chipped shrubbery and tree trimmings. The term does not include a facility
that is used entirely or partly for composting grass clippings.
   LICENSED HAULER
An individual, partnership, firm, corporation or other business licensed or
authorized by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to collect, haul, transport and
dispose of municipal waste and/or recyclables.
   MAGAZINES
Printed matter, also known as periodicals, containing miscellaneous written
pieces published at fixed or varying intervals, printed on glossy or chemically
coated paper. Expressly excluded are newspapers and all other paper products of
any nature whatsoever.
   MULTIFAMILY HOUSING PROPERTY
A type of residential property either under single ownership by a person or
organized as a condominium or cooperative form of housing, which contains four
or more dwelling units.
   MUNICIPAL
Of or pertaining to any office or other property under the control of any
branch or arm of the federal government of the United States of America, the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, or any political subdivision of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania, including but not limited to Antrim Township, any counties,
cities, boroughs, townships and municipal authorities.
   MUNICIPAL WASTE
An all-encompassing, most general term meaning any garbage, refuse, commercial
and industrial lunchroom or office waste and other material, including solid,
liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous material, resulting from operation of
residential, municipal, commercial or institutional establishments and from
community activities, except farm produced manure; other agricultural waste;
food processing waste used on land where such materials will improve the
condition of the soil, the growth of crops or the restoration of the land for
the same purposes; any sludge not meeting the definition of residual or
hazardous waste as defined in Commonwealth of Pennsylvania Solid Waste
Management Act; but excluding recyclables.
   NEWSPRINT
Paper of the type commonly referred to as newspaper and distributed at fixed or
stated intervals, usually daily or weekly, having printed thereon news and
opinions and containing advertisements and other matters of public interest.
The term newsprint expressly excludes glossy advertising inserts, magazines,
glossy or other chemical coated paper, office paper and any other paper
products of any nature.
   PERSON
Any individual, partnership, cooperative enterprise, municipality, municipal
authority, federal government or agency, state institution or agency or any
other legal entity whatsoever which is recognized by law as the subject of
rights and duties. In any provisions of this Article prescribing a fine or
penalty, the term person shall include the officers and directors of any
corporation or other legal entity having officers and directors.
   PLASTIC BEVERAGE CARRIER
Plastic rings or similar plastic connectors used as holding devices in the
packaging of beverages, including but not limited to all carbonated beverages,
liquors, wines, fruit juices, mineral waters, soda and beer.
   PLASTIC CONTAINERS
Empty plastic food and beverage containers, the specific types of which may,
from time to time, be designated by resolution of the Antrim Township
Supervisors.
   POLLUTION
Contamination of any air, water, land, or other natural resources that will
create or is likely to create a public nuisance or to render the air, water
land or other natural resources harmful, detrimental or injurious to public
health, safety or welfare, or to domestic, municipal, commercial, industrial,
agricultural, recreational or other legitimate beneficial use or to livestock,
wild animals, birds, fish or other life.
   PRIVATE HOUSEHOLD WASTE
Solid waste generated in a residence.
   PROCESSING
Any technology used for the purpose of reducing the volume or bulk of municipal
waste, or any technology used to convert part or all of such waste materials
for off-site reuse. Processing facilities include, but are not limited to,
transfer stations, composting facilities and resource recovery facilities.
   PUBLIC CONTAINER
Any device owned by any local, state or federal government in which solid waste
is held for storage or transportation.
   RECYCLABLES
Materials designated as recyclables in this Article, or required by the terms
of this Article (or any amendment hereto) to be kept separate from municipal
waste and recycled.
   RECYCLING
The collection, separate maintenance, recovery, and sale or reuse of
recyclables which would otherwise be disposed of or processed as municipal
waste, or the mechanized separation and treatment of municipal waste (other
than through combustion) and creation and recovery of reusable materials other
than a fuel for the production of energy.
   RECYCLING CENTER
A facility designed to or which does act as a collection center for the
processing, storage, and shipment of recyclables. The term specifically
excludes charitable organizations that accept recyclables for collection but do
not process such recyclables.
   REFUSE
Garbage, rubbish and trade waste.
   RESIDENTIAL
Of or pertaining to any dwelling unit used as place of human habitation and
which is not commercial, municipal, institutional, or a community activity.
Home occupations incidental to the residential use within a building are
considered residential.
   RESOURCE RECOVERY FACILITY
A processing facility that provides for the extraction and utilization of
materials or energy from municipal waste that is generated off site, including
but not limited to a facility that mechanically extracts materials from
municipal waste, a combustion facility that converts the organic fraction of
municipal waste to usable energy, and any chemical and biological process that
converts municipal waste into a fuel product. The term also includes any
facility for the combustion of municipal waste that is generated off-site,
whether or not the facility is operated to recover energy. The term does not
include:
      (1)   Any composting facility.
      (2)   Methane gas extraction from a municipal waste landfill.
      (3)   Any separation and collection center, drop-off point or collection
center for recycling or any source separation or collection center for
composting leaf waste.
      (4)   Any facility, including all units in the facility, with a total
processing capacity of less than 50 tons per day.
   RUBBISH
All non-putrescible municipal waste except garbage and other decomposable
matter. This includes, but is not limited to ashes, bedding, cardboard, carpet,
cans, crockery, glass, leather, masonry, old clothes, paper, rags, rubber, and
solids not considered to be highly flammable or explosive.
   SALVAGE YARD
A lot, land or structure, or part thereof, used for the collecting, storage and
sale of waste paper, rags, scrap metal or discarded material, or for the
collecting, dismantling, storage and salvaging of machinery or vehicles not in
running condition, and for the sale of parts thereof.
   SALVAGE
The controlled reclamation of discarded objects for the purpose of reuse, which
occurs at a solid waste processing or disposal facility.
   SCAVENGING
The Unauthorized and uncontrolled removal of any material stored or placed at a
point for subsequent collection or from a solid waste processing or disposal
facility.
   SOLID WASTE
Waste, including but not limited to municipal waste, residual or hazardous
wastes (as defined in the Solid Waste Management Act of Pennsylvania) including
solid, liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous materials.
   STEEL CANS
Empty food or beverage containers made of steel, tin-coated steel, or other
ferrous metal food or beverage containers.
   STORAGE
The containment of any municipal waste on a temporary basis in such a manner as
not to constitute disposal of such municipal waste. It shall be presumed that
the containment of any municipal waste in excess of the requirements of this
Article constitutes disposal. This presumption can only be overcome by clear
and convincing evidence to the contrary.
   TOWNSHIP
Antrim Township, Franklin County, Pennsylvania.
   TRADE WASTE
All solids or liquid material or rubbish resulting from construction building
operations, or the prosecution of any business, trade, or industry, including,
but not limited to, plastic products cartons, paint, grease, oil and other
petroleum products, chemicals, cinders and other forms of solid or liquid waste
material.
   TRANSPORTATION
The removal and conveyance of any municipal waste at any time after generation
thereof.
   TRASH
Any solid waste, excluding food waste.
   WASTE
A material whose original purpose has been completed and which is directed to a
disposal or processing facility or is otherwise disposed of. The term does not
include source-separated recyclable materials or material approved by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection for
beneficial use.
   YARD WASTE
Grass clippings, prunings and other discarded vegetation from yards and
gardens.
   YARD WASTE COMPOSTING FACILITIES
A facility that is used to compost yard waste, including a facility that is
used to compost leaf waste.
 118-4 PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES.
   A.   Dumping and littering prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person
to accumulate, store, dump, discard, dispose or deposit or to permit the
accumulation, storage, dumping, discarding, disposal or depositing of any solid
waste or recyclables upon the surface of the ground or underground within the
Township, except in proper containers for purposes of collection.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any person to dump or deposit any solid waste
or recyclables in any stream, body of water or on any public or private right-
of-way within the Township.
   C.   It shall be unlawful for any person to salvage or reclaim any solid
waste within the Municipality except at an approved and permitted salvage yard.
   D.   It shall be unlawful for any person to use or permit the use of private
property for the accumulation, disposal, packing, preparing, processing,
storing, or transferring, of garbage, refuse, or other solid waste.
   E.   It shall be unlawful to accumulate, store, dump, discard or deposit or
to permit the accumulation, storage, dumping, discarding or depositing of any
dead animal carcass, in part or in whole, with or without the hide in any
manner including but not limited to trimmings of fat, meat, or flesh other than
as regulated in this Article.
 118-5 PRESUMPTION OF OWNERSHIP.
   The presence of any articles containing a person s name among solid waste or
recyclables shall create a rebuttable presumption, for purposes of this
article, that said solid waste or recyclables are the property of the person
whose name is found therein. This presumption can only be rebutted by clear and
convincing evidence to the contrary.
 118-6 AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITIES.
   Nothing contained herein shall prohibit a farmer from carrying out the
normal activities of his farming operation, including composting, spreading of
manure or other farm produced agricultural waste; provided that such activities
are conducted in accordance with all applicable laws, rules and regulations.
 118-7 PREPARATION AND STORAGE OF MUNICIPAL WASTE.
   A.   General. The storage of all municipal waste shall be practiced to
prevent the attraction, breeding or harborage of insects or rodents and to
prevent conditions which may create potential hazards to the public health or
which may create fire and other safety hazards, odors, unsightliness or public
nuisance.
   B.   Standards for storage. Any person storing municipal waste on private or
public property in the Township shall place the same, or cause the same to be
placed, in sanitary closed or covered containers in accordance with the
following standards:
      (1)   Containers used for the storage of municipal waste shall be metal,
plastic or fiberglass construction; rust and corrosion resistant, equipped with
lids and waterproof (except that lids shall be optional on large bulk
containers commonly known as dumpsters ).
      (2)   Containers shall remain tightly sealed and covered at all times.
      (3)   A sufficient number of containers to store the permitted amount of
waste shall be acquired by the owner, tenant or occupant. All waste shall
remain in the sealed, covered container until it is properly disposed of in
accordance with this Article.
      (4)   Containers and/or bulky items shall be properly stored on the owner
s, tenant s, or occupant s premises in a manner to prevent the collection or
accumulation of water, the attraction, harborage, or breeding of insects or
rodents and eliminate conditions harmful to public health.
      (5)   All garbage shall be drained of excess liquids and wrapped in paper
or be placed in plastic bags before being placed in the waste storage
containers described above, and all ashes shall be free of any burning material
before being deposited for collection.
      (6)   No person, except the occupants of the property on which a waste
container is placed, an authorized Licensed Hauler, a Township official,
employee or agent shall remove the lids of the container and/or remove the
contents thereof.
      (7)   All hazardous waste (as defined in the Solid Waste Management Act
of Pennsylvania), including but not limited to municipal waste of a highly
flammable or explosive nature or highly infectious or contagious municipal
waste, shall not be stored for ordinary collection, but shall be specifically
disposed of in accordance with the directions of the Township or of any State
or Federal authority having jurisdiction thereof.
      (8)   Containers, other than bulk containers, shall be placed at such
locations as may be agreed upon by the person and the authorized Licensed
Hauler.
      (9)   Plastic bags may be used as inserts in the containers. A plastic
bag is not a container and therefore is not proper storage.
      (10)   Containers may be placed at the agreed location for pickup not
earlier than 24 hours prior to collection.
      (11)   Bulk containers (such as dumpsters) shall be placed, whenever
possible, at ground level and at a point on the property being serviced by the
Collector which will enable clear and easy access to the container by the
Collector s vehicle.
      (12)   Bulk containers shall not be permitted to overflow or to have
waste strewn or left about them on the ground. A violation of this provision
shall be deemed a violation of this Article by the person on whose property the
bulk container is located, if it is located on private property.
 118-8 COLLECTION REQUIRED; HOURS OF COLLECTION.
   A.   Property owner compliance. All owners of property within the Township
shall provide for the regular preparation, collection and removal of all
municipal waste generated at such properties in one of the approved manners set
forth herein.
      (1)   Self-collection and removal from residential dwellings other than
Multifamily Housing. If a person or agent collects and removes their own
municipal waste, they shall do so at a minimum of every fifteen (15) days or at
shorter intervals to not exceed six (6) bags of waste or what can be placed in
no more than three (3) containers as described in §
118-7, in order to prevent odors, rodents, vectors or accumulations of refuse
that is unsafe, unsightly, or potentially harmful to the public health. Any
municipal waste so removed shall be disposed of in accordance with the
requirements of this Article.
      (2)   Contracts with Licensed Haulers.
         (a)   All multifamily housing, commercial and industrial properties
that generate waste shall contract with a Licensed Hauler in accordance with
this Article. This may be accomplished using dumpsters that are emptied at a
frequency of not less than every fifteen (15) days or at shorter intervals to
maintain compliance with this Article. At no time shall a dumpster overflow,
cause a public nuisance, generate odors, attract rodents or vectors, or create
an unsafe, unsightly, or potentially harmful environment for the public.
Curbside pickup may be utilized if compliance with this Article can be
maintained.
         (b)   Residential uses, other than Multifamily Housing, may, at their
own discretion, contract with a Licensed Hauler in accordance with this
section.
         (c)   Every owner, occupant, agent, or establishment is responsible to
ensure that waste is not accumulated, stored, dumped, or discarded in any
manner except in full conformity of this Article. If the Licensed Hauler does
not provide pick up in a frequency to maintain compliance then other
arrangement shall be made by such owner, occupant, agent, or establishment to
maintain compliance.
         (d)   The Licensed Hauler contracted with for the regular, scheduled
collection and removal of the municipal waste, curbside or otherwise, shall
provide pick up services at least once every seven (7) days. Municipal waste
shall be prepared for collection and be collected and removed from such person
s or establishment s property at least once every seven (7) days, except where
conditions beyond the control of the Licensed Hauler prevent it. No person
other than a Licensed Hauler or an agent shall collect or remove municipal
waste from any other person s property.
         (e)   Nothing in this section shall allow for the accumulation,
storage, or dumping, of any solid waste or recyclables.
         (f)   All agreements for collection, transportation, and disposition
of municipal waste shall be by private contract between the owner or occupant
of the property where the waste is generated and the Licensed Hauler who is to
collect such waste.
   B.   Collection on Sunday prohibited. Licensed Haulers shall not collect
municipal waste from properties within the Township limits on Sunday.
   C.   Township collection/contracts. Nothing herein shall limit the right of
the Township to implement public collection of solid waste either by entering
into contracts or by engaging in any collection practice permitted by law.
   D.   Antrim Township may, at its discretion, collect for removal, municipal
waste that is not properly contained and/or disposed of in accordance with this
Article after giving written notice of such intent. Costs of such removal shall
be borne by the property owner and paid to the Township. Failure to pay may
result in a municipal lean being placed on the property or other collection
measures available to the Township of Antrim.
   E.   Private hauling permitted. Nothing contained herein shall be deemed to
prohibit any person from hauling municipal waste generated from their own
property in which they reside on an irregular and unscheduled basis to a
facility permitted by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Department of
Environmental Protection, and which is approved for disposal in the Franklin
County Solid Waste Plan, provided that such hauling shall be in addition to,
and not in place of, the regular removal of municipal waste as required by this
section and provided that such is not in violation of any county or other
municipal law or regulation.
   F.   Recyclables; leaf waste. Nothing in this section shall modify the
requirements in this Article pertaining to separation and disposal of
recyclables. Nothing in this section shall impair the ability of the Township
to provide a system of placement for removal and public collection of leaf
waste, or the Township residents to utilize such system of public collection of
leaf waste, anything herein contained to the contrary notwithstanding.
 118-9 TRANSPORTATION OF MUNICIPAL WASTE.
   A.   Any person transporting municipal waste within the Township shall
prevent or remedy any spillage from vehicles or containers used in the
transport of such municipal waste.
   B.   All persons authorized to collect municipal waste shall do so in
vehicles that are provided with either closed, covered containers or which have
measures taken to prevent waste from being blown or falling from the vehicle.
 118-10 PUBLIC CONTAINERS.
   The use of public containers for the disposal of private household waste is
prohibited.
 118-11 DISPOSAL OF LEAF WASTE.
   A.   Unless otherwise providing for composting, all persons shall keep leaf
waste separate from all other forms of municipal waste and separate from
recyclables. Such waste shall be set out for collection in a manner to be
designated by the Collector and shall be disposed of by the Collector in
accordance with Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection
regulations.
   B.   Nothing herein shall require any person to gather leaf waste or prevent
any person from utilizing leaf waste for compost, mulch or other agricultural
purposes when generated on their own property.
   C.   Leaf waste may not be collected off site and brought to private
property for disposal, burning, composting or any other purpose.
 118-12 DISPOSAL OF WILD ANIMAL CARCASS.
   A.   Wild animal carcasses and all by products shall be properly disposed of
within forty-eight (48) hours in accordance with standards set by State and
Federal regulations for the disposal of dead domestic animals. Methods include
burial, mortality composting and rendering in accordance with the procedures
established by the Pennsylvania Department of Agriculture, and incineration
only at Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection licensed
incinerating facilities. All such disposal shall be in accordance with State
and Federal regulations governing air quality, water quality, and methods
according to procedures and product safety standards established by the
Pennsylvania Department of Agriculture.
   B.   Animal carcasses, parts or hides that are being collected, stored and/
or processed to generate a product, shall be concealed from view and enclosed
and/or sealed off at all times in a manner that emits no odor and prevents the
attraction, harborage, or breeding of insects or rodents and eliminates
conditions harmful to the public health, safety and welfare. Examples of proper
storage are solid containers with tight fitting sealed lids, properly working
refrigerated storage containers and the like. Tarps, plastic bags, and the like
are not proper containment.
 118-13 SEPARATION OF RECYCLABLES.
   A.   General. Recyclables shall be kept separate from and disposed of
separately from municipal waste, to the extent required by the following
provisions and the hauler s guidelines:
      (1)   Owners and occupants of all residential property shall keep
separate from other waste but may commingle (mix) the following recyclables:
clear glass, colored glass and aluminum, steel and bimetallic cans, and
newsprint.
      (2)   Owners and occupants of all commercial, municipal and institutional
establishments and properties and sponsors or organizers of community
activities shall keep separate from other waste but may commingle (mix) the
following recyclables: clear glass, colored glass, aluminum, steel and
bimetallic cans, corrugated paper, high-grade office paper and newsprint.
      (3)   Alternatively, the Township Supervisors may by resolution enumerate
alternative recyclables which will be required to be separated from municipal
waste and collected in accordance with this Article.
   B.   Paper products; metal; glass; limitations. Corrugated paper, high-grade
office paper and newsprint shall be placed in easy-to-manage bundles not to
exceed 40 pounds and kept dry. Glass containers and aluminum, steel and
bimetallic cans shall be emptied and clean. Aluminum, steel and bimetallic cans
and glass containers may be mixed together and shall be placed in containers
which when full shall not exceed 40 pounds. Lids shall be removed from all
glass containers. High-grade office paper shall be placed in containers not to
exceed 40 pounds. Recyclables shall not be placed in the same garbage can or
other container as, or otherwise mixed with, municipal waste for collection,
removal or disposal. Recyclables shall not be placed in plastic bags or
corrugated boxes.
   C.   Alternative procedures. Recyclables may be set out for collection in a
manner different from the requirements in Subsection (B) above if an
alternative manner is designated by the Collector and complies with this
Article.
 118-14 REMOVAL OF RECYCLABLES FROM RESIDENTIAL PROPERTIES.
   A.   General. For residential properties other than multifamily housing
properties, all recyclables which are required to be kept separate pursuant to
§
118-13 above, shall be placed at the appropriate location on the premises to be
collected at times designated by the Licensed Hauler. The frequency of such
collection shall be not less than once every fifteen (15) days. Individuals may
take their own recyclables generated from their own household to a recycle
center.
   B.   Licensed Hauler; location of recyclables. If the recyclables are to be
collected by a Licensed Hauler, then the recyclables shall be set out curbside,
within the public right-of-way for collection.
 118-15 REMOVAL OF RECYCLABLES FROM MULTIFAMILY HOUSING PROPERTIES.
   A.   General.
      (1)   For multifamily housing properties, all recyclables which are
required to be kept separate pursuant to §
118-13 above shall either be delivered directly to a recycling center or shall
be picked up by a Licensed Hauler separately from municipal waste in a
prearranged manner. The owner and/or landlord of every multifamily housing
property shall require, by a clause in the lease or other enforceable rule or
regulation, that the tenants in such property comply with the requirements of
this Article governing separation and disposal or placement for removal of
recyclables in multifamily housing properties. Every such owner and/or landlord
shall set up a convenient and practical collection system in such properties
for the collection, storage and regular disposal or placement for removal of
recyclables generated by the residents of such properties.
      (2)   The collection system must include suitable containers for
collecting and sorting materials, easily accessible locations for the
containers and written instructions to the occupants concerning the use and
availability of the collection system.
   B.   Compliance. Owners, landlords and agents of owners or landlords who
comply with the aforementioned requirements relative to multifamily housing
properties are still liable for the noncompliance of occupants of their
building in addition to the occupants.
 118-16 REMOVAL OF RECYCLABLES FROM COMMERCIAL, MUNICIPAL AND INSTITUTIONAL
PROPERTIES AND COMMUNITY ACTIVITIES.
   All recyclables which are required to be kept separate in commercial,
municipal and institutional establishments and properties and community
activities pursuant to §
118-13, above, shall either be delivered directly to a recycling center or
shall be picked up by a Licensed Hauler separately from municipal waste in a
prearranged manner.
 118-17 RECYCLING REPORTS FOR MULTIFAMILY HOUSING PROPERTIES.
   A.   Reports required. The landlord of every multifamily housing property or
his or her agent or representative shall complete a form to be designated
Recycling Report - Multifamily Housing Properties, to be provided by the
Township, which shall indicate where the property s recyclables were delivered.
   B.   Responsibility; time for submitting. The recycling report and all weigh
slips obtained from the facility or facilities to which the recyclables were
delivered or taken shall be submitted quarterly to the Township. For purposes
of submitting such weigh slips and recycling reports quarterly to the Township,
the Collector who removed the recyclables from the property shall be the agent
for the landlord and shall be responsible for completing and submitting such to
the Township. Each such quarterly report shall be submitted on or before the
last day of the first month of each quarter, for the preceding quarter.
Quarters shall run on a calendar-year basis thus: January through March; April
through June; July through September; and October through December.
 118-18 RECYCLING REPORTS FOR COMMERCIAL, MUNICIPAL AND INSTITUTIONAL
ESTABLISHMENTS AND COMMUNITY ACTIVITIES.
   A.   Reports required. Every commercial, municipal and institutional
establishment and community activity sponsor shall complete a form to be
designated Recycling Report - Commercial, Municipal and Institutional
Establishments and Community Activities, to be provided by the Township, which
shall indicate where the establishment s or activity s recyclables were
delivered.
   B.   Responsibility; time for submitting. The recycling report and all weigh
slips obtained from the facility or facilities to which the recyclables were
delivered or taken shall be submitted quarterly to the Township. For purposes
of submitting such weigh slips and recycling reports quarterly to the Township,
the Collector who removed the recyclables from the property shall be the agent
for the operator of the establishment or sponsor of the activity and shall be
responsible for completing and submitting such to the Township. Each such
quarterly recycling report shall be submitted on or before the last day of the
first month of each quarter, for the preceding quarter. Quarters shall run on a
calendar year basis, thus: January through March, April through June; July
through September; and October through December.
 118-19 COLLECTION BY UNAUTHORIZED PERSON.
   A.   From the time of placement for collection of residentially generated
recyclable items for collection in accordance with the terms of this Article,
the items shall be and become the property of the Township or its authorized
agent. It shall be a violation of this Article for any person other than a
Licensed Hauler to collect or pick up or cause to be collected or picked up any
such items. Any and each such collection in violation hereof from one or more
locations shall constitute a separate and distinct offense punishable as
hereinafter provided. This does not apply to the individual of a single-family
home disposing of their own recyclables generated from their household.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for a person to collect, remove or dispose of
municipal waste which contains recyclables, required to be separated by that
person, combined therewith.
 118-20 GENERAL REGULATIONS FOR COLLECTORS.
   A.   General. It shall be unlawful for any person, other than such persons
as are duly authorized by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, to collect and to
transport municipal wastes of any nature or recyclables within or from the
Township.
   B.   Authorization required. Authorization to collect, transport and dispose
of municipal waste or recyclables for persons other than one s self or for whom
one is acting as an agent (as defined in this Article) may be given
authorization by the State. A person who collects municipal waste exclusively
or in addition to recyclables shall provide valid copies of all permits,
authorization, and/or licenses to the Township upon request to show proof of
being an authorized Collector or Licensed Hauler. Failure to provide such
copies of permits, authorizations, and/or licenses within 30 days shall be
deemed unauthorized and constitute a violation of this Article and be subject
to violations provided herein.
   C.   Rules and regulations. The Board of Supervisors may, from time to time
by resolution, promulgate rules and regulations reasonable and necessary for
the proper and effective administration of this Article.
   D.   Compliance by Licensed Haulers. All Licensed Haulers shall have an
affirmative duty to follow and conduct themselves in accordance with their
current license, permit, or acknowledgment and to service each of their
customers in accordance with the requirements of this Article and rules and
regulations as may be promulgated from time to time by resolution of the Board
of Supervisors, any failure of which shall be a violation of this Article.
   E.   Limited exemptions. Collectors of bulky items, trash and rubbish who
collect on an unscheduled, sporadic basis, (such as you call, we haul
operators) shall be exempt from the timing provisions for removal of such items
as required in this Article. All other provisions shall apply including, but
not limited to authorization as required by the State.
 118-21 LICENSED HAULERS TO REMOVE RECYCLABLE MATERIALS.
   A.   Residential customers. Every Licensed Hauler shall be required to
provide to its residential customers the service of removing recyclables from
their properties at the curbside (within the public right-of-way). Any such
recyclables so removed by Licensed Haulers shall be kept separate from
municipal waste, and shall be taken to a recycling center. Licensed Haulers
shall take all of their customers recyclable materials to a recycling center.
   B.   Commercial, municipal and institutional establishments and properties.
Every Licensed Hauler shall be required to provide to its commercial,
municipal, and institutional property customers the service of removing
recyclables from their properties. Any such recyclables so removed by Licensed
Haulers shall be kept separate from municipal waste and shall be taken to a
recycling center. Licensed Haulers shall take all of their customers recyclable
material to a recycling center.
 118-22 ACCEPTANCE OF UNLAWFULLY DISPOSED OF RECYCLABLES PROHIBITED.
   A.   Haulers responsibilities. No Licensed Hauler shall accept, pick up or
remove any bag or other container of municipal waste which the hauler knows or
has reason to believe contains recyclables required to be separated, combined
with municipal waste.
   B.   Administration. Upon discovery of such recyclables combined with
municipal waste placed at curbside or otherwise placed for pick up, the hauler
shall affix a tag or sticker to the container containing the recyclables (which
tag or sticker will be provided by the hauler). When the hauler utilizes a tag
or sticker pursuant to this section, he or she shall fill in the information
requested herein, including the address at which the container is located and
the reason which led him or her to know or believe the container contained
recyclables (e.g., he or she saw newspaper or he or she heard bottles rattling)
to act as notice to the owner. The hauler shall leave such container with the
tag or sticker placed thereon where he or she found it.
 118-23 REMOVAL OF BULKY ITEMS BY LICENSED HAULERS.
   All Licensed Haulers doing business within the Township shall make available
to their customers the service of removal of bulky items not less frequently
than once per year.
 118-24 MISSED PICKUP.
   In the event of any missed pickup, the Collector shall collect from the
missed location before the end of the next business day.
 118-25 COMPLAINTS REGARDING COLLECTION.
   All complaints regarding collection of recyclables or solid waste shall be
reported to the Collector.
 118-26 COMMUNITY-ORIENTED CHARITABLE ACTIVITIES.
   A.   Voluntary projects; authorization required. Nothing contained herein
shall impair or prohibit any recognized religious, civic, fraternal, charitable
or benevolent organization, association or society from undertaking or
sponsoring voluntary programs or projects involving the collection of
recyclables from the public. Any such collection activity can only occur prior
to the recyclable materials being placed at curbside or similar location for
collection by an Authorized Collector.
   B.   Sale/donation of recyclables. Nothing herein shall be deemed to
prohibit any person from donating or selling any recyclables to any recognized
religious, civic, fraternal, charitable or benevolent organization, association
or society unless or until such recyclables are placed at curbside or a similar
location for collection by an authorized Collector.
 118-27 VIOLATION AND PENALTIES.
   A.   This Article shall be enforced by action brought before a District
Justice in the same manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses
under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure. Any person who violates or
permits the violation of this Article shall, upon conviction in a summary
proceeding, be punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000 or by imprisonment
for a term not exceeding 90 days. Each day or portion thereof that such
violation continues, or is permitted to continue, shall constitute a separate
offense. Each section of this Article that is violated shall also constitute a
separate offense.
   B.   For the purpose of this section, the doing of any act or thing
prohibited by any provision of this Article, or the failure to do any act or
thing as to which any provision of this Article creates an affirmative duty,
shall constitute a violation of this Article, punishable as herein stated.
ARTICLE II LANDFILLS
[Adopted 8-6-1992 by Ord. No. 222]
 118-28 TITLE.
   This article shall be known and may be cited as Antrim Township Landfill
Ordinance.
 118-29 DEFINITIONS AND WORD USAGE.
   A.   As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
   BOARD
The Board of Supervisors of Antrim Township.
   LANDFILL
Includes municipal waste and residual landfills.
   PRIME AGRICULTURAL SOILS
Soils classified as prime agricultural soils in Plat Number 8 of the
Comprehensive Plan for Antrim and Greencastle, dated April 14, 1992, and
approved June 1 and June 9, 1992.
   B.   The definitions contained in the Solid Waste Management Act (35 P.S. §§
6018.101 et seq.), the Municipal Waste Planning, Recycling and Waste Reduction
Act (53 P.S. §§ 4000.101 et seq.), and regulations promulgated pursuant to
those acts, are applicable to this article.
   C.   In this section, the singular shall include the plural, and the
masculine shall include the feminine and neuter.
 118-30 CONDITIONS.
   Municipal waste landfills and residual landfills shall be permitted subject
to the conditions stated in this article.
 118-31 GENERAL REGULATION.
   Landfills must be conducted and maintained in such a manner as to ensure the
health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Antrim Township.
 118-32 LOCATION OF LANDFILLS WITHIN THE TOWNSHIP.
   A.   Landfills shall not be located in an area with soils classified by the
Soil Conservation Service as prime agricultural soils.
   B.   A landfill shall not be located on property which has any creek,
stream, run or any other free-flowing body of water within 100 feet of the
boundary lines of said landfill, nor shall any such creek, stream, run or free-
flowing body of water run through any land upon which it is proposed to locate
a landfill. Temporary water runoff such as that present in swales after a
rainstorm shall not be considered a creek, stream, run or any other free-
flowing body of water for the purpose of this article.
   C.   No part of the landfill shall be established within 500 feet of any
occupied dwelling.
   D.   No landfill shall be established within 300 feet of any building that
is currently being occupied by people for periods in excess of five hours per
day.
   E.   No landfill shall be established within 100 feet of a property line.
   F.   No landfill shall be established within 100 feet of a public right-of-
way. Where the right-of-way is bounded on both sides by a landfill, under a
single ownership, the landfill shall be set back 100 feet on each side of the
right-of-way.
   G.   No part of a landfill shall be established within 1,500 feet of a water
supply for domestic use.
 118-33 BUFFER ZONE; FENCING; PLANTING.
   A.   Buffer zone. There shall be a two-hundred-foot buffer zone between the
landfill and the adjoining properties.
   B.   Plantings. Trees and/or shrubs shall be planted to screen the landfill
from view and from adjacent rights-of-way. The plantings must consist of
evergreen trees and shrubs designed and planted so as to completely screen the
landfill from view and create a solid screen six feet in height. The planting
shall be located between the right-of-way line and the fencing required by
Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) rules and regulations, leaving
ample area so as not to obstruct or encroach upon the right-of-way line when
plantings are sufficiently grown, and leaving sufficient area and space for
vehicles to pass between adult plantings and fencing.
   C.   Fencing. Fencing shall be as required by DEP rules and regulations.
 118-34 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   The landfill shall be opened, and dumping and depositing therein shall be
permitted only from 7:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. Monday through Friday, and 7:00 a.m.
to 11:30 a.m. Saturdays. However, on the Saturday immediately following a week
within which a national holiday occurs, the landfill shall be allowed to remain
open from 7:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. on that Saturday. The following are national
holidays: Christmas, Easter, Thanksgiving, Fourth of July, Memorial Day, Martin
Luther King Day, Presidents Day, Labor Day.
 118-35 DIRT AND DEBRIS FROM TRUCKS.
   In order to prevent trucks departing the landfill from depositing dirt and
debris on public roads, all access roads shall be paved with macadam 1,000 feet
from the point the access road intersects with the public roads or, in the
alternative, all trucks leaving the landfill shall be washed immediately prior
to departing. The truck shall be washed in such a manner to prevent debris and
dirt from being deposited on public roads.
 118-36 LANDFILL APPLICATION; APPROVAL.
   A.   No person shall start, maintain, continue to maintain, or expand,
whether for commercial purposes or otherwise, any landfill within Antrim
Township unless such landfill has an approved landfill application from the
Board of Supervisors of Antrim Township. Application for such approval shall be
made to the Board of Supervisors of Antrim Township and shall be in writing,
under oath and in the form prescribed by the Board of Supervisors.
   B.   Required information.
      (1)   Said application shall contain the following information:
         (a)   Name of the applicant and address for the past five years, the
location of the premises upon which the landfill is to be conducted, and the
name of the owner or owners of said property, if other than the applicant.
         (b)   Upon any subsequent applications, a statement that during the
preceding term of his or her approval he or she complied with and maintained
the premises in full compliance with the provisions of this article.
         (c)   A description of the premises upon which the landfill is to be
established, specifying therein setback lines, structures erected thereon, any
premises to be so used, and the book and page number identifying the deed of
record as recorded by the Franklin County Recorder of Deeds.
      (2)   If the applicant is a partnership or association, the applicant
shall furnish the information required in Subsection (B)(1) above for every
member of the association or partnership. If the application is a corporation,
the applicant shall furnish the information requested in Subsection (B)(1)
above for each officer and director thereof.
      (3)   The application shall be signed by the applicant if an individual;
by all members if the applicant is a partnership or association; and by the
president, secretary and chairman of the board, if the applicant is a
corporation.
      (4)   A physical plan of the landfill drawn to scale shall be submitted
with the application, including the following:
         (a)   The metes and bounds upon which the landfill is to be
maintained, the area presently in use as a landfill, and the area for which a
permit has been granted by the Department of Environmental Protection under the
Solid Waste Management Act, being 35 P.S. §§ 6018.101 et seq., as amended.
         (b)   All streams, creeks, runs or other free-flowing bodies of water
within 500 feet of any present or intended landfill.
         (c)   All property lines within 200 feet of the landfill.
         (d)   All buildings within 400 feet of the landfill.
         (e)   All rights-of-way within 200 feet of the landfill.
         (f)   All water supplies for domestic use within 2,000 feet of the
landfill.
         (g)   Proposed planting locations designed in compliance with §
118-33B.
         (h)   Soil embankments for noise, dust and visual barriers; and
heights of soil mounds, including proposed soil erosion and sedimentation
control which has been favorably reviewed by the Soil Conservation Service.
         (i)   Stormwater management provisions.
         (j)   Interior road pattern identifying their relation to yard
operation and points of ingress and egress onto state and Township roads.
         (k)   Source of water, if plans show use of water, and location of all
monitoring wells.
      (5)   The applicant shall also submit to the Township a site plan showing
the appearance of the site following termination of any landfill activity. Such
plan must show:
         (a)   Final grading contours.
         (b)   Planned ultimate use and ownership, if known, of the site after
termination of the landfill.
      (6)   A separate application is required for each landfill.
      (7)   The application, with the required fees, deposits, written
approvals, comments and/or recommendations, as well as other documents or
evidence that may be required by any federal, state, or local board or agency
shall be submitted to Antrim Township at the Antrim Township Municipal Building
during regular business hours, at least 15 calendar days prior to the next
scheduled meeting of the Antrim Township Board of Supervisors at which said
application is to be reviewed.
      (8)   The application shall have attached to the application form, in
addition to these aforereferenced approvals, the comments and recommendations
of the Antrim Township Planning Commission, the Antrim Township Zoning Hearing
Board, the Antrim Township Zoning Officer, the Antrim Township Solicitor, the
Antrim Township Administrator and the Antrim Township Secretary.
      (9)   The comments and recommendations required in Subsections (B)(7) and
(8) above shall be obtained at the expense of the applicant and shall be
submitted as required under Subsection (B)(7).
      (10)   Every prospective landfill shall pay an application fee of an
amount set forth from time to time by resolution of the Board of Supervisors,
for each application. An application renewal fee, of an amount set forth from
time to time by resolution of the Board of Supervisors, shall be paid annually
on the anniversary of the effective date of the initial approval. Said fees are
to defray Township costs of administering this article. [Amended 7-8-1997 by
Ord. No. 246]
      (11)   Approvals shall be issued for a term of one calendar year.
      (12)   The landfill may be inspected and reviewed at any time during the
one-year term of the initial approval of the application. A failure to comply
with this article can result in said approval being revoked by Antrim Township.
      (13)   The Board of Supervisors of Antrim Township, upon receipt of an
application timely filed, shall review said application at its next regularly
scheduled meeting. After an examination of the application, the Board of
Supervisors will consider the suitability of the proposed premises for the
purpose, the character of the property adjacent thereto, the effect of the
proposed use on the surrounding properties, the environment, as well as the
health, welfare and safety of the citizens of the Township. Upon approval of
the application, the Board of Supervisors of Antrim Township shall stamp the
application approved. The name of the landfill owner and address of the
premises approved for use as a landfill shall be designated upon said approval.
Said approval shall be at all times conspicuously displayed and posted upon the
premises. Said approval issued by the Board of Supervisors is not transferable
or assignable.
      (14)   No subsequent approval shall be issued to any applicant who has
shown a lack of ability or intention to comply with any provision of this
article.
 118-37 ESCAPE OF MUNICIPAL AND RESIDUAL WASTE.
   The landfill shall prevent any municipal and residual waste, including the
residue of said waste, from blowing, leaking or otherwise escaping from the
landfill onto any public or private property in Antrim Township. In the event
of a violation of this article, in addition to any other penalties provided
herein, the applicant shall remove and/or clean any such refuse within 24 hours
unless prevented from doing so in an emergency caused by adverse weather
conditions. If the applicant shall be prevented from cleanup within 24 hours by
adverse weather conditions, he or she shall have 24 hours after the weather
condition is clear to correct the problem.
 118-38 LIABILITY INSURANCE REQUIRED.
   A.   The landfill shall provide liability insurance in the amount of
$10,000,000 for claims of liability against the Township, the Board of
Supervisors, its employees, agents, or representatives. However, the Board of
Supervisors may require the amount of the liability insurance to be increased
in order to prevent adverse effects upon public health and safety or public
welfare and the environment while the landfill is active and after closure.
   B.   Any cancellation of the landfill owner s insurance, either in part or
in total, shall be just cause of revocation of the approval issued under this
article.
 118-39 RESPONSIBILITY FOR CLEANUP AND POLICING.
   The landfill shall be responsible for the cleanup and policing of all areas
and adjacent properties to which any materials are spread by natural or
artificial means from said municipal waste landfill site.
 118-40 INSPECTION; RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   A.   The Township, or its designated agent, shall have the right to enter
the landfill site for the purpose of monitoring compliance with this article
without notice during normal operational hours, and shall have the right to
inspect during nonoperating hours upon 24 hours advance notice to the landfill.
   B.   Pursuant to the Municipal Waste Planning, Recycling, and Waste
Reduction Act (53 P.S. § 4000.101, et seq.), certain employees of Antrim
Township have been certified as municipal inspectors to ensure that municipal
waste landfills are in compliance with the Solid Waste Management Act (35 P.S.
§ 6018.101 et seq.). Said employees are appointed and authorized to enforce the
Solid Waste Management Act, the Municipal Waste Planning, Recycling and Waste
Reduction Act and regulations promulgated pursuant to said acts on behalf of
Antrim Township.
 118-41 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
[Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 246]
   This article shall be enforced by action brought before a District Justice
in the same manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses under the
Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure. Any person who violates or permits
the violation of this article shall, upon conviction in a summary proceeding,
be punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000 or by imprisonment for a term
not exceeding 90 days. Each day or portion thereof that such violation
continues, or is permitted to continue, shall constitute a separate offense.
Each section of this article that is violated shall also constitute a separate
offense.
 118-42 DECLARATION OF NUISANCE.
   In addition to the enforcement remedies as set forth in §
118-41, the Board of Supervisors of Antrim Township hereby declares any
accumulation of municipal or residual waste in violation of this article to be
a nuisance, and the Board of Supervisors shall give written notice to the owner
or owners of land upon which said waste is deposited in violation of this
article to remove, or cause to be removed, such waste, or to abate such
nuisance, and upon failure of such owner or owners to remove such waste, or to
abate such nuisance, and a twenty-day period after such notice to remove or
abate the same, the Board of Supervisors may cause said land to be entered upon
and said waste removed and/or said nuisance abated, and may collect the costs
of such removal and/or abatement from the owner or owners of said land.
 118-43 CONFLICTS WITH OTHER PROVISIONS.
   If this article is in conflict with the Solid Waste Management Act, being 35
P.S. § 6018.101 et seq., as amended, the Municipal Waste Planning, Recycling
and Waste Reduction Act, being 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq., or the regulations
promulgated pursuant to said acts, then the ordinance or act imposing the most
stringent requirement shall apply.
CHAPTER 119 CHAPTER 123: RESERVED
[Former Ch. 122, Streets and Sidewalks, adopted 5-26-1987 as Ch. 21, Part 1 of
the 1987 Code of Ordinances, was repealed 11-25-2014 by Ord. No. 338.]
CHAPTER 124: OFFICIAL MAP
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Antrim 11-25-
2014 by Ord. No. 338. Amendments noted where applicable.]
Section
   
124-1   Purpose
   
124-2   Word Usage
   
124-3   Definitions
   
124-4   Official Map
   
124-5   Additions
   
124-6   Procedures
   
124-7   Municipalities Planning Code
   
124-8   Revisions
   
124-9   Enforcement
 124-1 PURPOSE.
   To identify areas of the Township to be improved, constructed, or preserved
for the health, safety and welfare of the Township. To give authority to the
Board of Supervisors to negotiate with property owners and developers for such
improvement, construction, or preservation.
 124-2 WORD USAGE.
   Words used in the present tense include the future tense. The singular
includes the plural. The word person includes an individual, a corporation, a
partnership and incorporated association or any other similar entity. The word
lot includes the words plot or parcel. The term shall is always mandatory. The
word used or occupied as applied to any land or building shall be construed to
include the words intended, arranged or designed to be used or occupied.
 124-3 DEFINITIONS.
ALTERATIONS
As applied to a building or structure, a change or rearrangement in the
structural parts or in the existing facilities, or an enlargement, whether by
extending on a side or by increasing height, or the moving from one location or
position to another.
ALTERATIONS, STRUCTURAL
Any change in the supporting members of a building, such as bearing walls,
columns, beams or girders.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT
Every application, whether preliminary, tentative or final, required to be
filed and approved prior to start of construction or development, including but
not limited to an application for a building permit, for the approval of a
subdivision plat or plan or for the approval of a development plan.
ARCHEOLOGICAL PROPERTY
A property that has any artifacts, remains, objects or any other evidence of
historic or anthropological value located on the property, whether found above
or below the surface of the earth.
BOARD
The Board of Supervisors of the Township of Antrim.
BUILDING
Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls and intended for the
shelter, housing or enclosure of persons, animals or chattels, and, including
covered porches or bay windows and chimneys.
CONSTRUCTION
The construction, reconstruction, renovation, repair, extension, expansion,
alteration or relocation of a building or structure, including the placement of
mobile homes.
DEVELOPER
Any landowner, agent of such landowner or tenant with permission of such
landowner, who makes or causes to be made a subdivision of land or land
development.
DEVELOPMENT
The disturbance of 5,000 sq. ft. or more of land resulting in any man-made
change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to
buildings or other structures, the placement of mobile homes, streets and other
paving, utilities, filling, grading, excavation, mining, dredging or drilling
operation, changes in the contour of the land and removal or destruction of
topsoil, trees or other vegetative cover of the land.
EASEMENT, UTILITY
A right-of-way granted for limited use of land for public or quasipublic
purpose.
GOVERNING BODY
The Board of Supervisors of Antrim Township, Franklin County, Pennsylvania.
HISTORICAL PROPERTY
A building, structure, object, district, place, site or area significant in the
history, architecture, maritime heritage or archaeology of the Township of
Antrim, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or the United States of America.
HISTORICALLY SIGNIFICANT SITE OR STRUCTURE
   A.   Any site or structure in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Department of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;
   B.   Certified or preliminary determination by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as
a registered historic district;
   C.   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary
of the Interior; or
   D.   Any other historic site or structure that is eligible for inclusion in
a federal, state or local registry of historic sites or structures.
   E.   Any historic site or structure that the Township deems necessary for
preservation.
IMPERVIOUS AREA
A surface that prevents the percolation into the ground (examples include but
are not limited to stone/gravel materials, pavement, concrete, buildings,
etc.).
LAND DEVELOPMENT
Any of the following activities:
   A.   The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts or
parcels of land for any purpose involving:
      (1)   A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings,
whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single nonresidential building
on a lot or lots regardless of the number of occupants or tenure.
      (2)   The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially or
cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or prospective occupants by
means of or for the purpose of streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums,
building groups or other features.
   B.   A subdivision of land.
   C.   Development in accordance with this chapter and the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, Act of 1968 and as reenacted and amended.
   D.   Paving for commercial or industrial use.
   E.   Paving of more than 12,000 square feet for residential use. Paving over
concrete or bituminous surfaces which are already existing shall be excluded
from Subsections (C) and (D) above and this Subsection (E).
   F.   Any alteration of the existing topography on a single nonresidential
lot, tract or parcel of land that alters the drainage characteristics of an
adjoining land parcel(s) or publicly held right-of-way by increasing the rate
of surface water runoff by more than 10%.
   G.   Any nonresidential development of land.
   H.   Interior changes that create any additional improvements as required by
the Code, including but not limited to: additional parking, increased sewer/
water flows, etc.
   I.   Land development does not include development which involves:
      (1)   The conversion of an existing single-family detached dwelling or
single-family semidetached dwelling into not more than three residential units,
unless such units are intended to be a condominium.
      (2)   The addition of an accessory building, including farm buildings, on
a lot or lots subordinate to an existing principal building.
      (3)   The addition or conversion of buildings or rides within the
confines of an enterprise which would be considered an amusement park. For the
purposes of this subsection, an amusement park is defined as a tract or area
used principally as a location for permanent amusement structures or rides.
This exclusion shall not apply to newly acquired acreage by an amusement park
until initial plans for the expanded area have been approved by the proper
authorities.
LANDOWNER
The legal or beneficial owner or owners of land, including the holder of an
option or contract to purchase (whether or not such option or contract is
subject to any conditions), or a lessee if he or she is authorized under the
lease to exercise the rights of the landowner or other person having a
proprietary interest in land.
LOT
A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat or otherwise
as permitted by law and to be used, developed or built upon as a unit.
MUNICIPAL AUTHORITY
A body politic and corporate created pursuant to the Municipality Authorities
Act, being 53 Pa. C.S. §§ 5601 et seq.
MUNICIPALITY
The Township of Antrim, Franklin County, Pennsylvania.
NEW CONSTRUCTION
Structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after April 24,
1981 and includes any subsequent improvements thereto.
PLANNING COMMISSION
The Planning Commission of Antrim Township.
PUBLIC
Owned, operated or controlled by a government agency (federal, state or local).
PUBLIC GROUNDS
Includes:
   A.   Parks, playgrounds, trails, paths and other recreational areas and
other public areas.
   B.   Sites for schools, sewage treatment, refuse disposal and other publicly
owned or operated facilities.
   C.   Publicly owned or operated scenic and historic sites.
PUBLIC HEARING
A formal meeting held pursuant to public notice by the Board of Supervisors or
Planning Commission, intended to inform and obtain public comment, prior to
taking action in accordance with this chapter.
PUBLIC MEETING
A forum held pursuant to notice under the Act of July 3, 1986, (P.L. 388, No.
84), known as the Sunshine Act, 65 P.S. § 271 et seq.
PUBLIC NOTICE
Notice published once a week for two consecutive weeks in a newspaper of
general circulation in the Township. Such notice shall state the time and place
of the hearing and the particular nature of the matter to be considered at the
hearing. The first publication shall not be more than 30 days and the second
publication shall not be less than seven days from the date of the hearing.
PUBLIC PARK
A recreational facility open to the public at no charge or a recreational
facility or area owned by a public entity such as a municipality or state.
RECREATIONAL FACILITIES
A business engaged in providing a place with activities for the purpose of
enjoyment, pastime, retreat, athletics, or restorative commune with nature.
STRUCTURE
Any man-made object having an ascertainable stationary location on or in land
or water, whether or not affixed to the land.
TOWNSHIP
The Township of Antrim, Franklin County, Pennsylvania.
WATERCOURSE
A permanent stream, intermittent stream, river, brook, creek channel or ditch
for water, whether natural or man-made.
 124-4 OFFICIAL MAP.
   The Official Map is a planning tool used in conjunction with the
Comprehensive Plan, the Zoning Chapter, and the Land Development Chapter that
identifies public grounds at approximate locations having been added without
the benefit of a survey. The Official Map is hereby adopted and made a part of
this chapter. The items listed in the LEGEND section of the Official Map
constitute the streets, water courses, public lands and projected improvements
of the Official Map herein sometimes referred to as public grounds . An
official copy of said map, indicating the latest amendments, shall be kept up-
to-date for the use and benefit of the public and shall be so displayed at the
Antrim Township Municipal Building.
 124-5 ADDITIONS.
The following additions may be added to the Official Map.
   A.   Existing and proposed public streets, intersections, watercourses, and
public grounds, including widening, narrowing, extensions, diminuations,
openings or closing of same.
   B.   Existing and proposed public parks, playgrounds and open space.
   C.   Pedestrian ways and easements.
   D.   Railroad and transit rights of way and easements.
   E.   Support facilities, easements and other properties held by public
bodies.
   F.   Historical properties or structures.
   G.   Archeological sites.
 124-6 PROCEDURES.
   A.   The owner of a property shall notify the Township in writing that they
propose to build, subdivide, or perform other work on land that has been listed
in the legend section on the Official Map.
   B.   The municipality has one (1) year from the receipt of written
notification from the property owner to confirm its acquisition interest and
begin negotiations to acquire the land.
   C.   Such acquisition can take the form of dedication by owner, purchase of
land or easement by the municipality, negotiations with the owner/developer to
make desired improvements, or eminent domain, at the discretion of the
municipality.
   D.   The Board is not, in any way, required to make or negotiate to make
such improvements.
 124-7 MUNICIPALITIES PLANNING CODE.
   A.   This Chapter hereby incorporates by reference sections 404, 405, 406,
and 407 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code (MPC) as if set forth
in full hereunder.
   B.   If any provision of this Chapter conflict with the MPC then the
provisions of the MPC shall control.
 124-8 REVISIONS.
[Amended 2-12-2019 by Ord. No. 353]
   Official Map revisions shall be adopted in accordance with the requirements
as set forth in the MPC.
 124-9 ENFORCEMENT.
   Failure to notify Antrim Township of any changes to a property noted to have
been included in the official map shall be a violation of this Chapter. Such
violation may result in condemnation.
CHAPTER 125: SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT
   Article
      
I.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
II.   DEFINITIONS
      
III.   PLAN PROCEDURES
      
IV.   DESIGN STANDARDS
      
V.   MOBILE HOME PARK REGULATIONS
      
VI.   ENFORCEMENT AND APPEALS
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Antrim 11-25-
2014 by Ord. No. 338. Amendments noted where applicable.]
Section
Article I: General Provisions
   
125-1   Purpose
   
125-2   Title
   
125-3   Interpretation; conflicts with other provisions
   
125-4   Compliance with zoning regulations
   
125-5   Minimum lot area, setback and yard requirements
   
125-6   Existing approved lots without road frontage
   
125-7   Rules and regulations
Article II: Definitions
   
125-8   Word Usage
   
125-9   Definitions
Article III: Plan Procedures
   
125-10   Approval of Township required; compliance with standards
   
125-11   Consultation with Township and sketch plan (optional)
   
125-12   Subdivision and Land Development Plan Submission
   
125-13   Review Process and requirements
Article IV: Design Standards
   
125-14   Plan requirements
   
125-15   Conservation Practices
   
125-16   Development Layout
   
125-17   Streets, driveways, parking, loading/unloading areas, curbs and
sidewalk specifications
   
125-18   Building numbers
   
125-19   Traffic lights, traffic control signage, markings, traffic studies and
street lighting
   
125-20   Monuments and markers
Article V: Mobile Home Park Regulations
   
125-21   Land Development/Subdivision required
   
125-22   Procedures for plan review
   
125-23   Lot requirements
   
125-24   Yard and setback requirements
   
125-25   Structural additions
   
125-26   Park street system
   
125-27   Required off-street parking
   
125-28   Utility improvements
   
125-29   Common Open Space
   
125-30   Service, administration and other buildings
   
125-31   Sale of mobile homes located within mobile home parks
   
125-32   Fees
Article VI: Enforcement and Appeals
   
125-33   Preventative remedies
   
125-34   Violations and penalties
   
125-35   Appeals
   
Exhibit A
   
Exhibit B
   
Exhibit C
   
Exhibit D
   
Exhibit E
   
Exhibit F
   
Exhibit G
   
Exhibit H
ARTICLE I GENERAL PROVISIONS
 125-1 PURPOSE.
   This chapter is enacted to ensure subdivided and developed land in Antrim
Township is suitable for construction, human habitation and will ensure
sustenance to future generations. To accomplish this, Subdivision and Land
Development plans shall be submitted to the Township for review and approval
and shall include adequate open space, safe traffic patterns that minimize
congestion and integrate pedestrian traffic, recreational space, and minimal
interruption of light and air. Subdivision and Land Development plans shall, at
a minimum, address sedimentation, storm water management, utilities,
infrastructure, proper distribution of population and conformance with
Chapter 150, Zoning, in order to create conditions favorable to the health,
safety, morals and general welfare of the residents of Antrim Township.
 125-2 TITLE.
   This chapter may be cited as the Antrim Township Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance (ATSALDO).
 125-3 INTERPRETATION; CONFLICTS WITH OTHER PROVISIONS.
   The provisions of this chapter shall be held to be a minimum requirement to
meet the above stated purposes. Where the provisions of this chapter impose
greater restrictions than those of any statute, other ordinance or regulations,
the provisions of this chapter shall prevail. Where the provisions of any
statute, other ordinance or regulations impose greater restrictions than those
of this chapter, the provisions of such statute, ordinance or regulations shall
prevail.
 125-4 COMPLIANCE WITH ZONING REGULATIONS.
   Nothing contained in this chapter shall relieve the owner or developer from
complying with the applicable provisions of
Chapter 150, Zoning. It is the expressed intent of the Township that this
chapter and
Chapter 150, Zoning be mutually reinforcing and together foster the stated
planning goals and objectives of the Township.
 125-5 MINIMUM LOT AREA, SETBACK AND YARD REQUIREMENTS.
   
Chapter 150, Zoning dictates the minimum area regulations for lot area,
setbacks, and yard requirements. All subdivision and land development shall
comply with the minimum area regulations. When multiple non-residential uses
are proposed on a single tract or parcel of land under single ownership, the
minimum area requirements for a single lot size shall be met. The non-
residential uses shall not be sold separately unless and until the uses are
separated by subdivision and each newly created development, lot, tract, or
parcel complies with the minimum area regulations.
 125-6 EXISTING APPROVED LOTS WITHOUT ROAD FRONTAGE.
   A lot in a previously approved Subdivision without public roadway frontage
may be used if a legally binding agreement is provided, subject to approval by
the Township, whereby maintenance of a privately accessed easement, lane or
right-of-way having a minimum width of twelve (12) feet is agreed to and
affirmed by all parties who do not have public roadway frontage and use the
private easement, lane or right-of-way for motor vehicle ingress and egress for
access to a public roadway. A stand-alone existing approved lot with a minimum
twelve (12) foot wide panhandle connecting to a public roadway as a part of the
property shall also be permitted. Each lot shall comply with all applicable
water and sewer regulations prior to the issuance of a land use or building
permit and also shall comply with all other applicable Township ordinances.
 125-7 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The Board of Supervisors may pass, by resolution at any time after enactment
of this chapter, any rules and/or regulations it deems necessary to implement,
effectuate, interpret, enforce, construe or apply to this chapter.
ARTICLE II DEFINITIONS
 125-8 WORD USAGE.
   As used in this chapter words in the singular include the plural, and those
in the plural include the singular.
   A.   The word person includes corporation, unincorporated association and
partnership, as well as an individual.
   B.   The word building includes the meaning of structure and shall be
construed as if followed by the phrase or part thereof.
 125-9 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words as used in this chapter shall have the meanings
indicated below:
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT
Every application, whether preliminary, tentative, or final, required to be
filed and approved prior to start of construction or development, including but
not limited to an application for a land use permit, for the approval of a
subdivision plat or plan or for the approval of a development plan.
AS BUILT DRAWINGS
Scaled drawings prepared and sealed by a Pennsylvania licensed engineer or
surveyor showing the actual location of improvements made to a property.
BLOCK
An area bounded by streets.
BOARD
Any body granted jurisdiction under a land use ordinance or under this chapter
to render final adjudications.
CARTWAY
The portion of a street intended for vehicle use.
CERTIFICATION STATEMENT
A signed statement appended to a plan or other document whereby the signer
verifies that to the best of their knowledge and belief said plan or document
is true and correct and that the Township may rely upon the accuracy thereof.
CLEAR SIGHT DISTANCE
A line of unobstructed vision from a point 4 1/2 feet above the center line of
a street to the farthest point on the top of an object four inches high on the
same center line.
COMMON OPEN SPACE
A parcel or parcels of land or an area of water, or a combination of land and
water within a development site, and designed and intended for the use or
enjoyment of residents of a development, not including streets, off-street
parking areas and areas set aside for public facilities.
CONSERVATION AREA, PRIMARY
Land defined as floodplains, wetland, and/or having a slope greater than 25%.
CONSERVATION EASEMENT
An area of land or water designated as being protected from development in
perpetuity.
CONSERVATION EASEMENT AGREEMENT
A legally drafted and recorded agreement between a landowner and the Township
in which the owner agrees to place certain restrictions over all or portions of
his/her land in perpetuity to retain it in a predominately natural, scenic,
agricultural or other open space conditions. Except for the specific
restrictions contained in the easement document, the owner retains all other
rights in the property. The easement stays with the land and is therefore
legally binding on present and future owners.
COUNTY
Franklin County, Pennsylvania.
CUL-DE-SAC
A street with access closed at one end with a vehicular turnaround at the
closed end.
DECISION
Final adjudication of any board or other body granted jurisdiction under any
land use ordinance, either by reason of the grant of exclusive jurisdiction or
by reason of appeals from determinations. All decisions shall be appealed to
the court of common pleas of the county and the judicial district wherein the
municipality lies.
DETERMINATION
Final action by an officer, body, or agency charged with the administration of
any land use ordinance or application thereunder except the following: the
Zoning Hearing Board, or the Planning Commission, only if and to the extent the
Planning Commission is charged with the final decision on preliminary or final
plans under this chapter or planned residential development provisions.
Determinations shall be appealable only to the boards designated as having
jurisdiction for such appeal.
DEVELOPER
Any landowner, agent of such landowner or tenant with the permission of such
landowner, who makes or causes to be made a subdivision of land or land
development.
DEVELOPMENT
The disturbance of 5,000 sq. ft. or more of land resulting in any man-made
change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to
buildings or other structures, the placement of mobile homes, streets and other
paving, utilities, filling, grading, excavation, mining, dredging or drilling
operation, changes in the contour of the land and removal or destruction of
topsoil, trees or other vegetative cover of the land.
DEVELOPMENT PLAN
The provisions for development, including a planned residential development, a
plat of subdivision, all covenants relating to use, location and bulk of
buildings and other structures, intensity of use or density of development,
streets, ways and parking facilities, common open space and public facilities.
The phrase provisions of development plan when used in this chapter shall mean
the written and graphic materials referred to in this definition.
DRAINAGE
The flow of water or liquid waste and the methods of directing such flow.
DRIP LINE
The drip line is the area directly located under the outer circumference of the
tree branches.
DRIVEWAY
A surface, other than a street, which provides vehicular access from a public
street to a building on a lot.
DWELLING
A building or structure designed for living quarters for one or more families,
including homes which are supported either by a foundation or by blocks or
jacks or are otherwise permanently attached to the land, but not including
hotels, rooming houses or other accommodations used for transient occupancy.
DWELLING UNIT
One or more rooms used for living and sleeping purposes and having a kitchen
with fixed cooking facilities arranged for occupancy by one family or a single
person.
EASEMENT
A right-of-way granted for limited use of land for public or quasi-public
purposes.
ENGINEER, PROFESSIONAL
A person duly licensed as an engineer by the commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
ENGINEER, TOWNSHIP
The Township Engineer or any consultant designated by the Board of Supervisors
to review a subdivision plan and perform the duties of engineer on behalf of
the Township.
EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL PLAN
A plan for the control of erosion and sediment prepared pursuant to the rules
and regulations of the Franklin County Soil Conservation District and
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
FLOODPLAINS
A relatively flat or low land area which is subject to partial or complete
inundation from an adjoining or nearby stream, river or watercourse; and/or any
area subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation of surface waters from any
source.
GREEN DESIGN
Preserving primary conservation areas and incorporating green space through
landscaping and courtyards to generate an aesthetic and environmentally
conscious atmosphere.
GREEN SPACE
An area growing plants of any type, which include but are not limited to grass,
trees, flowers, etc.
HARDSHIP
Financial infeasibility or financial impracticability, without more, shall not
be deemed a hardship . A hardship must not have been created by the applicant
but must be caused by the topographical features of the land proposed to be
developed.
HISTORICALLY SIGNIFICANT SITE AND/OR STRUCTURE
An historically significant site or structure shall be defined as follows:
   A.   Any site or structure in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Department of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;
   B.   Certified or preliminary determination by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as
a registered historic district;
   C.   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary
of the Interior; or
   D.   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified
either:
      (1)   By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the
Interior; or
      (2)   Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without
approved programs.
   E.   The historic sites and structures as described in the Open Space Plan
amendment to the Township of Antrim Comprehensive Plan.
   F.   Any other historic site or structure that is eligible for inclusion in
a federal, state or local registry of historic sites or structures.
   G.   Any historic site or structure that the Township deems necessary for
preservation.
   H.   Any site or structure identified as a historic site or structure on the
official map of Antrim Township.
LAND DEVELOPMENT
   A.   The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts or
parcels of land for any purpose involving:
      (1)   A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings,
whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single nonresidential building
on a lot or lots regardless of the number of occupants or tenure.
      (2)   The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially or
cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or prospective occupants by
means of, or for the purpose of streets, common areas, leaseholds,
condominiums, building groups or other features.
   B.   A subdivision of land.
   C.   Development in accordance with this chapter and the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, Act of 1968, and as reenacted and amended.
   D.   Paving for commercial or industrial use.
   E.   Paving of more than 12,000 square feet for residential use. Paving over
concrete or bituminous surfaces which are already existing shall be excluded
from Subsection (C) and (D) above and this Subsection (E).
   F.   Any alteration of the existing topography on a single nonresidential
lot, tract or parcel of land that alters the drainage characteristics of an
adjoining land parcel(s) or publicly held right-of-way by increasing the rate
of surface water runoff by more than 10%.
   G.   Any nonresidential development of land.
   H.   Interior changes that create any additional improvements as required by
the Code, including but not limited to: additional parking, increased sewer/
water flows, etc.
   I.   Land development does not include development which involves:
      (1)   The conversion of an existing single-family detached dwelling or
single-family semidetached dwelling into not more than three residential units,
unless such units are intended to be a condominium.
      (2)   The addition of an accessory building on a lot or lots subordinate
to an existing principal building.
      (3)   Agricultural buildings under 10,000 square feet.
      (4)   The addition or conversion of buildings or rides within the
confines of an enterprise, which would be considered an amusement park. For the
purposes of this subsection, an amusement park is defined as a tract or area
used principally as a location for permanent amusement structures or rides.
This exclusion shall not apply to newly acquired acreage by an amusement park
until initial plans for the expanded area have been approved by the proper
authorities.
LAND OWNER
The legal or beneficial owner or owners of land, including the holder of an
option or contract to purchase (whether or not such option or contract is
subject to any condition), a lessee if he or she is authorized under the lease
to exercise the rights of the landowner, or other person having a proprietary
interest in the land.
LANDSCAPING
The intentional planting and maintenance of plants, shrubs and trees, excluding
areas of grass, for the purpose of creating an aesthetic environment, improving
air quality, and reducing urban heat island index.
LINE OF SIGHT
A visually unobstructed distance of four hundred twenty five (425) feet from a
point measured 10 back from the edge of the intersecting cartway at an
elevation of three and one half (3 1/2) feet above the road surface to a point
in the center of the cartway of oncoming traffic at an elevation of three and
one half (3 1/2) feet above the cartway surface.
LOT
A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat or otherwise
as permitted by law and to be used, developed or built upon as a unit.
LOT, PANHANDLE
A polygonal-shaped lot with the appearance of a frying pan or flag and staff,
in which the handle is most often used as the frontage on a public street. The
handle shall be not less than 25 feet in width and the lot shall meet the other
requirements as set forth in §
150-8(E)(2) and other requirements as set forth in the ordinances of the
Township.
LOT, THROUGH (DOUBLE FRONTAGE LOT)
A lot with road frontage along the front and rear yard.
MARKETING ANALYSIS
A careful study of an aggregate of functions involved in moving goods from
producer to consumer to learn about its parts, what they do, and how they are
related to each other.
MOBILE HOME
A transportable, single-family dwelling intended for permanent occupancy,
contained in one unit or in two or more units designed to be joined into one
integral unit capable of again being separated for repeated towing, which
arrives at a site complete and ready for occupancy except for minor and
incidental unpacking and assembly operations, and constructed so that it may be
used without a permanent foundation. The term does not include park trailers,
travel trailers, recreational or other similar vehicles.
MOBILE HOME LOT
A parcel of land in a mobile home park, improved with the necessary utility
connections and other appurtenances necessary for the erection thereon of a
single mobile home.
MOBILE HOME PARK
A parcel or contiguous parcels of land which has been so designated and
improved that it contains two or more mobile home lots for the placement
thereon of mobile homes.
MUNICIPAL AUTHORITY
A body politic and corporate created pursuant to the Municipality Authorities
Act, being 53 Pa. C.S. §§ 5601 et seq.
MUNICIPALITIES PLANNING CODE (MPC)
An Act of 1968, P.L. 805 No. 247 and subsequent reenactments and amendments by
the State of Pennsylvania to empower counties and municipalities, individually
or jointly, to plan their developments and to govern the same by zoning,
subdivision and land development ordinances and additional tools.
NON-MOTORIZED
Any method of travel that does not involve a device propelled by an electric or
combustion motor with the exception of electric wheelchairs and scooters
designed to aid mobility impaired persons.
OFFICIAL MAP
A map adopted by ordinance pursuant to Article IV of the Municipalities
Planning Code, 53 P.S. §§ 10401 et seq.
OPEN SPACE
The unoccupied space open to the sky on the same lot with the building, not
including parking lots. Parking lots shall not be permitted in required open
space.
OPEN SPACE, USABLE
A parcel or parcels of land or an area of water or a combination of land and
water within the development site and designed and intended for the use or
enjoyment of residents of the subdivision or mobile home park or other
development, not including streets, off-street parking areas and areas set
aside for public facilities.
PAVED SURFACE
Asphalt or concrete stabilized pad, road, driveway, or parking area.
PEDESTRIAN TRAFFIC
Movement or travel by a non-motorized means.
PERCOLATION TEST
A procedure to determine the absorption rate of the soil in an area proposed as
the installation site for an on-lot septic system. Such a test will be carried
out according to the requirements of the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection.
PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT
An area of land, controlled by a landowner, to be developed as a single entity
for a number of dwelling units, or combination of residential and
nonresidential uses, the development plan for which does not correspond in lot
size, bulk, type of dwelling or use, density or intensity, lot coverage and
required open space to the regulations established in any one district created,
from time to time, under the provisions of this chapter.
PLANNING AND ZONING DEPARTMENT
Staff of the Township of Antrim who have the responsibility of enforcing the
Subdivision and Land Development Chapter and the Zoning Chapter of the Code of
the Township of Antrim.
PLANNING COMMISSION
The Planning Commission of Antrim Township.
PLAT
The map or plan of a subdivision or land development, whether preliminary or
final.
PRINCIPLE BUILDING
The most significant structure on a parcel of land that houses the primary use
of the property.
PUBLIC
Owned, operated or controlled by a government agency (federal, state, or
local).
PUBLIC GROUNDS
Includes:
   A.   Parks, playgrounds, trails, paths and other recreational areas and
other public areas.
   B.   Sites for schools, sewage treatment, refuse disposal and other publicly
owned or operated facilities.
   C.   Publicly owned or operated scenic and historic sites.
PUBLIC HEARING
A formal meeting held pursuant to public notice by the board of Supervisors or
Planning Commission, intended to inform and obtain public comment, prior to
taking action in accordance with this chapter.
PUBLIC MEETING
A forum held pursuant to notice under the Act of July 3, 1986 (P.L. 388, No.
84), known as the Sunshine Act, 65 P.S. § 271 et seq.
PUBLIC NOTICE
Notice published once each week for two successive weeks in a newspaper of
general circulation in the Township. Such notice shall state the time and place
of the hearing and the particular nature of the matter to be considered at the
hearing. The first publication shall not be more than 30 days and the second
publication shall not be less than seven days from the date of the hearing.
RECREATIONAL SPACE
Open space designed or designated for active and passive recreational uses.
RECREATIONAL TRAILS
Non-motorized, pedestrian pathways and bike trails for the intended purpose of
enjoyment and exercise.
RUNOFF
The surface water discharge or rate of discharge of a given watershed after a
fall of rain or snow that does not enter the soil but runs off the surface of
the land.
SCREENING
A well maintained fence, wall, hedge or vegetative material at least five feet
in height and of a density to conceal from the view of adjoining property
owners the structures and uses of the premises on which the screening is
required to be located.
SECRETARY
The Township Secretary of Antrim Township.
SHARED USE TRAILS
Pedestrian pathways and bike trails, located at the right of way line of
streets and roads with the intended purpose of providing a non motorized
network throughout the community.
SLOPE
Slopes are to be expressed in a percentage based upon the vertical difference
in feet per one-hundred (100) feet of horizontal distance.
SOILS ANALYSIS
A procedure to permit visual inspection of geological formations and water
table level in an area proposed as the installation site for an on-lot septic
system. Such test will consist of a trench which shall be as a minimum two feet
wide and six feet deep or four feet below the proposed installation level of
the septic field, whichever is deeper. Such tests may be referred to as a deep
probe or inspection trench and shall be opened for inspection by the Township
and the Department of Environmental Protection.
STREET
Includes street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway, freeway, parkway, lane,
alley, viaduct and any other ways used or intended to be used by vehicular
traffic or pedestrians whether public or private.
STREET LIGHTS
Illumination along roadways and at intersections intended to enhance visibility
when it is dark.
STRUCTURE
Any man-made object having an ascertainable stationary location on or in land
or water, whether or not affixed to the land.
SUBDIVIDER
The owner, developer or the authorized agent of the owner of a subdivision or
land development.
SUBDIVISION
The division or re-division of a lot, tract, or parcel of land by any means
into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land, including
changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of
lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs or devisees, transfer
of ownership or building or lot development; provided, however, that the
subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into parcels of more
than 10 acres, not involving any new street or easement of access or any
residential dwelling, shall be exempted.
SUBSTANTIALLY COMPLETED
Where, in the judgment of the Township Engineer, at least 90% (based on the
cost of the required improvements for which financial security was posted
pursuant to the requirements of this chapter) of those improvements required as
a condition for final approval have been completed in accordance with the
approved plan, so that the project will be able to be used, occupied or
operated for its intended use.
SURVEYOR
A person licensed as a surveyor by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
SWALE
A low-lying stretch of land which gathers or carries surface water runoff.
TOWNSHIP
Antrim Township, Franklin County, Pennsylvania.
TRAFFIC IMPACT STUDY
A study prepared pursuant to the requirements of Antrim Township and/or the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation.
WETLANDS
An area of land and/or water meeting one or more of the definitions of wetland
under Federal and/or Pennsylvania law and/or regulations.
YARD, FRONT
The yard on which the house fronts on the public/private road right of way and
shall coincide with the address. There shall only be one front yard per parcel.
YARD, REAR
The opposite of the front yard and every lot shall have a rear yard. There
shall only be one rear yard per parcel.
YARD, SIDE
Any yard or yards other than the front yard or rear yard.
ARTICLE III PLAN PROCEDURES
 125-10 APPROVAL OF TOWNSHIP REQUIRED; COMPLIANCE WITH STANDARDS.
   A.   From and after the effective date of this chapter, no Subdivision or
development of any lot, tract or parcel of land within the Township shall be
made, and no street, sanitary sewer, storm sewer, water main or other facility
in connection therewith shall be laid out, constructed, opened or dedicated for
public use or travel or for the common use of occupants of buildings abutting
thereon, unless and until a plan for Subdivision or Land Development has been
approved by the Board of Supervisors and recorded and until the improvements
required by the Board of Supervisors in connection therewith have either been
constructed in strict accordance with the standards and specifications of the
Township or guaranteed as provided in this chapter, and further conditioned
upon said activity being performed in strict accordance with the provisions of
this chapter.
   B.   No lot in a Subdivision or Land Development may be sold, no permit to
erect, alter or repair any structure upon land in a Subdivision or Land
Development may be issued, no structure may be erected, and no changes may be
made in the contour of the land; and no grading, excavating, removal or
destruction of the topsoil, trees or other vegetative cover of the land may be
commenced in a Subdivision or Land Development unless and until a plan for the
Subdivision or Land Development has been approved by the Board of Supervisors
and recorded, and until the improvements required by the Board of Supervisors
in connection therewith have either been constructed in strict accordance with
the standards and specifications of the Township or guaranteed as provided in
this chapter.
   C.   Said standards and specifications, particularly as presented in Article
IV of this chapter, are declared to be a minimum guaranty that all streets
shown on any proposed plan are of sufficient width and proper grade and so
located as to accommodate the probable volume of traffic thereon, afford
adequate light and air, facilitate fire protection, provide access for
firefighting equipment to buildings and provide a coordinated system of streets
conforming to the Township s Official Map or Comprehensive Plan; and further,
that the land whereon buildings are to be constructed is of such character that
it can be used for building purposes without danger to health or peril from
fire, flood, or other hazard and that all necessary or required erosion and
sedimentation facilities be installed prior to or during the initial phase of
construction of the Subdivision or Land Development.
 125-11 CONSULTATION WITH TOWNSHIP AND SKETCH PLAN (OPTIONAL).
   A.   The conference and any other communications shall be kept as
confidential as possible. However, any documents or communications submitted in
connection with the sketch plan may be subject to disclosure under the
Pennsylvania Right to Know Act. Sketch plans shall not be considered as formal
applications for either subdivision or land development and shall not be
subject to the time requirements as set forth in Section 508 of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code and the time requirements as set fort
in this Chapter. Prior to land acquisition, subdivision, or development the
subdivider or developer should be familiar with these regulations and should
consult with the Township about the following factors:
      (1)   The suitability of the site for development.
      (2)   The demand for a development of the type proposed in the particular
location proposed.
      (3)   The accessibility of the site.
      (4)   The availability of public facilities (schools, parks, water,
sanitary and storm sewerage, etc.) and public services (police, fire, refuse
disposal, etc.).
      (5)   Conformance of the proposed development with the comprehensive plan
of the Township.
      (6)   Sewage facilities requirements of the Department of Environmental
Protection and the Township.
      (7)   Erosion and sedimentation plans and permits as required by the
Department of Environmental Protection and as reviewed by the Franklin County
Conservation District.
      (8)   Requirements of
Chapter 150, Zoning.
      (9)   Precautionary measures to preserve or protect historic and natural
features.
      (10)   Approvals by all appropriate local, state and federal agencies.
   B.   It is highly recommended, but not required, that the subdivider or
developer submit a sketch plan for review before making a formal submission.
Such review shall be limited to Township staff unless the subdivider or
developer provides written authorization agreeing to reimburse all review fees
incurred by the Township s engineer.
 125-12 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT PLAN SUBMISSION.
   A.   The subdivider or land developer shall submit copies of proposed plans
to the Township Planning and Zoning Department in accordance with subsections
(E) and (F) below. Plans shall be distributed to the appropriate agencies as
provided for in §
125-13. All plans when first submitted shall be clearly marked as Preliminary
or Final Plans, but not both.
   B.   Preliminary Plans. Preliminary Plans may be submitted for review and
approval by the Board of Supervisors. Such plans shall comply with all the
applicable regulations. Upon approval of Preliminary Plans, the subdivider or
developer may grade and install infrastructure. No lots may be sold and no
permits may be issued for any structures not related to the infrastructure
until Final approval is obtained. Financial security, recreation fees and
repair and improvement charges are not required for Preliminary approval.
Preliminary Plans are not required to be submitted before submission of Final
Plans.
   C.   Final Plans. Final Plans may be submitted for review and approval by
the Board of Supervisors. Such plans shall comply with all the applicable
regulations. If Preliminary Plans were previously approved, the Final Plan
shall conform, in all important details, to the approved Preliminary Plan. Any
change shall constitute a new plan submission and is subject to all current
regulations. Financial security shall be provided and all other applicable fees
shall be paid prior to Board of Supervisors approval. Final Plans shall be
recorded within 90 days of the Board of Supervisors signature.
   D.   Exemptions and Modifications.
      (1)   Exemptions. The following are exempt or partially exempt from the
provisions of this chapter:
         (a)   The conversion of an existing single-family detached dwelling or
single-family dwelling semidetached into not more than three residential units,
unless such units are intended to be a condominium.
         (b)   The addition of a residential accessory building on a lot or
lots subordinate to an existing principal building.
         (c)   Agricultural buildings less than 10,000 square feet.
         (d)   The addition or conversion of buildings or rides within the
confines of an enterprise which would be considered an amusement park. For the
purposes of this subsection, an amusement park is defined as a tract or area
used principally as a location for permanent amusement structures or rides.
This exclusion shall not apply to newly acquired acreage by an amusement park
until initial plans for the expanded area have been approved by proper
authorities.
      (2)   Modifications.
         (a)   The Board of Supervisors may grant a modification of the
requirements of one or more provisions of this chapter if the literal
enforcement will create undue hardship because of particular conditions
pertaining to the land in question, provided that such modifications will not
be contrary to the public interest and that the purpose and intent of this
chapter is observed.
         (b)   All requests for a modification shall be in writing and shall
accompany and be a part of the application for development. The request shall
state in full the grounds and facts of unreasonableness or hardship on which
the request is based, the provision or provisions of this chapter involved and
the minimum modification necessary to afford relief.
         (c)   Any request for modification shall be referred to the Antrim
Township Planning Commission for advisory comments.
         (d)   The Board of Supervisors shall keep a written record of all
action on all requests for modifications.
   E.   Formal Submissions to the Township shall contain at a minimum:
      (1)   Antrim Township Subdivision/Land Development Application.
      (2)   Subdivision/Land Development fees as approved by the Board of
Supervisors by check made payable to Antrim Township.
      (3)   Letter of Transmittal listing all submitted items.
      (4)   Franklin County Planning Commission review application and
submission fees on a check made payable to the Franklin County Planning
Commission. Fees must be obtained from the Franklin County Planning Commission.
      (5)   Eleven (11) full sets of the plan.
      (6)   One (1) hard copy of all reports relating to stormwater, traffic,
erosion control, hydrogeology, and all other applicable reports or studies.
      (7)   Sewage Facilities Planning as required.
      (8)   One (1) electronic submission of the full plan set and all reports
in a portable document format (.pdf) or in a format approved by Antrim
Township.
   F.   Informal resubmission. An informal resubmission may be made during the
review process to allow a subdivider or developer to receive a review of
revisions. Such informal submission neither extends timing provisions nor
allows approval from Commissions or Boards. Notwithstanding anything in this
section, the Supervisors have the right to disapprove the plan if an extension
request is not submitted and approved by the Supervisors. Informal
resubmissions shall contain at a minimum:
      (1)   Letter of Transmittal listing all submitted items.
      (2)   Comment response letter(s).
      (3)   Two (2) full sets of revised plans.
      (4)   One (1) hard copy of all revised reports.
      (5)   One (1) electronic submission of the full revised plan set and all
revised reports in a .pdf or in a format approved by Antrim Township.
 125-13 REVIEW PROCESS AND REQUIREMENTS.
   A.   Approving Agencies. The following agencies shall review and make
determinations, when applicable, on subdivision and land development plans
submitted to Antrim Township for approval. When a change is required by an
approving agency, the changes shall be made to all plans prior to re-submittal
for approval.
      (1)   Franklin County Planning Commission (FCPC).
         (a)   No plan shall be acted on by the Antrim Township Planning
Commission or the Antrim Township Board of Supervisors without first being
acted on by the Franklin County Planning Commission unless the FCPC fails to
respond within thirty (30) days from the date the plan was forwarded to them.
      (2)   Antrim Township Planning Commission (ATPC).
         (a)   All plans shall be referred to the Antrim Township Planning
Commission for a recommendation to the Board of Supervisors.
         (b)   Plans will be added to the next ATPC regular meeting agenda
provided the plans are received at least ten (10) days in advance. This does
not mean the plans will be acted on by the ATPC; only that they will be listed
on the agenda.
         (c)   The ATPC shall act on a plan within sixty (60) days following
the date of the next regular ATPC meeting from when the application was filed.
If the next regular meeting is greater than thirty (30) days from the date of
application, the sixty (60) days shall be counted from the thirtieth (30th) day
of the application date.
         (d)   An extension of time may be agreed to as provided for in Section
508 of the Municipalities Planning Code (MPC).
      (3)   Antrim Township Municipal Authority (ATMA)/Greencastle Area
Franklin County Water Authority (GAFCWA)
         (a)   A plan for properties that are served by sewer or water that are
within five-hundred (500) feet of sewer or water by the Antrim Township
Municipal Authority or the Greencastle Area Franklin County Water Authority
shall receive approval from such entity before the plan can go to the Board of
Supervisors for action.
         (b)   The submission to the GAFCWA shall be made by the developer.
      (4)   Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection Agency (PADEP).
         (a)   When required, the developer is responsible for submitting and
obtaining approval for appropriate planning and permitting for sewer, water,
erosion and sedimentation controls, stream crossing or alteration, and or other
regulated activities from the PADEP.
      (5)   Franklin County Conservation District (FCCD).
         (a)   The developer is responsible for submitting plans to the
Franklin County Conservation District.
         (b)   A copy of the approved stamped set of Erosion and Sedimentation
plans shall be inserted into each set of the plans submitted to the Township.
      (6)   Other approvals.
         (a)   Township staff, Township engineers and, when required, other
approving agencies shall review and comment on plans.
      (7)   Antrim Township Board of Supervisors (BOS).
         (a)   The Subdivision and Land Development plans shall be subject to
approval, modification, or rejection by the BOS.
         (b)   Approval of Preliminary or Final Plans by the Board of
Supervisors shall be considered approval of the arrangement and dimensions of
streets, lots, utilities, and other features shown on the plans and may be made
conditionally on specified changes to be incorporated in the plans.
         (c)   When a Final Plan is conditionally approved, the Board of
Supervisors shall not sign such plans until all conditions are satisfied. The
plan s approval date shall be the date the conditions are satisfied.
         (d)   Before acting on any plan, the Board of Supervisors may arrange
for a public hearing thereon after giving such notice as it may deem necessary
and desirable in such case.
         (e)   In the event that such plan is disapproved, the reason therefore
shall be set forth in writing.
         (f)   All the above agencies, as required, shall have acted on the
plans prior to BOS action and all staff and engineering comments shall be
satisfied.
         (g)   All fees as required shall be paid prior to BOS action.
         (h)   Prior to Board of Supervisors approval and after all revisions
have been made, an electronic copy of a complete plan set in State Plane 83
South shall be submitted to the Township in accordance with this chapter.
         (i)   Financial Security shall be in place prior to BOS final
approval.
   B.   Fees.
   The following fees shall be paid by the subdivider or developer to the
Township:
      (1)   Filing fees. For the filing of a Preliminary or Final Plan, the fee
shall be set forth from time to time by resolution of the Board of Supervisors.
      (2)   Review fees.
         (a)   Review fees shall include the reasonable and necessary charges
by the Township s professional consultants, Solicitor, and/or Engineer for
review and report to the Township, and shall be set by resolution. Such review
fees shall be reasonable and in accordance with the ordinary and customary
charges by the Township Engineer or consultant for similar service in the
community, but in no event shall the fees exceed the rate or cost charged by
the Engineer or consultant to the Township when fees are not reimbursed or
otherwise imposed on applicants.
         (b)   In the event that the applicant disputes the amount of any such
review fees, the applicant shall, within ten (10) days of the billing date,
notify the Township that such fees are disputed, in which case the Township
shall not delay or disapprove a Subdivision or Land Development application due
to the applicant s request over disputed fees.
         (c)   In the event that the Township and the applicant cannot agree on
the amount of review fees which are reasonable and necessary, then the fees
shall be recalculated and recertified by another professional engineer licensed
as such in the commonwealth and chosen mutually by the Township and the
applicant or developer. The estimate certified by the third engineer shall be
presumed fair and reasonable and shall be the Final estimate. In the event that
a third engineer is so chosen, fees for the services of said engineer shall be
paid equally by the Township and the applicant or developer.
      (3)   Sewer fees.
         (a)   No Subdivision or Land Development plans shall be given Final
approval until all applicable fees prescribed in
Chapter 110 entitled Sewers or as prescribed on the Antrim Township Fee
Schedule as set forth by the Board of Supervisors annually, have been paid in
full, except that tapping fees for each EDU within the Subdivision need not be
paid until individual land use permits are applied for.
      (4)   Recreation fee.
         (a)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to ensure that present
and future residents of the Township of Antrim will have available to them
adequate parks, recreational areas and facilities by establishing requirements
for the dedication of land or a fee in lieu of such dedication to be imposed
upon subdividers and land developers as authorized by the Municipalities
Planning Code. All land so dedicated or fees collected in lieu thereof shall be
used only for the purpose of providing accessible park or recreational
facilities.
         (b)   Applicability. This section shall apply to all Subdivisions and
Land Developments in Antrim Township.
         (c)   General requirement. Every Subdivision or Land Development
shall, as a condition of approval and subject to the standards for acceptance
set forth hereafter, provide for the development of recreational areas or
facilities by either the dedication of land suitable therefor or the payment of
a fee in lieu of such dedication in accordance with the hereinafter established
standards:
            [1]   Land dedication requirement. Except as hereinafter provided,
every owner, subdivider or developer of a Subdivision or Land Development shall
dedicate a portion of the land proposed for said development to the Township
for recreational purposes in accordance with the following standards and
formula:
               [a]   Single-family detached or semidetached dwelling
developments shall dedicate a minimum of one-thousand-five-hundred (1,500)
square feet per lot or dwelling unit.
               [b]   Multifamily dwelling developments shall dedicate a minimum
of one-thousand-five-hundred (1,500) square feet per unit. Twenty-five percent
(25%) of the land so dedicated may be included in and used to satisfy the open
space requirement for development.
               [c]   Conversions from single to multifamily dwelling
developments will be subject to the standard for multifamily dwelling
developments.
               [d]   Nonresidential developments, excluding agricultural uses,
shall dedicate a minimum of ten percent (10%) of gross land area to
recreational use.
               [e]   Single lot one (1) time exemption. The Subdivision or
development of one (1) single-family residential lot from a larger tract shall
be exempt from the dedication or fee requirements of this chapter; provided
however, that this exemption shall be available one (1) time only and further
Subdivisions or Land Development from the same tract shall not be exempted.
            [2]   Standards and criteria for dedication and acceptance of
recreational land.
               [a]   Acceptance and dedication shall be at the option of the
Board of Supervisors. In determining whether to accept or reject land offered
for dedication the Board shall consider the recommendation of the Parks and
Recreation Board and the following factors:
                  i.   All land offered for dedication shall be contiguous and
located in a single area of not less than three (3) acres.
                  ii.   Not more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the offered
land shall be located in a floodplain or exceed a slope in excess of eight
percent (8%).
                  iii.   Offered land must be suitable for recreational use as
a public park based upon its size, topography and soil conditions. Land shall
not be considered suitable when used for inappropriate dual purposes, including
but not limited to erosion and sedimentation control and stormwater management.
                  iv.   Offered land shall abut and have direct access to a
public road and shall be suitable for the installation of water and sewer
facilities and other utilities.
                  v.   The decision of the Board of Supervisors to accept or
reject dedication shall be conclusive. In the event that dedication is
rejected, the developer or subdivider shall comply with the provisions herein
for payment of a fee in lieu of dedication. The developer shall also have the
option of providing recreational land and facilities which are owned and
maintained by a homeowners association in accordance with §
150-63, provided all above standards are met.
            [3]   Fees in lieu of dedication. In lieu of dedication of land as
aforesaid, the developer or subdivider shall pay a fee to the Township of
Antrim in an amount based upon a schedule of fees adopted by resolution of the
Board of Supervisors. Said fee schedule shall establish a set fee for lots and
dwelling units thereon and may be revised from time to time without further
amendment of this chapter.
               [a]   Payment of fees. All fees hereunder shall be due and
payable prior to approval of the Final Subdivision or Land Development plan or
any phase or section thereof.
               [b]   Use of land or fees received. All land or fees received by
the Township shall be used to establish and develop recreational areas and
facilities within the Township which shall be reasonably available for use and
enjoyment by the residents of the development and Subdivision assessed for said
lands or fees. Such facilities shall not however be required to be within or
immediately adjoining such Subdivisions or developments. A separate park and
recreation capital account in the name of the Township shall be established to
set aside the funds collected and ensure their use for recreational purposes
exclusively. Said account shall be an interest-bearing account and funds not
utilized within the period provided by law shall, upon request, be returned to
the owner or developer in accordance with the provisions of Municipalities
Planning Code, Section 503.11, vii.
      (5)   Electronic copies.
         (a)   Once a plan is acted on by the Board of Supervisors, whether
Preliminary or Final, the Township shall scan or have the plan electronically
copied. Such cost shall be borne by the developer.
      (6)   Recording of plans and agreements at the Franklin County Recorder
of Deeds.
         (a)   Antrim Township staff will deliver the plans, agreements, and/or
other documents to the Franklin County Courthouse to be recorded.
         (b)   Final Plans shall be recorded within ninety (90) days of when
the Board of Supervisors sign the plans. Preliminary Plans shall not be
recorded.
         (c)   The Recorder of Deeds shall not accept any plan for recording
unless such plan officially notes the approval of the Board of Supervisors and
review by the county planning agency.
         (d)   The Developer shall provide a check made payable to the Franklin
County Recorder of Deeds to cover the entire cost for any and all plans,
agreements or other documents that shall be recorded.
         (e)   This check shall be received before the Board of Supervisors act
on the plan.
         (f)   The recording of the plan shall not constitute grounds for
assessment increases until such time as lots are sold or improvements are
installed on the land within the subject plan.
   C.   Financial Security.
      (1)   No plan shall be Finally approved unless the streets shown on such
plan have been improved to a mud-free or otherwise permanently passable
condition, or improved as may be otherwise required by this chapter and any
walkways, curbs, gutters, streetlights, fire hydrants, shade trees, water
mains, sanitary sewers, storm sewers and other improvements as may be required
by this chapter have been installed in accordance with this chapter. In lieu of
the completion of any improvements required as a condition for the Final
approval of a plan, including improvements or fees otherwise required by this
chapter, the developer may deposit with the Township financial security in an
amount sufficient to cover the costs of such improvements or common amenities,
including but not limited to roads, stormwater detention and/or retention
basins and other related drainage facilities, recreational facilities, open
space improvements, or buffer or screen plantings which may be required.
      (2)   When requested by the developer, in order to facilitate financing,
the Board of Supervisors shall furnish the developer with a signed copy of a
resolution indicating approval of the Final Plan contingent upon the developer
obtaining satisfactory financial security. The Final Plan or record plan shall
not be signed nor recorded until the financial improvements agreement is
executed. The resolution or letter of contingent approval shall expire and be
deemed to be revoked if the financial security agreement is not executed within
ninety (90) days, unless a written extension is granted by the Board of
Supervisors; such extension shall not be unreasonably withheld and shall be
placed in writing at the request of the developer.
      (3)   Without limitation as to other types of financial security which
the Township may approve, which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld,
federal or commonwealth chartered lending institution irrevocable letters of
credit and restrictive or escrow accounts in such lending institutions shall be
deemed acceptable financial security for the purposes of this section.
      (4)   Such financial security shall be posted with a bonding company or
federal or commonwealth chartered lending institution chosen by the party
posting the financial security, provided said bonding company or lending
institution is authorized to conduct such business within the commonwealth.
      (5)   Such bond or other security shall provide for and secure to the
public the completion of any improvements which may be required on or before
the date fixed in the formal action of approval or accompanying agreement for
completion of the improvements.
      (6)   The amount of financial security to be posted for the completion of
the required improvements shall be equal to one-hundred-ten percent (110%) of
the cost of completion estimated as on ninety (90) days following the date
scheduled for completion by the developer. Annually, the Township may adjust
the amount of the financial security by comparing the actual cost of the
improvements which have been completed and the estimated cost for the
completion of the remaining improvements as of the expiration of the ninetieth
(90th) day after either the original date scheduled for completion or a
rescheduled date of completion. Subsequent to said adjustment, the Township may
require the developer to post additional security in order to assure that the
financial security equals said one-hundred-ten percent (110%). Any additional
security shall be posted by the developer in accordance with this subsection.
      (7)   The amount of financial security required shall be based upon an
estimate of the cost of completion of the required improvements submitted by
the applicant or developer and prepared by a professional engineer licensed as
such in the commonwealth and certified by such engineer to be a fair and
reasonable estimate of such cost. The Township, upon the recommendation of the
Township Engineer, may refuse to accept such estimate for good cause shown. If
the applicant or developer and the Township are unable to agree upon an
estimate, then the estimate shall be recalculated and recertified by another
professional engineer licensed as such in this commonwealth and chosen mutually
by the Township and the applicant or developer. The estimate certified by the
third engineer shall be presumed fair and reasonable and shall be the final
estimate. In the event that a third engineer is so chosen, fees for the
services of said engineer shall be paid equally by the Township and the
applicant or developer.
      (8)   If the party posting the financial security requires more than one
(1) year from the date of posting of the financial security to complete the
required improvements the amount of financial security may be increased by an
additional ten percent (10%) for each one (1) year period beyond the first
anniversary date from posting of financial security or to an amount not
exceeding one-hundred-ten percent (110%) of the cost of completing the required
improvements as reestablished on or about the expiration of the preceding one-
year period by using the above bidding procedure.
      (9)   In the case where development is projected over a period of years,
the Board of Supervisors may authorize submission of Final Plans by sections or
stages of development subject to such requirements or guarantees as to
improvements in future sections or stages of development as it finds essential
for the protection of any Final approved section of the development.
      (10)   As the work of installing the required improvements proceeds, the
party posting the financial security may request the Board of Supervisors to
release or authorize the release, from time to time, of such portions of the
financial security necessary for payment to the contractor or contractors
performing the work. Any such requests shall be in writing addressed to the
Board of Supervisors, and the Board of Supervisors shall have forty-five (45)
days from receipt of such request within which to allow the Township Engineer
to certify, in writing, to the Board of Supervisors that such portion of the
work upon the improvements has been completed in accordance with the approved
plan. Upon such certification the Board of Supervisors shall authorize release
by the bonding company or lending institution of an amount as estimated by the
Township Engineer fairly representing the value of the improvements completed
or, if the Board of Supervisors fails to act within said forty-five (45) day
period, the Board of Supervisors shall be deemed to have approved the release
of funds as requested. The Board of Supervisors may, prior to Final release at
the time of completion and certification by its engineer, require retention of
ten percent (10%) of the estimated cost of the aforesaid improvements.
      (11)   Where the Board of Supervisors accepts dedication of all or some
of the required improvements following completion, the Board of Supervisors may
require the posting of financial security to secure structural integrity of
said improvements as well as the functioning of said improvements in accordance
with the design and specifications as depicted on the Final Plan for a term not
to exceed eighteen (18) months from the date of acceptance of dedication. Said
financial security shall be of the same type as otherwise required in this
section with regard to installation of such improvements, and the amount of the
financial security shall not exceed fifteen percent (15%) of the actual cost of
installation of said improvements.
      (12)   If water mains or sanitary sewer lines, or both, along with
apparatus or facilities related thereto, are to be installed under the
jurisdiction and pursuant to the rules and regulations of a public utility or
municipal authority separate and distinct from the Township, financial security
to assure proper completion and maintenance thereof shall be posted in
accordance with the regulations of the controlling public utility or municipal
authority and shall not be included within the financial security as otherwise
required by this section.
      (13)   If the financial security has been approved in lieu of the
completion of improvements required as a condition for the Final approval of a
plan as set forth in this section, the Township shall not condition the
issuance of building, grading or other permits relating to the erection or
placement of improvements, including buildings, upon the lots or land as
depicted upon the Final Plan upon actual completion of the improvements
depicted upon the approved Final Plan. Moreover, if said financial security has
been provided, occupancy permits for any building or buildings to be erected
shall not be withheld following the improvement of the streets providing access
to and from existing public roads to such building or buildings to a mud-free
or otherwise permanently passable condition, as well as the completion of all
other improvements as depicted upon the approved plan, either upon the lot or
lots or beyond the lot or lots in question if such improvements are necessary
for the reasonable use of or occupancy of the building or buildings.
   D.   Inspection of improvements; release from improvement bond.
      (1)   When the developer has completed all of the necessary and
appropriate improvements, the developer shall notify the Board of Supervisors,
in writing, by certified or registered mail, of the completion of the aforesaid
improvements and shall send a copy thereof to the Township Engineer. The Board
of Supervisors shall, within ten (10) days after receipt of such notice, direct
and authorize the Township Engineer to inspect all of the aforesaid
improvements. The Township Engineer shall, thereupon, file a report in writing
with the Board of Supervisors, and shall promptly mail a copy of the same to
the developer by certified or registered mail. The report shall be made and
mailed within thirty (30) days after receipt by the Township Engineer of the
aforesaid authorization from the Board of Supervisors. Said report shall detail
and shall indicate approval or rejection of said improvements, either in whole
or in part, and if said improvements, or any portion thereof, shall not be
approved or shall be rejected by the Township Engineer, said report shall
contain a statement of reasons for such non-approval or rejection.
      (2)   The Board of Supervisors shall notify the developer, within fifteen
(15) days of receipt of the Engineer s report, in writing, by certified or
registered mail of the action of said Board of Supervisors with relation
thereto.
      (3)   If the Board of Supervisors or the Township Engineer fails to
comply with the time limitation provisions contained herein, all improvements
will be deemed to have been approved and the developer shall be released from
all liability, pursuant to its performance guaranty bond or other security
agreement.
      (4)   If any portion of said improvements shall not be approved or shall
be rejected by the Board of Supervisors, the developer shall proceed to
complete the same, and, upon completion, the same procedure of notification, as
outlined herein, shall be followed.
      (5)   Nothing herein, however, shall be construed in limitation of the
developer s right to contest or question by legal proceedings or otherwise, any
determination of the Board of Supervisors or the Township Engineer.
      (6)   Where herein reference is made to the Township Engineer, he or she
shall be as a consultant thereto.
      (7)   The applicant or developer shall reimburse the Township for the
reasonable and necessary expense incurred for the inspection or improvements
according to a schedule of fees adopted by resolution of the Board of
Supervisors and as from time to time amended. Such expense shall be reasonable
and in accordance with the ordinary and customary fees charged by the Township
Engineer or consultant for work performed for similar services in the
community, but in no event shall the fees exceed the rate or cost charged by
the Engineer or consultant to the Township when fees are not reimbursed or
otherwise imposed on applicants.
         (a)   In the event that the applicant disputes the amount of any such
expense in connection with the inspection of improvements, the applicant shall,
within 10 working days of the date of the billing, notify the Township that
such expenses are disputed as unreasonable or unnecessary, in which case the
Township shall not delay or disapprove a Subdivision or Land Development
application or any approval or permit related to development due to the
applicant s request over disputed engineer expenses.
         (b)   If, within twenty (20) days from the date of the billing, the
Township and the applicant cannot agree on the amount of expenses which are
reasonable and necessary, then the applicant and the Township shall jointly, by
mutual agreement, appoint another professional engineer licensed as such in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to review said expenses and make a determination
as to the amount thereof which is reasonable and necessary.
         (c)   The professional engineer so appointed shall hear such evidence
and review such documentation as the professional engineer in his or her sole
opinion deems necessary and render a decision within fifty (50) days of the
billing date. The applicant shall be required to pay the entire amount
determined in the decision immediately.
         (d)   In the event that the Township and the applicant cannot agree
upon the professional engineer to be appointed within twenty (20) days of the
billing date, then, upon application of either party, the President Judge of
the Court of Common Pleas of the judicial district in which the Township is
located (or if at the time there is no President Judge, then the senior active
judge then sitting) shall appoint such engineer, who, in that case, shall be
neither the Township Engineer nor any professional engineer who has been
retained by, or performed services for, the Township or the applicant within
the preceding five (5) years.
         (e)   The fee of the appointed professional engineer for determining
the reasonable and necessary expenses shall be paid by the applicant if the
amount of payment required in the decision is equal to or greater than the
original bill. If the amount of payment required in the decision is less than
the original bill by one-thousand dollars ($1,000) or more, the Township shall
pay the fee of the professional engineer, but otherwise the Township and the
applicant shall each pay half (1/2) of the fee of the appointed professional
engineer.
   E.   Remedies to effect completion of improvements.
   In the event that any improvements which may be required have not been
installed as provided in this chapter or in accord with the approved Final Plan
the Board of Supervisors is hereby granted the power to enforce any corporate
bond, or other security by appropriate legal and equitable remedies. If the
proceeds of such bond or other security are insufficient to pay the cost of
installing or making repairs or corrections to all the improvements covered by
said security, the Board of Supervisors may, at its option, install part of
such improvements in all or in part of the Subdivision or Land Development and
may institute appropriate legal or equitable action to recover the money
necessary to complete the remainder of the improvements. All of the proceeds,
whether resulting from the security or from any legal or equitable action
brought against the developer, or both, shall be used solely for the
installation of the improvements covered by such security, and not for any
other Township purpose.
   F.   Dedication of improvements.
      (1)   Prior to the dedication of roads, water, and/or sewer, the
developer or subdivider shall prepare as built drawings showing the vertical
and horizontal location of such improvements. As built conditions shall be CAD
drafted red lined revisions overlaid on the approved design. Two (2) copies and
(1) electronic copy in State Plane 83 South shall be submitted for review and
approval. Additional copies may be requested.
      (2)   The developer or subdivider shall prepare and submit a deed in a
form approved by the Township along with a statement of value. The deed shall
include a written legal description of the area to be dedicated as well as a
right of way plat on paper no larger than 11 x 17 . The right of way plat
should be contained on one sheet of paper to the greatest extent possible. When
two or more sheets are necessary, match lines are required.
      (3)   An on site inspection of all proposed improvements to be dedicated
will be conducted by Township staff and engineer(s). Any deficiencies found
from such inspection shall be corrected prior to acceptance of the deed(s).
      (4)   A maintenance bond shall be supplied in accordance with §
125-13(C).
      (5)   Upon Township satisfaction with the as built drawings, deed of
dedication documents and such improvements, the Antrim Township Municipal
Authority and/or the Antrim Township Board of Supervisors, will accept such
dedication by Resolution. When roads and sewer or water are being dedicated,
the sewer or water lines shall be dedicated to the Antrim Township Municipal
Authority before the roads shall be accepted by the Antrim Township Board of
Supervisors. The Township reserves the right to reject a deed of dedication if
deemed to be in the best interest of the public health, safety, and welfare of
the Township.
      (6)   The deed of dedication, the statement of value and the resolution
shall be recorded at the Franklin County Courthouse. The developer shall
provide a check made payable to the Franklin County Recorder of Deeds before
the documents can be recorded.
      (7)   The subdivider or developer shall reimburse the Township for all
costs incurred.
ARTICLE IV DESIGN STANDARDS
 125-14 PLAN REQUIREMENTS.
   Final Plans with Preliminary Plan approval shall conform in all important
details with Preliminary Plans as previously approved, and any conditions
specified in the approval of Preliminary Plans shall be incorporated in the
Final Plans. The following material shall be submitted by a Pennsylvania
licensed surveyor or Pennsylvania licensed engineer with an application for
review and approval of Subdivision or Land Development plans:
   A.   Plans shall be submitted on sheet sizes, 18 inches by 24 inches or 24
inches by 36 inches drawn to a scale not smaller than fifty (50) feet to the
inch. The subdivision or development of lands that propose no street
construction or other improvements that would require the need for greater
detail may use a smaller scale so long as it is clear as to the plan s intended
purpose. [Amended 4-14-2020 by Ord. No. 355]
   B.   The standards for Subdivision and Land Development plans are as
follows:
      (1)   Horizontal control surveying accuracy shall meet or exceed N.G.S.
Order of Accuracy Third Class.
         (a)   Maximum error of closure: one to 10,000.
         (b)   Angular closure, traverse with N angle: 15" x SQRT (N).
      (2)   Vertical control surveying accuracy and contours:
         (a)   Vertical error of closure: 12 millimeters * SQRT (K), where K is
length of the level loop in kilometers; or 0.05 foot * SQRT (M), where M is the
length of the level loop in miles.
         (b)   Contour accuracy and precision: + or - 1/2 contour interval.
      (3)   Site plans shall use a two (2) foot contour interval for all
projects requiring public improvements. For slopes greater than 20%, five (5)
foot contour intervals may be used.
      (4)   All plans shall be designed with a minimum of two (2) points
plotted/shown in Pennsylvania State Plane 83 South. Additional points may be
required by the Township to adequately locate the development.
      (5)   Horizontal datum shall be Pennsylvania State Plane 83 South.
      (6)   Elevations shall be NOAA, NGS referenced to vertical controls
established by any accepted federal agency (USGS) and a suitable bench mark
shall be established within the project and referenced on the plan. Datum for
vertical elevation shall be based on the latest established datum. (Currently
NAVD 1988)
      (7)   A typical cross-section drawing for all proposed streets showing
rights-of-way, cartway widths, location of curbs, sanitary and stormwater
sewers, water pipes, underground utilities, water management facilities,
sidewalks, and planting strips.
      (8)   Profile drawings of all proposed streets showing existing and
proposed grade.
      (9)   Plans and profiles of existing and/or proposed sanitary and storm
sewer systems, water distribution systems, and any other pertinent utilities.
Such plans shall include grades, pipe sizes and the location of valves and fire
hydrants.
   C.   The following shall be on the first page of a plan. A cover page must
be used if there are multiple pages.
      (1)   An index.
      (2)   Uniform Parcel Identifier Number (UPI).
      (3)   Signature blocks for the Franklin County Planning Commission, the
Antrim Township Planning Commission, the Antrim Township Municipal Authority,
when applicable, the Greencastle Area Franklin County Water Authority, when
applicable, and the Board of Supervisors. If a plan enters into more than one
municipality, then the plans must obtain signatures as required by that entity
as well.
      (4)   The name and address of the subdivider or developer.
      (5)   The name and address of the owner(s) of the tract.
      (6)   The name, seal, certification statement, and signature of the
Pennsylvania licensed engineer and/or Pennsylvania licensed surveyor, as
warranted by the magnitude of the project.
      (7)   A location map showing the proposed project in relation to adjacent
properties and existing streets in that vicinity of the Township.
      (8)   A statement of acknowledgment in legal form, executed by each owner
or equitable owner and acknowledged by a notary public, stating that the
applicant is the owner or equitable owner of the land which is the subject of
the application and that the application as shown on the plat is the act and
deed of the applicant and that it is desired to record same.
      (9)   Drawings shall include the source of the survey, topographical
features, date of field work and by whom.
      (10)   The Zoning District, its standards, and minimum area regulations.
      (11)   The following notes shall apply and be set forth on the first page
when applicable to the project:
         (a)   During construction a copy of the Township Approved plans must
be on site and available at all times.
         (b)   Township must be notified seven (7) days in advance for a
preconstruction meeting.
         (c)   Any damage to existing Antrim Township roads shall be repaired
by the developer to Antrim Township s road construction specifications and to
the satisfaction of Antrim Township.
         (d)   Roads shall be kept free of mud, dirt, stones, and debris for
the duration of the project.
         (e)   All road construction shall be in accordance with Antrim
Township s road construction standards in place at time of actual construction.
         (f)   Construction on a property which is accessed by a public road
shall have minimal impact on the road and neighborhood while construction is
taking place.
         (g)   All entrances shall be constructed prior to any excavation
taking place. All construction vehicles shall be parked outside of the public
rights-of-way and shall only enter and exit the property by means of the
construction entrance.
         (h)   Stormwater swales shall not be altered by any means during any
part of the construction of the property, and silt fence shall be placed
adjacent to the stormwater swales to prevent any debris and/or alterations to
the swales. Where stormwater tiles are required under a driveway, they shall be
constructed to be flush with the bottom of the stormwater swales to allow the
water to keep flowing through the swale. If a stormwater swale is altered or
damaged during construction, the property owner will be responsible for
reconstructing the swale as per the approved plan and will bear the expense of
the Township Engineer visiting the site to determine if the swale was
constructed as per the approved plans.
         (i)   The Township shall be responsible for ordering and installing
signs on all roads to be dedicated to the Township after the developer has paid
for them.
         (j)   Either permanent or temporary stop signs shall be installed at
street intersections as soon as the road surface is improved to a mud-free
condition.
         (k)   Utility easements are offered for dedication to their respective
Authority upon approval and acceptance of said respective authority.
         (l)   Road(s) shall be offered to the Township for dedication once
development is built out at a minimum of seventy-five (75) percent.
         (m)   A maintenance bond valid for eighteen (18) months from the date
of acceptance must be provided in a form approved by the Township before
dedication of road and/or utilities.
         (n)   No trees, shrubs, fences, buildings, or improvements are
permitted within the line of sight.
         (o)   No trees, shrubs, fences, buildings, or improvements are
permitted within any right of ways or easements, existing or proposed, as shown
on the plan.
         (p)   Recreational objects shall not be located, either permanently or
temporarily, within the road right-of-way.
         (q)   The Contractor shall notify the following utilities or agencies
at least five (5) days before starting work shown on these drawings (provide
current name and phone numbers for each entity):
   PA One Call System
   Antrim Township
   Franklin County Soil Conservation District
   Antrim Township Municipal Authority
   Gas Transmission
   Power Company
   Cable Franchiser
   Greencastle Area Franklin County Water Authority
         (r)   All driveways shall be located as shown on the approved plans
unless approved by Antrim Township to be re-located at time of driveway permit
application.
         (s)   The distance of all driveways on corner lots must be maximized
away from road intersections.
         (t)   All driveways shall be constructed so as not to impair drainage
within the right-of-way, alter the stability of the improved area or change the
drainage of the Township road and adjacent areas.
         (u)   All driveways shall have a minimum fifteen inch (15 ) culvert
pipe or equivalent where a drainage ditch or swale exists.
         (v)   Driveways serving residential use properties shall be a minimum
of twelve (12) feet in width and have at a minimum a five-foot (5 ) radius.
         (w)   Residential driveways shall be a paved surface with a four (4)
inch minimum depth within the road right-of-way.
         (x)   All nonresidential driveways and parking areas intended for use
by the public shall be paved in their entirety.
         (y)   Plans with Cul-de-sacs shall have the following notes:
            [1]   There shall be no more than three (3) driveways off the cul-
de-sac.
            [2]   Mailbox clusters are required prior to entering the cul-de-
sac and shall be shown on the plan. Mailboxes shall not be placed within the
area of the cul-de-sac.
            [3]   Pillars, piers, monuments, or any other structures are not at
any time permitted within the right-of-way of the cul-de-sac.
            [4]   If the use is residential; only single-family dwellings are
permitted in cul-de-sacs.
            [5]   No parking shall be permitted in cul-de-sacs. Signage shall
be posted prohibiting parking.
            [6]   Two (2) snow easements 20 feet wide x 20 feet long shall be
provided at the two o clock and ten o clock positions measuring from the edge
of the pavement to provide an area for snow to be stockpiled. This area shall
remain free of improvements.
         (z)   Warning: Residents shall expect the smell of farm animals and
the manure they produce, chemical sprays, slow-moving agricultural machinery on
roads and other byproducts of agricultural activity.
         (aa)   Property owners shall own and maintain all curbs, sidewalks,
and/or trails on their property or within the right of way.
         (bb)   An HOP shall be obtained from Antrim Township/PennDOT for the
entrance onto ___________.
         (cc)   Any illumination or flood lighting shall be arranged so there
will be no glare of lights upon residences or residential district. Lighting
shall also be shielded from the roadway.
         (dd)   Notes addressing:
            [1]   Type of sewer and water service and who it is served by.
            [2]   The purpose of the plan.
            [3]   Compliance with parking regulations.
            [4]   The site s impervious area.
            [5]   Types of structures to be erected and a summary table of the
number of structures/dwelling units proposed.
            [6]   Estimated EDUs.
   D.   All plans shall show the following:
      (1)   The limits and dimensions of the tract and/or property to be
subdivided or developed and the proposed name or identifying title of the
project.
      (2)   All existing buildings, railroads, easements, rights-of-way, public
lands, tree masses, streams, bodies of water, primary conservation areas,
monuments, and other features within one-hundred (100) feet of the Subdivision.
      (3)   The date, scale and North point.
      (4)   Existing and proposed streets, including the name, Township or
State Route number, width of the right-of-way and cartway.
      (5)   Names of the owners of adjoining tracts, including those across
roads, streams, etc.
      (6)   The location and dimensions (when applicable), of all existing and
proposed:
         (a)   monuments.
         (b)   traffic lights, street lights, and street signs.
         (c)   sewer facilities, public or otherwise.
         (d)   perc sites and replacement areas shall be shown.
         (e)   water facilities, public or otherwise.
         (f)   fire hydrants, water lines, water easements etc.
         (g)   stormwater facilities.
         (h)   curbs.
         (i)   sidewalks.
         (j)   primary conservation areas and their easements.
         (k)   tree masses, streams, ponds and other features.
         (l)   buildings and structures, historical and otherwise.
         (m)   railroads
         (n)   easements and/or rights-of-way
         (o)   public lands.
         (p)   Township boundary lines.
         (q)   Zoning lines, if split zoning.
         (r)   driveways in accordance with §
125-17(C)(3)
         (s)   minimum building setback lines.
         (t)   buffer zones and screening.
         (u)   trails.
   E.   All Subdivisions or Land Development plans shall connect to public
utilities as required in
Chapter 110 entitled Sewers and
Chapter 143 entitled Water supply . Private wells and or septic systems shall
comply as set forth in
Chapter 110.
   F.   Any property requiring that a Subdivision or Land Development plan (as
defined in this chapter) be filed pursuant to this chapter shall also file a
stormwater management plan pursuant to the requirements of
Chapter 126 of the Code of the Township of Antrim.
   G.   The measures used to control erosion and reduce sedimentation shall at
a minimum meet the erosion and sedimentation control standards and
specifications as set forth in the Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control
Program Manual, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Department of Environmental
Protection, Bureau of Soil and Water Conservation, March 2012, as amended.
Copies of this document are available from the commonwealth and through the
Franklin County Conservation District Office.
 125-15 CONSERVATION PRACTICES.
   A.   Primary Conservation Areas.
      (1)   Primary Conservation Areas shall be preserved in perpetuity by a
Conservation Easement in all Zoning Districts. The Conservation Easement shall
extend twenty (20) feet beyond the perimeter of wetlands and steep slopes to
provide a buffer zone. Flood Plains shall be in a Conservation Easement but are
not required to have the twenty (20) foot buffer. [Amended 4-14-2020 by Ord.
No. 355]
      (2)   Such areas shall be protected from mechanical injury during the
construction of the site and any grading changes to the remainder of the site
shall be proposed in such manner that it will not adversely affect the existing
vegetation, drainage, soils, or root system of the retained portion.
      (3)   State and Federal regulations permit construction within these
areas. However, Antrim Township has the right and is requiring preservation
areas within the Township. The following shall be permitted in accordance with
State and Federal law only when the criteria of this section is met and the
Board of Supervisors has granted approval. The Board of Supervisors shall
render the Final decision after receiving a recommendation from the Township
Planning Commission and Engineer.
         (a)   The relocation or disturbance of wetlands shall only be
permitted when all the following criteria can be adequately proven that:
         [1]   isolated wetlands are less than one-thousand (1,000) sq. ft.
         [2]   the wetlands are not contiguous from another property and meet
the criteria of this section when combined.
         [3]   the wetlands are not connected to or touched by a body of water.
         (b)   Stream restoration/improvement when it is clearly shown that the
quality of the stream will be enhanced.
         (c)   Stream crossing when it is proven that such crossing would be an
asset or improvement to the Township and that such crossing, if permitted,
would minimize the impact to the stream and surrounding area.
   B.   Historically Significant Sites or Structures.
      (1)   Historically Significant Sites or Structures in the A, R-1, R-2,
CC, and HC Zoning Districts shall be preserved and maintained in perpetuity.
      (2)   A Conservation Easement or other means of perpetual preservation
and maintenance shall be provided.
      (3)   Practical uses may be proposed for historical structures that will
not negatively impact the historical integrity of the structure. A written plan
shall be submitted for review and approval by the Township showing that such
use will make good use of the structure and not damage the historical integrity
in any way.
   C.   Recreational Trails.
      (1)   Areas designated by the Township on the official map for
recreational trails shall be constructed in accordance with this chapter at the
time the property is developed or as required by the Township.
      (2)   The course of the recreational trail within the tract may be
altered from the Official Map as long as the point where the trail enters and
exits the tract remains the same, aligns with existing trails, and remains
consistent with the Official Map.
      (3)   Recreational Trails shall be properly protected by an easement or
other similar method to ensure proper maintenance and access.
      (4)   Recreational Trails at a minimum shall not be less than five (5)
feet in width and shall maintain a vertical clearance of eight (8) feet. Where
curb ramps and driveway crossings are used, level landings that meet the
minimum width shall be provided. Recreational Trails shall be constructed of a
stable surface that remains unaltered by a person walking, using a bicycle, or
using a wheelchair. In all other respects, Recreational Trails shall meet the
design specifications and recommendations of the Federal Highway Administration
Part II of II Best Practices Design Guide, Chapter 14, Shared-Use Path Design,
dated September 2001 and subsequent revisions.
      (5)   Motorized traffic shall be prohibited and Recreational Trails shall
be designed to deter such traffic.
   D.   Woodland Preservation. [Amended 4-14-2020 by Ord. No. 355]
      (1)   Woodland preservation shall apply to all properties located in the
A, R-1, R-2 and CC Zoning District.
      (2)   A minimum of eighty (80) percent of woodland areas of one (1) acre
or greater, measured from the drip line, shall be preserved by a conservation
easement. The conservation easement shall extend twenty (20) feet from the edge
of the drip line as it existed the day the plans are submitted to the Township.
Woodlands contiguous with woodlands on neighboring properties shall be given
priority for preservation.
      (3)   The woodland shall be undisturbed, except for the removal of dead
or diseased trees, and/or except for normal removal of trees for prudent
woodland management to allow for proper tree growth.
   E.   The Township recognizes that landowners have the right to reasonably
develop their property. Therefore, all landowners shall comply with the
requirements of Section 125-15(A), (B), (C), and (D). However, compliance shall
be required to the extent that landowner shall be able to develop his land with
a density of one (1) lot per eighty-thousand (80,000) square feet. If, the
property contains more than one (1) of the areas described in Section 125-15
(A), (B), (C) or (D), the Primary Conservation areas shall be preserved first.
The developer shall incorporate Sections 125-15(B), (C), or (D), as a whole or
combination thereof, to best fit the land and development to the extent that
the density is met.
   F.   Green Designs and Landscape requirements.
      (1)   Green Designs. Green designs shall be incorporated into all non
residential areas, excluding agricultural uses. Green designs shall, at a
minimum, meet the following:
         (a)   Planting for Green Space shall follow landscape requirements as
set forth in this Chapter.
         (b)   Green Space shall be interconnected within the site as well as
to neighboring properties when possible.
         (c)   Outdoor benches or seating areas are required for food services,
establishments that schedule appointments, or are primarily retail.
         (d)   All sites shall be designed in a manner to create an aesthetic
environment that promotes pedestrian traffic and provides rest areas.
      (2)   Landscape requirements.
         (a)   Landscape requirements for new development or redevelopment
shall be consistent with this section.
         (b)   A minimum of ten (10) percent of the improved non residential
lot(s) shall be landscaped in accordance with this section. Such landscaping is
subject to review and approval by the Township.
         (c)   Native species suitable for soil and climatic conditions shall
be primarily used.
         (d)   Invasive species shall be prohibited.
         (e)   Landscaping shall be maintained by the property owner(s).
Maintenance shall include actions necessary to keep materials and plant life
healthy, neat and orderly in appearance and free of litter and debris. All
landscaped areas must be protected from damage by motor vehicles or
pedestrians. Replacement of trees, bushes, plants or other vegetation that do
not survive must be replaced as soon as they show signs of dying with trees,
bushes, or plants of a like size and type.
         (f)   Any change to an approved landscape design shall be reviewed by
the Township engineer to ensure consistency with this section.
   G.   Conservation Easements. [Amended 4-14-2020 by Ord. No. 355]
      (1)   Conservation Easements shall be owned and maintained by an
individual, corporation, condominium association, homeowners association, other
similar entity or a combination thereof. The articles of incorporation shall be
reviewed by the Township Solicitor.
      (2)   Conservation Easements shall be accompanied by a conservation
easement agreement. The agreement shall be between the owner of the easement
and the Township to ensure the easement is preserved in perpetuity.
      (3)   Conservation easement agreements shall be reviewed and approved by
the Township Solicitor before such plan shall be approved. Any changes to the
agreement shall be reviewed and approved by the Township Solicitor prior to
making such change. At a minimum the agreement shall include:
         (a)   Ownership information.
         (b)   A description of regular and periodic maintenance
responsibilities to ensure the land and/or structures are properly preserved
and maintained.
      (4)   Antrim Township shall not incur any costs associated with such
easement and shall not be responsible for any maintenance of easements.
      (5)   The Township may enter the premises and take corrective action,
including extended maintenance. The costs of such corrective action shall be
charged to the property owner, condominium association, homeowners association,
other similar entity, and/or the individuals who make up such entity along with
the administrative costs and penalties. Such costs shall become a lien on said
properties. Notice of such lien shall be filed by the Township in the office of
the Prothonotary of the County.
 125-16 DEVELOPMENT LAYOUT.
   A.   Street layout.
      (1)   Proposed streets shall be integrated with existing and future
proposed streets. The redesign of intersections and road sections may be
required to facilitate new traffic flow and improve safety. Varied street
widths may be required by the Township for safety purposes.
      (2)   When street widths vary, the width shall continue until the next
intersection.
      (3)   Streets shall be interconnected as far as practicable. When
interconnection is not possible, self-looping streets shall be utilized. Cul-
de-sacs shall be avoided and allowed only when interconnection or a self
looping street is not possible.
      (4)   Streets shall be designed to make provision for access to all lots
and to adjacent undeveloped land.
      (5)   Right of ways shall be reserved to all adjoining properties to
allow for the interconnection of streets. These right of ways shall be part of
the deed and dedication documents and offered to the Township to ensure future
connections.
      (6)   Street length. Streets shall be a minimum of four-hundred (400)
feet in length and shall not be more than one-thousand-two-hundred (1,200) feet
in length before an intersection or directional change for the purpose of
traffic calming.
      (7)   Directional changes. Changes in street direction shall be made by
horizontal curves with a minimum radius of five-hundred (500) feet for
arterial/collector/industrial/commercial streets and two-hundred (200) feet for
residential streets. These radii are to be measured at the center line. Shorter
radii may be permitted upon recommendation of the developer s engineer,
reviewed and approved by the Township Engineer.
      (8)   Intersections. Street intersections shall be designed according to
the following standards:
         (a)   No more than two (2) streets shall cross at the same point.
Street intersections shall be at right angles wherever possible, and
intersections of less than seventy degrees (70 ) (measured at the center lines
of the streets) shall not be permitted.
         (b)   Intersection streets shall not enter into the same side of
collector, commercial, industrial, or arterial streets at intervals of less
than eight-hundred (800) feet.
         (c)   Streets entering another street from opposite sides should be
directly opposite each other, or, if necessary, they may be separated by at
least two-hundred (200) feet between center lines measured along the center
line of the cross street. Greater offsets may be required depending on the
importance of the cross street.
         (d)   Maximum grade within any intersection shall not exceed five
percent (5%) in any direction, and approaches to any intersection shall follow
a straight course within one-hundred (100) feet of the intersection. Grades
within one-hundred (100) feet of an intersection shall not exceed ten percent
(10%).
         (e)   Curb radii at intersections shall be according to the following
schedule of minimum lengths: fifteen (15) feet for intersections of alleys with
all streets; twenty (20) feet for residential streets; and thirty five (35)
feet for commercial, industrial, collector, and arterial streets. Where streets
of different categories intersect, requirements for the larger radii shall
hold. The maximum radius of intersection right-of-way lines shall be forty (40)
feet.
         (f)   When average daily trips warrant signalization, a roundabout
shall be used unless justification can be provided that a roundabout is not
sufficient. The roundabout shall be of a size to accommodate the type of
traffic anticipated based on the most current Federal Highway Administration
guidelines.
         (g)   Clear sight distance. Clear sight distance along the center
lines of residential streets shall be maintained at not less than one-hundred-
fifty (150) feet; along collector streets at not less than two-hundred-fifty
(250) feet, and along commercial streets at not less than four-hundred-fifty
(450) feet.
      (9)   Streets shall be laid out to promote pedestrian circulation.
      (10)   Any development proposed to have sixty (60) or more living units
in the entire master sketch plan shall have two (2) or more public roadway
points of ingress and egress. The Board of Supervisors reserves the right to
increase or modify this section when special circumstances exist.
      (11)   A development planned to have a total of sixty (60) or more living
units, preexisting and proposed, utilizing an existing limited (single) access
public roadway, shall provide for a second public roadway for ingress and
egress. The Board of Supervisors reserves the right to increase or modify this
section when special circumstances exist.
      (12)   Street names. Continuations of existing streets shall be known by
the same name, but names for other streets shall not duplicate or closely
resemble names for existing streets in the Township and/or region. The use of
North, South, East, or West shall not be used unless the street crosses SR 16
or SR 11.
   B.   Lot layout.
      (1)   Lot size. The minimum lot size, lot width and building setback line
shall be as required in
Chapter 150, Zoning.
      (2)   Lot lines. Lot lines shall be approximately at right angles or
radial to street lines so long as reasonably shaped lots result.
      (3)   Through lots. Double frontage lots are to be avoided and generally
will not be permitted unless the lots are a minimum of two-hundred (200) feet
deep. Along major highways, through reverse frontage lots served by a minor
street may be required in order to protect the character of the highway.
      (4)   Percolation tests and soils analysis. Percolation tests and soil
analysis shall be required by the Township on each proposed lot in accordance
with the rules and regulations of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection. From the results of these tests, the lot size shall be established
large enough to provide for the specified minimum area required for the
absorption field as prescribed in accordance with the requirements of the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection, but in no case shall the
lot size be less than the minimum area regulations as set forth in the Zoning
Chapter.
      (5)   Recreational Space. Ten percent (10%) of a residential development
shall be set aside for recreational space when proposing an average of five (5)
or more residential dwelling units per acre in a development. Details of such
recreational area(s) shall be shown on the plans. The maintenance and liability
shall be with the Homeowners Association or similar association.
      (6)   Trees and shrubbery shall not be located on any rights-of-way and/
or any other easements. Recreational objects shall not be located, either
permanently or temporarily, within the road right-of-way.
 125-17 STREETS, DRIVEWAYS, PARKING, LOADING/UNLOADING AREAS, CURBS AND
SIDEWALK SPECIFICATIONS.
   A.   Streets.
      (1)   Street Classification. Streets shall be designed according to their
function and laid out to preserve the integrity of their design in accordance
with the following functional classification:
         (a)   Alley. A minor street privately or publically owned, primarily
for service access to the rear or side of properties.
         (b)   Local Road. A street providing access directly to residential
properties. Standards assume light traffic flow with the possibility of
upgrading the classification in the future. Generally, a publicly owned and
maintained road in the Township with an average daily traffic volume of less
than or equal to one-thousand (1,000) vehicles.
         (c)   Neighborhood Collector. A street which collects residential
traffic from local roads to higher level streets. Standards assume medium
traffic flow with the possibility of upgrading the classification in the
future. Generally, a publicly owned and maintained road in the Township with an
average daily traffic volume greater than one-thousand (1,000) vehicles shall
be classified as a neighborhood collector. The function shall be to provide
traffic access to and from residential areas. Access from a residential
property directly onto a Neighborhood Collector shall be limited to not more
than one (1) per two-hundred (200) feet and avoided when possible.
         (d)   Community Collector. A street that provides access to a mix of
residential and commercial uses. They may serve as neighborhood collectors, and
connectors between residential neighborhoods and higher order streets.
Providing for pedestrian traffic is of upmost importance. Access shall be
limited to not more than one (1) per two-hundred (200) feet and discouraged
when possible.
         (e)   Commercial Street. A street that is generally a publicly owned
and maintained road in the Township, utilized for commercial motor vehicles and
is located in commercial zoned areas shall be classified as a commercial
street. Access to a commercial street shall be limited to one (1) per two-
hundred (200) feet. Accommodations for shared accesses shall be planned and are
required.
         (f)   Industrial Street. A street that is generally publicly owned and
maintained, utilized for industrial motor vehicles and located in industrial
zoned areas shall be classified as an industrial street.
         (g)   Community Arterial. Streets that provide mobility between
communities and business centers. They provide accesses to commercial centers
and provide direct links to higher order, state owned streets. Access shall be
limited to not more than one (1) access per five-hundred (500) feet.
Accommodations for shared accesses shall be planned and are required.
         (h)   Regional Arterial. A high capacity street that delivers traffic
to highways and between urban centers. Access shall be limited to not more than
one (1) access per five-hundred (500) feet. Accommodations for shared accesses
shall be planned and are required.
      (2)   Street widths. Streets shall be laid out according to the following
minimum schedule; however, additional street width may be required as
determined by the Township.
                               Width of Width of Pavement On Street Parking
Class of Street Width of R-O-W Pavement w/ Curbs          permitted (8
                                                          lane)
                               Width of Width of Pavement On Street Parking
Class of Street Width of R-O-W Pavement w/ Curbs          permitted (8
                                                          lane)
Residential     50             20       24                Yes
Local road
Neighborhood    50             24       26                No
Collectors
Community       50             24       26                Yes
Collector
Commercial      80             28       32                Yes
Industrial      80             32       36                No
Community       80             32       36                No
Arterial
Regional        80             32       36                No
Arterial
Alleys          20             12       Not permitted     No
* Right of way widths shall be increased by 5 per parking lane when on street
parking is used.
      (3)   All underground utilities shall be located outside of the cartway
of any road. When utilities need to cross the road they shall do so at a near
perpendicular angle. Sewer and water lines shall be permitted in the cartway.
When manholes, valves or other appurtenances are located in the cartway, they
shall be centered in the middle of the cartway or travel lane.
      (4)   Residential Street Standards (Refer to Exhibits A and B).
      All residential streets to be dedicated to the Township shall meet the
following standards:
         (a)   Adequate surface and subsurface drainage shall be provided as
per the Township ordinance and approved by the Township Engineer.
         (b)   Streets shall be surfaced to the grades and dimensions drawn on
the plans, profiles and cross sections submitted by the applicant and approved
by the Board of Supervisors. Before paving the street surface, the applicant
must install all required utilities and service laterals and provide storm
drainage facilities as were approved by the Board of Supervisors. All subgrade
and paving work must be supervised by the Township. The wearing course shall
only be placed between April 1 and October 31. Prior to the commencement of
paving, the Township shall be contacted to determine the suitability of
compaction. The subgrade, pavement base, binder and wearing surface and
shoulders shall be constructed in accordance with PennDOT Specifications
Publication 408.
         (c)   All streets shall have a minimum pavement width in accordance
with the chart in §
125-17(A)(2).
         (d)   Inspection. Upon the approval of a street plan, including
profiles and layout, the proposed street shall be inspected by the Township as
follows:
            [1]   All time accumulated for review and inspection by the
Township, whether pass or fail, shall be reimbursed to the Township by the
developer
            [2]   Developer/Contractor shall contact the assigned inspector a
minimum of twenty-four (24) hours prior to each required inspection. Failure to
have the Township inspection before proceeding may result in refusal of
acceptance of dedication.
            [3]   Subgrade Inspection. After subgrade is completed the Township
will require and shall be present for a proof roll.
            [4]   Subbase Inspection. After subbase is completed the Township
will require and shall be present for a proof roll.
            [5]   Base Course Inspection. After base course is completed the
Township will require and shall be present for an inspection.
            [6]   Wearing Course Inspection. After wearing course is completed
the Township will require and shall be present for an inspection.
            [7]   Stormwater facilities shall be inspected continuously during
construction.
            [8]   Final inspection will be done upon request, in writing, by
the developer/subdivider and after all infrastructure is in place as per the
approved plans.
         (e)   Subgrade. All topsoil shall be removed to the natural subsoil
and the proposed roadway brought up to subgrade level with approved slate/shale
a minimum of thirty-two (32) feet wide.
            [1]   Prepare the subgrade prior to placing subbase. Do not place
subbase material on soft, muddy, or frozen areas, as determined by the
Township. Before placing subgrade, satisfactorily correct irregularities or
soft areas in the prepared subgrade. Correct unsatisfactory subgrade conditions
developing ahead of the base and paving operations by scarifying, reshaping,
and re-compacting, or by replacement of subgrade, if directed, which is
required to be re-inspected by the Township (according to PennDOT
Specifications Publication 408 or other applicable PennDOT regulations).
            [2]   A proof roll is required for every two (2) feet of depth of
fill installed. The proof roll shall be witnessed by the Township inspector.
         (f)   Subbase. A minimum of six (6) inches compacted, of PennDOT-
approved 2A coarse aggregate, rolled, shall be placed a minimum of twenty eight
(28) feet wide. As an alternative, a minimum of six (6) inches compacted, of
approved slate/shale, rolled, and then a minimum of two (2) inches compacted of
PennDOT-approved 2A coarse aggregate rolled, shall be placed a minimum of
twenty eight (28) feet wide.
         (g)   Base course. A PennDOT-approved Superpave Mix 25 mm, based on
ESAL s Publication 408, shall be used. A minimum of four (4) inches compacted
of 25 mm Superpave course, rolled, shall be placed in accordance with the chart
in §
125-17(A)(2) for pavement construction. Superpave must be installed according
to all PennDOT Specifications. See Publication 408 for paving and asphalt
testing (asphalt content and percentage passing No. 200 sieve). All asphalt
plant test results must be received and approved by Antrim Township prior to
wearing course being applied. Base course full depth core sample shall be taken
and the report submitted in accordance with §
125-17(A)(4)(j) before proceeding with the next course.
         (h)   Tack Coat. If the wearing course is not installed within twenty-
four (24) hours of the finish of the base course, then a tack coat will be
required in accordance with Penn DOT Publication 408.
         (i)   Wearing. A PennDOT-approved Superpave Mix 9.5 mm SRL treatment,
based on ESAL s Publication 408, shall be used. A minimum of two (2) inches
compacted of 9.5 mm Superpave course, rolled, shall be placed in accordance
with the chart in §
125-17(A)(2) for pavement construction. Wearing must be constructed according
to all PennDOT Specifications. See Publication 408 for paving and asphalt
testing (asphalt content and percentage passing No. 200 sieve). All asphalt
plant test results must be forwarded to Antrim Township within five (5)
business days. Wearing course full depth core sample shall be taken and the
report submitted in accordance with §
125-17(A)(4)(j).
         (j)   Core samples.
            [1]   Core samples for base and wearing course shall be taken and
measured for thickness and density according to PennDOT Specifications. See
Publication 408.
            [2]   All test results of each layer of pavement shall be submitted
to the Township and approved prior to the next layer being applied.
            [3]   The Final test results shall be forwarded to the Township
within five (5) business days after application of Subsections (g) and (i)
above.
            [4]   Core locations shall be selected by the Township. At a
minimum, one (1) core sample shall be taken within every two-thousand (2,000)
square yards. More samples may be required as determined by the Township.
            [5]   Core holes must be patched and sealed with in-kind material
to the Township s satisfaction.
      (5)   Non Residential Street Standards (Refer to Exhibits C and D).
   All streets for commercial and industrial developments shall meet the
following standards:
         (a)   Adequate surface and subsurface drainage shall be provided as
per the Township ordinance and approved by the Township Engineer.
         (b)   Streets shall be surfaced to the grades and dimensions drawn on
the plans, profiles and cross sections submitted by the applicant and approved
by the Board of Supervisors. Before paving the street surface, the applicant
must install all required utilities and service laterals and provide storm
drainage facilities as were approved by the Board of Supervisors. All subgrade
and paving work must be supervised by the Township. The wearing course shall
only be placed between April 1 and October 31. Prior to the commencement of
paving, the Township shall be contacted to determine the suitability of
compaction. The subgrade, pavement base, binder, and wearing surface and
shoulders shall be constructed in accordance with PennDOT Specifications
Publication 408.
         (c)   All streets shall have a minimum pavement width in accordance
with the chart in §
125-17(A)(2).
         (d)   Inspection. Upon the approval of a street plan, including
profiles and layout, the proposed street shall be inspected by the Township as
follows:
            [1]   All time accumulated for review and inspection by the
Township, whether pass or fail, shall be reimbursed to the Township by the
developer.
            [2]   Developer/Contractor shall contact the assigned inspector a
minimum of twenty-four (24) hours prior to each required inspection. Failure to
have the Township inspection before proceeding may result in refusal of
acceptance of dedication.
            [3]   Sub grade. After sub grade is completed the Township will
require and shall be present for a proof roll.
            [4]   Sub base. After sub base is completed, the Township will
require and shall be present for a proof roll.
            [5]   Base. After base is completed the Township will require and
shall be present for an inspection.
            [6]   Binder. After binder is completed the Township will require
and shall be present for an inspection.
            [7]   Wearing. After wearing course is finished the Township will
require and shall be present for an inspection.
            [8]   Stormwater facilities shall be inspected continuously during
construction by the contractor and by the Township.
            [9]   Final inspection will be done upon request, in writing, by
the developer/subdivider and after all infrastructure is in place as per the
approved plans.
         (e)   Sub grade. All topsoil shall be removed to the natural subsoil
and the proposed roadway brought up to sub grade level with approved slate/
shale a minimum of thirty-eight (38) feet wide.
            [1]   Prepare the sub grade prior to placing sub base. Do not place
sub base material on soft, muddy, or frozen areas, as determined by the
Township. Before placing sub grade, satisfactorily correct irregularities or
soft areas in the prepared sub grade. Correct unsatisfactory sub grade
conditions developing ahead of the base and paving operations by scarifying,
reshaping, and re-compacting, or by replacement of sub grade, if directed,
which is required to be re-inspected by the Township. The sub grade must be
completed according to Penn DOT Specifications Publication 408 (or other
applicable Penn DOT regulations.)
            [2]   A proof roll is required for every two (2) feet of depth of
fill installed. The proof roll shall be witnessed by the Township inspector.
         (f)   Concrete Intersections.
            [1]   When a traffic study/count shows that the average daily
traffic (ADT) is equal to or greater than three-thousand (3,000) for any
approach to an intersection, concrete shall be required for that intersection.
            [2]   Concrete shall be used from the center of the intersection
extended back each road a minimum of two-hundred fifty (250) feet.
            [3]   Concrete intersection construction shall conform to Penn DOT
Publication 72M Sections RC-21M and RC-27M.
         (g)   Sub base. A minimum of ten (10) inches compacted of Penn DOT-
approved 2A coarse aggregate, rolled, shall be placed a minimum of thirty six
(36) feet wide for cartway construction. As an alternative, a minimum of twelve
(12) inches compacted of approved slate, rolled, and then a minimum of two (2)
inches compacted of Penn DOT-approved 2A coarse aggregate rolled, shall be
placed a minimum of thirty six (36) feet wide for cartway construction.
         (h)   Base course/binder course/wearing course. A Penn DOT-approved
Superpave Mix based on ESAL s Publication 408 shall be used as follows:
            [1]   Base course. A Penn DOT-approved Superpave Mix 25 mm
compacted with two (2) three (3) inch lifts for a total of six (6) compacted
inches of Superpave Mix, rolled, shall be used. A minimum of six (6) inches
compacted of Superpave Mix 37.5 mm, rolled, shall be placed at a minimum
pavement width in accordance with the chart in 125-17(A)(2). Superpave shall be
placed and compacted in lifts with a maximum depth of four (4) inches.
Superpave must be installed according to all Penn DOT Specifications. See
Publication 408 for paving and asphalt testing (asphalt content and percentage
passing No. 200 sieve). All asphalt plant test results must be received and
approved by Antrim Township prior to second layer being applied, and second
layer test results must be received and approved by Antrim Township prior to
binder course being applied. Base course full depth core sample shall be taken
and the report submitted in accordance with 125-17(A)(5)(k) before proceeding
with the next course.
            [2]   Tack Coat. If the binder course is not installed within
twenty-four (24) hours of the finish of the base course, then a tack coat will
be required in accordance with Penn DOT Publication 408.
            [3]   Binder course. A Penn DOT-approved Superpave Mix 19 mm ,
rolled, shall be used. A minimum of two (2) inches compacted of Superpave Mix
19 mm, rolled, shall be placed a minimum pavement width in accordance with the
chart in §
125-17(A)(2). Superpave must be installed according to all Penn DOT
Specifications. See Publication 408 for paving and asphalt testing (asphalt
content and percentage passing No. 200 sieve). All asphalt plant test results
must be received and approved by Antrim Township prior to wearing course being
applied.
         (i)   Tack Coat. If the wearing course is not installed within twenty-
four (24) hours of the finish of the binder course, then a tack coat will be
required in accordance with Penn DOT Publication 408.
         (j)   Wearing course. A Penn DOT-approved Superpave Mix 12.5 mm
compacted to two (2) inches shall be used. A minimum of two (2) inches
compacted of Superpave wearing course, rolled, shall be placed a minimum of
thirty two (32) feet wide for cartway construction. Wearing course must be
constructed according to all Penn DOT Specifications. See Publication 408 for
paving and asphalt testing (asphalt content and percentage passing No. 200
sieve). All asphalt plant test results shall be submitted to Antrim Township
within five (5) business days. Wearing course full depth core sample shall be
taken and the report submitted in accordance with subsection §
125-17(A)(5)(k).
         (k)   Core samples.
            [1]   Core samples for base, binder, and wearing course shall be
taken and measured for thickness and density according to PennDOT
Specifications, See Publication 408.
            [2]   All test results of each layer of pavement shall be submitted
to the Township and approved prior to the next layer being applied.
            [3]   The Final test results shall be forwarded to the Township
within five (5) business days after application of §
125-17(A)(5)(h)[1], [2], and [3] above.
            [4]   Core locations shall be selected by the Township. At a
minimum, one (1) core sample shall be taken within every two-thousand (2,000)
square yards. More samples may be required as determined by the Township.
            [5]   Core holes must be patched and sealed with in-kind material
to the Township s satisfaction.
      (6)   Dead-end streets, Alleys, and Divided streets.
         (a)   Dead-end streets. All dead-end streets shall be constructed with
a cul-de-sac meeting the Township specifications for cul-de-sac design and
construction. All dead-end streets must meet Penn DOT Specifications
Publication Nine (or other applicable Penn DOT regulations) as it pertains to
liquid fuels reimbursement.
            [1]   Cul-de-sac design specifications are as follows (Refer to
Exhibit E):
               [a]   Permanent cul-de-sacs shall terminate at the closed end
with a paved turnaround having a minimum radius of forty (40) feet from the
center of the cul-de-sac to the edge of the pavement and with a right-of-way
radius of sixty (60) feet.
               [b]   There shall be no more than three (3) driveways off the
cul de sac.(This shall be noted on the development plan.)
               [c]   Lots shall allow for a minimum off-street parking of four
(4) spaces. (This shall be noted on the development plan.)
               [d]   Mailbox clusters are required prior to entering the cul-
de-sac and shall be shown on the plan. Mailboxes shall not be placed within the
area of the cul-de-sac. (This shall be noted on the development plan.)
               [e]   No parking shall be permitted in cul de sacs. Signage
shall be posted prohibiting parking. (This shall be noted on the development
plan).
               [f]   Pillars, piers, monuments, or any other structures are not
at any time permitted within the entire right-of-way of the cul-de-sac. (This
shall be noted on the development plan.)
               [g]   When the use is residential, only single-family dwellings
are permitted in a cul-de-sac. (This shall be noted on the development plan.)
               [h]   No recreational objects shall be placed, either
permanently or temporarily, within the road right-of-way. (This shall be noted
on the development plan.)
               [i]   Cul-de-sacs shall be a one-way street moving in a
counterclockwise direction, and the developer shall pay for the necessary
signage to post the cul-de-sac as one-way.
               [j]   Two (2) snow easements twenty (20) feet wide by twenty
(20) feet long shall be provided at the two o clock and ten o clock positions
measuring from the edge of the pavement to provide an area for snow to be
stockpiled. This area shall remain free of improvements.
               [k]   Commercial and industrial cul-de-sacs shall be constructed
at least to meet minimum criteria established above and may require a larger
radius depending upon the type of use to be serviced.
         (b)   Temporary dead ends. The use of a hammerhead or T turnaround
shall be used temporarily until a street continues instead of constructing a
cul de sac (Refer to Exhibit F).
               [1]   No parking shall be permitted in a T turnaround. Signage
shall be posted prohibiting parking.
               [2]   No driveways shall be permitted access off a T turnaround.
               [3]   A twenty-eight (28) foot radius shall be used to flare out
to each end of the T .
               [4]   The T shall at a minimum extend thirty (30) feet in each
direction measured from the center line for a total distance of sixty (60)
feet. This distance may be increased due to the type of traffic accessing the
street, when fire hydrants or other utilities are in the area or for other
reasons as deemed necessary by the Township.
               [5]   The width of the area shall not be less than twenty (20)
feet.
               [6]   The T turnaround shall be paved in accordance with
Township standards based on the street classification.
               [7]   When the developer intends to dedicate a street that has a
T turnaround, the required road right of way width for the street shall be
dedicated to the Township all the way to the property line or phase line to
ensure future connection.
               [8]   Once the street is continued the excess portion of the
street shall be abandoned by saw cutting and removing the macadam that would be
outside the cartway so that the cartway width matches the existing and future
road. This portion of land shall be repaired to match the existing grade,
seeded and then revert back to the property in which it is located.
         (c)   Alleys (Refer to Exhibit G).
               [1]   Alleys shall not be more than six hundred (600) feet in
length, measured from right of way to right of way, before access to a street.
               [2]   Alleys shall be designed with an inverted crown of two (2)
percent to accommodate drainage.
               [3]   Alleys shall be paved with reinforced shoulders in
accordance with Township standards based on street classification.
               [4]   Alleys with a right of way width less than twenty (20)
feet shall not be dedicated to the Township. The Township may accept alleys of
twenty (20) feet or greater at their discretion. An ownership and maintenance
agreement for private alleys shall be reviewed and approved by the Township.
All fees associated with such review shall be reimbursed to the Township.
               [5]    No parking signs shall be installed.
      (7)   Grades. There shall be a minimum center line grade of one (1)
percent on all streets. Grades shall not exceed five (5) percent on all
commercial streets and ten (10) percent on residential and collector streets.
Steeper grades may be permitted on residential streets for short distances.
      (8)   Vertical curves. Changes in grade shall be joined by vertical
curves, and the maximum rate of change of grade shall be five (5) percent per
one-hundred (100) feet of road, provided that the clear sight distance and
stopping sight distance is maintained at all points.
      (9)   Crown. The slope of the crown on all streets shall be one-quarter
(1/4) inch per foot up to three-eighths (3/8) inch per foot.
      (10)   Side slopes. Street cuts and fills shall be provided with side
slopes not steeper than one (1) vertical to three (3) horizontal. Such slopes
shall be suitably planted with perennial grasses or other vegetation to prevent
gullying erosion, as per approval of Franklin County Soil Conservation
District.
      (11)   Blacktop restoration. Any excavated areas on streets shall be
restored to the Antrim Township road specifications.
      (12)   In addition to other valid reasons, the Township shall not be
required to accept for dedication or ordain any street that would not qualify
for liquid fuels funding.
   B.   Construction on a property which is accessed by a public road shall
have minimal impact on the road and neighborhood while construction is taking
place. All entrances shall be constructed prior to any excavation taking place.
All construction vehicles shall be parked outside of the public rights-of-way
and shall only enter and exit the property by means of the construction
entrance. The owner of the property shall see that the street is clean of mud
or debris which has been caused by the construction at the end of each day.
Stormwater swales shall not be altered by any means during any part of the
construction of the property, and silt fence shall be placed adjacent to the
stormwater swales to prevent any debris and/or alterations to the swales. Where
stormwater tiles are required under a driveway, they shall be constructed to be
flush with the bottom of the stormwater swales to allow the water to keep
flowing through the swale. If a stormwater swale is altered or damaged during
construction, the property owner will be responsible for reconstructing the
swale as per the approved plan and will bear the expense of the Township
Engineer visiting the site to determine if the swale was constructed as per the
approved plans.
   C.   Driveways.
      (1)   Permitting.
         (a)   No person, firm or corporation shall grade, construct,
reconstruct, install, erect or replace a drain, culvert, drive or driveway, or
other means of either affecting the discharge or passage of water or providing
ingress or egress onto or along an official Township road, or any road or
street in an approved Subdivision within the Township which is to be dedicated
for public use, unless and until such person, firm or corporation secures
approval and a permit from the Township.
         (b)   Application for such a permit shall be on forms provided by the
Township. There shall be attached to each application a drawing or plan
adequately illustrating the outlines of the property affected with existing
improvements thereon, the proposed improvements to be added, the direction of
surface water runoff, and the existing roadway and drainage features within the
Township s right-of-way which are affected by the proposed improvements. For
commercial and industrial driveways the applicant shall also submit engineering
calculations identifying the area and volume of runoff based upon a two-year
storm frequency with drainage facilities designed accordingly.
         (c)   The Board of Supervisors or its designated official may alter
plans filed with an application, and specify changes or modifications as deemed
necessary, and make its approval of an application subject to such changes or
modifications.
      (2)   Pre-existing access or drives.
         (a)   Permitted driveways in place at the time of the adoption of this
Article that do not conform to the standards herein shall be designated as pre-
existing driveways or accesses. They shall be brought into compliance with the
applicable standards contained herein under the following conditions:
            [1]   New permits are requested for drives/access.
            [2]   Modification to an existing driveway.
            [3]   The property owner or applicant applies for a change in
property use and will generate more vehicle trips than the existing use, or
            [4]   An expansion of the existing use will result in an increase
in trip generation.
      (3)   Driveway standards. The following general requirements shall be
applicable to all driveway and related drainage construction:
         (a)   Each lot created shall have access to a public road.
         (b)   Location.
            [1]   Except for joint-use driveways, no driveway shall be located
within twelve (12) inches of any portion of the side property line.
            [2]   Driveways shall not cross the street right-of-way within five
(5) feet of a fire hydrant, catch basin or drain inlet.
            [3]   Driveways shall be located in safe relationship to sight
distance and barriers to vision. PA Code Title 67, Transportation Chapter 441
(or other applicable PennDOT regulations) criteria shall be used to determine
if the location is suitable for sight distance.
         (c)   Shared Access. Shared accesses are encouraged when practicable.
When a new access is proposed along Williamsport Pike, Route 11, or Route 16;
shared accesses shall be planned for and provided.
         (d)   Joint and Cross Access Drives. Joint and Cross Access Drives
shall be required and planned for all non residential driveways as follows:
            [1]   Access drives shall allow circulation between sites wherever
feasible.
            [2]   The drive speed shall be posted at 10 MPH having a sufficient
width to accommodate two-way traffic.
            [3]   Signage for safety and traffic control shall be installed and
maintained by the property owner(s).
            [4]   Property owners utilizing joint or cross access drives shall
record an easement with the deed allowing cross access to and from other
properties served by the driveway.
            [5]   Property owners utilizing joint use or cross access drives
shall record an agreement with the municipality so that future access rights
along the driveway shall be granted at the discretion of the municipality and
the design shall be approved by the municipal engineer.
            [6]   Property owners utilizing joint use or cross access drives
shall record a joint agreement with the deed defining the maintenance
responsibilities of each of the property owners located along the drive or
access.
         (e)   Outparcels shall be served by an internal road or access drive
that is separated from the main roadway. All necessary easements and agreements
shall be required to be reviewed and approved by the Township solicitor to
ensure rights of access and maintenance responsibilities.
         (f)   Construction.
            [1]   Where roadway curbs occur, approaches at the curb line shall
be installed one and one-half (1 1/2) inches above the adjacent roadway or
gutter curb
            [2]   Driveways serving residential use properties shall be a
minimum of twelve (12) feet in width and a maximum of twenty four (24) feet. A
minimum five (5) foot radius at the entrance is required.
            [3]   Driveways serving nonresidential use properties shall follow
PA Code Title 67, Transportation Chapter 441 (or other applicable PennDOT
regulations) for standards for width and radius.
            [4]   Where open shoulders or berms occur, the grade of entrance
and exit of the driveway shall slope away from the roadway pavement at a rate
of not less than one-quarter (1/4) of an inch per foot or not more than one (1)
inch per foot for a distance equivalent to the prevailing width of the
shoulder.
            [5]   The rate of slope of approach ramps should not exceed one (1)
inch per foot.
            [6]   The center line of each driveway entrance shall be at a
ninety-degree angle to the center line of the public road at the driveway
entrance or as near thereto as site conditions permit.
            [7]   Residential driveways shall be a paved surface with a four
(4) inch minimum depth within the road right-of-way.
            [8]   All nonresidential driveways shall be paved in accordance
with Antrim Township specifications for road construction within the Township
right-of-way and in accordance with PennDOT Specifications Publication 408 for
road construction within the State right-of-way.
            [9]   All nonresidential driveways intended for use by the public
shall be paved in their entirety.
            [10]   All driveways shall be constructed so as not to impair
drainage within the right-of-way, alter the stability of the improved area or
change the drainage of the Township road and adjacent areas.
            [11]   Where a drainage ditch or swale exists, a pipe of adequate
size shall be installed under the driveway. Drainage pipe(s) installed under
driveways shall be a minimum of fifteen (15) inches in diameter (circular or
equivalent sized arch), or suitable size based on field conditions and approved
by the Township.
         (g)   Acceleration and Deceleration Lanes. When deemed necessary to
permit safe ingress and egress, acceleration and deceleration lanes paralleling
the street shall be installed at the expense of the property owner. PA Code
Title 67, Transportation Chapter 441 (or other applicable PennDOT regulations)
criteria shall be used to determine if these lanes are warranted.
   D.   Parking and loading/unloading areas.
      (1)   Off street loading/unloading and parking shall be provided and
maintained in accordance with this chapter for any new, changed, or modified
use or when a building is constructed, enlarged, or altered.
      (2)   Loading/unloading and parking areas shall not be used for storage,
sale items, or anything other than its intended purpose.
      (3)   When parking is shared, the total number of spaces shall equal the
cumulative required number for each use. The parking area shall be reasonably
located to gain access to each use. An agreement for maintenance of the area
shall be established and is subject to review and approval by the Township
solicitor. Reduced parking may be granted by the Township upon written request
when the parking analysis reflects that the uses sharing parking have different
peak times.
      (4)   Size of spaces. The minimum parking stall width shall be ten (10)
feet. The minimum length shall be twenty (20) feet. All parking aisles shall
have a minimum width of twenty five (25) feet for ninety-degree parking, and a
minimum width of twenty (20) feet for two-way angle parking. One-way angle
parking shall have a minimum aisle width of fifteen (15) feet. The stall size
shall be measured from the narrowest, shortest points when angled.
      (5)   Parking Analysis. The number of off-street parking spaces to be
provided for each use shall be sufficient to accommodate all the occupants,
employees, visitors, and customer parking. A parking analysis shall be
submitted for review and approval by the Township which includes, but shall not
be limited to, the estimated number of employees, patrons (peak and off peak
hours or times of year), occupancy level, hours of operation, and size of
building. Handicap spaces shall be part of the analysis and shall be determined
in accordance with ADA. Supporting documentation of the numbers or counts used
in the analysis shall be submitted for accuracy and justification. When parking
is proposed to be shared, all uses shall be part of the analysis. Antrim
Township has the right to require additional information to justify the number
of spaces proposed. A parking analysis shall not be required for residential
uses when 2 spaces per unit are provided.
      (6)   Parking Landscape requirements.
         (a)   All parking areas greater than seven (7) spaces shall be
landscaped to the minimum requirements.
         (b)   All landscaping shall comply with subsection §
125-15(F)(2) above.
         (c)   At least one (1) canopy (shade) tree for every eight (8) parking
spaces or fraction thereof, located in internal planting islands at least eight
(8) feet in width, shall be provided. Trailer storage or tractor trailer
parking shall incorporate the required number of canopy (shade) trees around
the perimeter of the parking areas but are relieved from planting islands.
[Amended 4-14-2020 by Ord. No. 355]
         (d)   A maximum of fifteen (15) consecutive and contiguous parking
spaces in a row shall be allowed without being separated by a landscaped
island. Trailer storage and tractor trailer parking areas are exempt from this
section. [Amended 4-14-2020 by Ord. No. 355]
         (e)   Every fourth row of parking spaces shall be separated by a
median strip at least eight (8) feet in width for landscaping, pedestrian
purposes, or combination of both. One (1) large canopy tree shall be planted in
this median for every forty-five (45) feet at a minimum.
      (7)   Illuminations. Such parking areas shall be appropriately
illuminated and shall comply with the following:
         (a)   A photometric plan shall be required.
         (b)   Lighting provided shall not be less than one-half (0.5) foot-
candles or greater than fifteen (15) foot-candles at any point in the parking
area.
         (c)   No more than one-half (0.5) foot candles shall be permitted at
any property line.
         (d)   Shielding. All light sources shall be shielded around the light
source and carefully directed and placed to prevent the lighting from creating
a nuisance to adjacent properties or roadways.
         (e)   Down directed lighting shall be used.
         (f)   Lighting shall be on a photo cell or other timing mechanism to
ensure lighting is adequate from dusk to dawn during operating hours
      (8)   Drainage and surfacing. All multifamily, commercial and industrial
public parking areas shall be paved with a durable and dustless surface and
shall be so graded and drained to dispose of all surface water anticipated
within the area.
      (9)   Circulation. All dead-end parking lots shall be designed to provide
sufficient backup area for the end stalls. Parking areas shall be designed so
that each vehicle may proceed without requiring the moving of any other
vehicle.
      (10)   Setbacks. No parking areas shall be closer than six (6) feet to
the principal multifamily, commercial or industrial building or to the side or
rear lot line. When parking is shared, the setback is zero for that common lot
line. Parking areas shall be physically separated from any public cartway by a
minimum of a ten (10) foot landscape area and in no case shall parking areas be
designed to require or encourage vehicles to back into the public street.
      (11)   Loading and unloading areas shall:
         (a)   comply with the setbacks for parking areas and shall not be
permitted within the road right of way.
         (b)   be provided to minimize interference with customer and
pedestrian traffic.
         (c)   be designed to accommodate the maximum number of deliveries
expected at one time and sized to accommodate the largest size truck expected
for deliveries.
   E.   Curbs, sidewalks, and shared use trails.
      (1)   Curbs.
         (a)   Curbs are not required and shall not be used unless necessary.
Open swales are encouraged to handle stormwater runoff.
         (b)   Curbs, when used, shall be designed in a manner to allow
stormwater to exit the roadway during all phases of construction.
         (c)   Curbs shall be located at the edge of the pavement.
         (d)   Curbs shall be constructed according to the standards set forth
in the most recent edition or revision to PennDOT Specifications, Form 408.
      (2)   Sidewalks.
         (a)   Existing sidewalks shall be maintained and are subject to the
regulations in §
125-17(E)(5).
         (b)   Sidewalks may be used by developers when trails are not required
by §
125-17(E)(3).
         (c)   Sidewalks shall be constructed and or repaired in accordance
with Penn DOT regulations.
         (d)   Sidewalks shall be replaced with Shared Use Trails whenever a
property makes improvements requiring Land Development plans, modifications are
made to the site and/or existing improvements are replaced.
      (3)   Shared Use Trails.
         (a)   Shared Use Trails shall be required whenever there is an average
of five (5) or more lots or dwelling units per acre in a development and/or
when designated on the official map. Shared Use Trails shall be required in
Community Commercial and Highway Commercial Zoning Districts regardless of the
use.
         (b)   Shared Use Trails shall be continued where Shared Use Trails or
sidewalks preexist in a development or along a street. The conversion shall be
adequately planned for from the width of a preexisting sidewalk to a trail.
         (c)   Rest areas shall be provided as shown on the official map. Rest
areas shall be off the travel lane of the trail and shall have a five (5) foot
clear area for wheel chairs or bikes and at least one (1) commercial grade
bench. The minimum length of the rest area shall be eight (8) feet and the
minimum width shall be four (4) feet.
         (d)   Shared use trails shall be eight (8) feet in width and paved
with either asphalt or concrete in accordance with Exhibit H.
         (e)   Grades. Grades shall be a minimum of l% and a maximum of 5%.
         (f)   Changes in level between adjacent surfaces. Any changes in level
between adjacent surfaces shall meet ADA requirements.
         (g)   Inlets and drainage structures within or directly adjacent to a
shared use path shall use bicycle rated grates and covers.
         (h)   The sidewalk or trail material shall continue across private
accesses or drives,
         (i)   Access shall be provided at intervals not greater than every
four-hundred (400) feet to streets from sidewalks or trails and at every
intersection. Access shall provide safe crossing across open swales.
         (j)   Safety Signage or markings. Pedestrian crossing signage shall be
provided where trails intersect streets. Pavement markings shall be provided at
every crossing. [Amended 4-14-2020 by Ord. No. 355]
         (k)   Safety rail, a minimum of forty-two (42) inches in height, along
sidewalks or trails shall be required when slopes exceed thirty-three (33)
percent and two and one half (2 1/2) feet in depth from the top of sidewalk or
trail to bottom of slope or swale. Safety rail shall not be required when there
is a minimum separation of two (2) feet from the top of the slope to the edge
of the sidewalk or trail.
      (4)   Location. Sidewalks and trails shall be constructed at the right-
of-way line.
      (5)   Ownership and maintenance of curbs, sidewalks and trails.
         (a)   Abutting property owners to curbs, sidewalks, and trails shall
own and maintain them.
         (b)   Construction and repair required. Antrim Township may require
owners of property along any street, including state highways, to construct,
pave, repave and keep in good repair the sidewalk, trail, curb, tile, and
gutter along such property, at such grades and under such regulations as may be
prescribed by ordinance.
         (c)   Upon failure of any property owner to construct, pave, repave or
maintain any sidewalk, trail, curb, tile, or gutter in compliance with the
notice to do so, Antrim Township may do the same or cause the same to be done
and may levy the costs of its work on such owner as a property lien to be
collected in a manner provided by law.
         (d)   Emergency repairs. Where in the opinion of the Township a
dangerous sidewalk, trail or curb condition exists, the Township shall send
such property owner notice by registered or certified mail stating emergency
repairs are required. Upon failure of such owner to comply with the notice
within two (2) days after receiving it, the Township may make emergency repairs
and levy costs of its work on such owner as a property lien to be collected in
the manner provided by law.
         (e)   Construction and repair done on owner s initiative without
notice. Any property owner not required by notice to construct, pave, repave or
keep in repair sidewalks, trail, curb, tile or gutters may construct, pave,
repave or repair the sidewalk, trail, curb and gutter abutting their property,
provided such owner shall make application to the Township before commencing
work, shall conform to the provisions of this section and other regulations as
to specifications for construction and repair work, and shall notify the
Township within two (2) days after completion of his work.
 125-18 BUILDING NUMBERS.
   A.   It shall be the duty of each and every owner, trustee, lessee or agent
and occupant of each and every house, building, or other structure to cause the
same to be numbered in accordance with this section.
   B.   Building numbers shall be assigned to each lot by the Township.
   C.   Building numbers shall be shown on the Subdivision plans and/or Land
Development plans and shall be indicated on each existing or proposed building.
   D.   The numbers shall be mounted in a conspicuous place on every house or
building and on both sides of the mailbox or on a reflective sign for the house
or building, so that said numbers can be readily seen and read while traveling
from either direction on the street or highway.
   E.   Each number shall be a minimum of four (4) inches in height.
   F.   It shall be unlawful to cover or conceal any number.
 125-19 TRAFFIC LIGHTS, TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNAGE, MARKINGS, TRAFFIC STUDIES AND
STREET LIGHTING.
   A.   Traffic Impact Study (TIS)
      (1)   A Traffic Impact Study shall be required when AM or PM peak hour
trips exceed 50 based on the most current edition of the Institute of
Transportation Engineers trip generation manual.
      (2)   Traffic Studies warranted by Penn DOT shall be submitted to Antrim
Township. The Township shall have the right to review and comment to Penn DOT
on such scope and warrants of such studies.
      (3)   The TIS scope of work shall be generated by the Township. Such
scope shall consider existing traffic problems on existing surrounding
roadways, level of service on nearby roadways and the impact this road may have
on it, the anticipated impact on the surrounding area, the proximity to other
site driveways or intersections, and all other items deemed necessary by the
Township.
      (4)   When a traffic study is warranted, the driveway throat length shall
be analyzed to ensure a safe distance is established for vehicles entering the
site before encountering conflicts created by internal intersections.
   B.   Traffic Control.
      (1)   Analysis. When AM or PM peak hour trips exceed 50 based on the most
current edition of the Institute of Transportation Engineers trip generation
manual, the developer of any Subdivision or Land Development shall prepare
necessary analysis and reports supporting signage, street lighting, or pavement
marking locations or that supports the position that signage or pavement
markings are not needed.
      (2)   Signs. The Township will order all signs. The developer shall
reimburse the Township for such costs. The signs will be installed by the
Township after the Township is reimbursed for such costs. Signs shall be
installed as soon as the road surface is improved to a mud-free condition.
      (3)   Markings/striping. The developer shall be responsible for the
pavement markings, including travel lane/shoulder separation striping within
the Subdivision, in accordance with PennDOT Specifications Publication 68 (or
other applicable regulations).
      (4)   Traffic Lights.
         (a)   All traffic lights shall be designed to the Township s
satisfaction.
         (b)   Agreements.
            [1]   An agreement is required between the developer/property owner
and the Township agreeing to the reimbursement of the ongoing maintenance and
or replacement cost of such light(s).
            [2]   All costs associated with such lights (repairs, maintenance,
electric etc.) shall be reimbursed to the Township by the property owner who
required the installation of such light.
         (c)   Specifications. The following equipment shall be designed for
and installed:
            [1]   Econolite Asc/3 Controllers
            [2]   Polycarbonate signal housing
            [3]   Optical pre-emption
            [4]   L.E.D. lights.
            [5]   Video Detection
            [6]   Fiber-optic interconnect where interconnect is required.
            [7]   Additional items as required by the Township, their engineer,
or signal vendor.
      (5)   Streetlights.
         (a)   Streetlights shall not be installed unless approval from the
Board of Supervisors has been obtained.
         (b)   Documentation shall be submitted for review supporting the need
of such streetlight.
         (c)   An agreement shall be made between the requestor of the
streetlight and the Township for operation and maintenance of said streetlight
before approval by the Board.
         (d)   The Township shall be reimbursed by the requestor for all costs
associated with the approval, installation, and maintenance costs including,
but not limited to the electric costs for said light.
         (e)   Streetlights shall be installed in rights-of-way, designed as
per the power company specifications.
 125-20 MONUMENTS AND MARKERS.
   Generally all work shall conform to standards put forth by the American
Congress of Surveying and Mapping and the following minimum standards:
   A.   Monuments. Monuments shall be six (6) inches square or four (4) inches
in diameter, thirty (30) inches long and made of concrete, stone, or by setting
a four (4) inch cast iron or steel pipe filled with concrete. Two (2) monuments
shall be set when a development of five (5) lots or more is proposed.
   B.   Markers. Markers shall be 5/8 of an inch round with a cap and a minimum
of fifteen (15) inches long. Markers shall be made of iron or steel bars.
Markers shall be set at all lot corners except those set with monuments.
ARTICLE V MOBILE HOME PARK REGULATIONS
 125-21 LAND DEVELOPMENT/SUBDIVISION REQUIRED.
   No person, firm or corporation shall construct, expand, maintain or operate
a mobile home park within the Township without obtaining approval for a Land
Development/Subdivision plan.
 125-22 PROCEDURES FOR PLAN REVIEW.
   The procedures for reviewing mobile home park plans shall be the same as for
Subdivision and Land Development plans in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter.
 125-23 LOT REQUIREMENTS.
   A.   New mobile home parks shall contain at least ten (10) acres and shall
contain a minimum of ten (10) mobile home spaces.
   B.   Individual mobile home lots located in a mobile home park shall remain
as part of the mobile home park and shall not be subdivided off separately.
 125-24 YARD AND SETBACK REQUIREMENTS.
   A.   All mobile homes shall be located at least thirty-five (35) feet from
any street right-of-way which abuts a mobile home park boundary and at least
fifty (50) feet from any other boundary of the park. A twenty (20) foot green
strip planted with screening, as defined in this chapter shall be required.
   B.   There shall be a minimum distance of twenty-five (25) feet between an
individual mobile home and adjoining pavement of a park street or common
parking area or other common areas or another mobile home pad.
   C.   No mobile home patio, deck, accessory or other structure shall be
located closer than ten (10) feet to another mobile home pad.
 125-25 STRUCTURAL ADDITIONS.
   All structural additions to mobile homes, other than those which are built
into the unit and designed to fold out or extend from it, shall be erected only
after a land use permit and/or building permit has been obtained, and such
additions shall conform to any building code of the Township, where applicable,
or shall meet the standards of special regulations adopted with respect to such
additions.
 125-26 PARK STREET SYSTEM.
   A.   Park access. Each mobile home park shall be provided with at least two
(2) points of ingress and egress and a distance of at least one-hundred-fifty
(150) feet shall be maintained between center lines of access streets.
   B.   Mobile Home access. All mobile home parks shall be provided with safe
and convenient paved access streets to and from each and every mobile home.
   C.   Streets. All streets within any mobile home park shall be designed and
improved as minor streets in accordance with §
125-17. All mobile home pads shall be given building numbers by the Township
and all park streets shall be given names approved by the Township.
 125-27 REQUIRED OFF-STREET PARKING.
   A.   Off-street parking areas shall be provided in all mobile home parks for
the use of park occupants and guests. Such areas shall be furnished at the rate
of at least two (2) vehicular parking spaces for each mobile home pad.
   B.   Each off-street parking space shall contain at least two-hundred (200)
square feet and shall not exceed a distance of one-hundred-fifty (150) feet
from the mobile home pad that it is intended to serve.
 125-28 UTILITY IMPROVEMENTS.
   A.   Mobile home facilities. No mobile home shall be placed in said park
which does not contain a built-in bathroom with water closet, lavatory and
shower or tub, kitchen and heating system, which are in working order.
   B.   Sewer and water. All mobile homes shall be connected to sewer and water
systems approved by the Department of Environmental Protection and the
Governing Municipal Authority.
   C.   Electrical distribution. All mobile home parks shall have underground
electrical distribution systems which shall be installed and maintained in
accordance with the local electric power company s specifications regulating
such systems.
   D.   Refuse and recyclables collection facilities. The developer shall
provide a plan detailing central locations throughout the park for refuse and
recyclables collection. The park owner is responsible for refuse and
recyclables collection at least once a week.
   E.   Liquefied petroleum gas system. Liquefied petroleum gas systems
provided for mobile homes, service buildings or other structures shall include
the following:
      (1)   Systems shall be provided with safety devices to relieve excessive
pressures and shall be arranged so that the discharge terminates at a safe
location.
      (2)   Systems shall have at least one (1) accessible means for shutting
off gas. Such means shall be located outside the mobile home and shall be
maintained in effective operating condition.
      (3)   All LPG piping outside of the mobile home shall be well supported
and protected against mechanical injury. Undiluted liquefied petroleum gas in
liquid form shall not be conveyed through piping equipment and systems in
mobile homes.
      (4)   Any vessel containing liquefied petroleum gas shall be securely but
not permanently fastened to prevent accidental overturning.
      (5)   No LPG vessel shall be stored or located inside or beneath any
storage cabinet, carport, mobile home or any other structure.
   F.   Fuel oil supply system. All fuel oil supply systems provided for mobile
homes, service buildings and other structures shall be installed and maintained
in conformity with the following regulations:
      (1)   All piping from outside fuel storage tanks or cylinders to mobile
homes shall be securely, but not permanently, fastened in place.
      (2)   All fuel oil supply systems provided for mobile homes, service
buildings and other structures shall have shutoff valves located within five
inches of storage tanks.
      (3)   All fuel storage tanks or cylinders shall be securely placed and
shall not be closer than ten (10) feet from any mobile home exit.
      (4)   Storage tanks located in areas subject to traffic shall be
protected against physical damage.
      (5)   All fuel oil tanks, when applicable, shall be registered with the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
 125-29 COMMON OPEN SPACE.
   A.   All mobile home parks shall provide not less than ten percent (10%) of
the total land area for common open space purposes. Common open space shall be
so located as to be free of traffic hazards and should, where the topography
permits, be centrally located and easily accessible to all park residents.
 125-30 SERVICE, ADMINISTRATION AND OTHER BUILDINGS.
   A.   Within a mobile home park, one (1) mobile home may be used as an
administrative office. Other administrative and service buildings, housing
sanitation and laundry facilities, or any other such facilities shall be of
permanent structure complying with all applicable ordinances and statutes
regarding buildings, electrical installations and plumbing and sanitation
systems.
 125-31 SALE OF MOBILE HOMES LOCATED WITHIN MOBILE HOME PARKS.
   Individual mobile homes on a pad may be sold from the pad. Mobile home
dealerships/sales lots shall not be permitted except for in the appropriate
zoning district.
 125-32 FEES.
   The fee schedule for filing a Preliminary and Final Plan shall be in
accordance with this chapter.
ARTICLE VI ENFORCEMENT AND APPEALS
 125-33 PREVENTATIVE REMEDIES.
   A.   In addition to other remedies, the Township may institute and maintain
appropriate actions by law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate
violations, to prevent unlawful construction, to recover damages and to prevent
illegal occupancy of a building, structure or premises. The description by
metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other documents used in the
process of selling or transferring shall not exempt the seller or transferor
from such penalties or from the remedies herein provided.
   B.   The Township may refuse to issue any permit or grant any approval
necessary to further improve or develop any real property which has been
developed or which has resulted from a Subdivision of real property in
violation of this chapter. This authority to deny such a permit of approval
shall apply to any of the following applicants:
      (1)   The owner of record at the time of such violation.
      (2)   The vendee or lessee of the owner of record at the time of such
violation without regard as to whether such vendee or lessee had actual or
constructive knowledge of the violation.
      (3)   The current owner of record who acquired the property subsequent to
the time of the violation without regard as to whether such current owner had
actual or constructive knowledge of the violation.
      (4)   The vendee or lessee of the current owner of record who acquired
the property subsequent to the time of violation without regard as to whether
such vendee or lessee had actual or constructive knowledge of the violation.
   C.   As an additional condition for issuance of a permit or the granting of
an approval to any such owner, current owner, vendee or lessee for the
development of any such real property, the Township may require compliance with
the conditions that would have been applicable to the property at the time the
applicant acquired an interest in such real property.
 125-34 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
   A.   Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated the
provisions of this chapter shall, upon being found liable therefore in a civil
enforcement proceeding commenced by the Township, pay a judgment of not more
than five-hundred dollars ($500) plus all court costs, including reasonable
attorneys fees incurred by the Township as a result thereof. No judgment shall
commence or be imposed, levied or payable until the date of the determination
of a violation by the District Justice. If the defendant neither pays nor
timely appeals the judgment, the Township may enforce the judgment pursuant to
the applicable rules of civil procedure. Each day that a violation continues
shall constitute a separate violation, unless the District Justice determining
that there has been a violation further determines that there was a good faith
basis for the person, partnership or corporation violating this chapter to have
believed that there was no such violation, in which event there shall be deemed
to have been only one such violation by the District Justice, and thereafter
each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
   B.   The Court of Common Pleas, upon petition, may grant an order of stay,
upon cause shown, tolling the per diem judgment pending a Final adjudication of
the violation and judgment.
   C.   Nothing contained in this section shall be construed or interpreted to
grant to any person or entity other than the Township the right to commence any
action for enforcement pursuant to this section.
   D.   District Justices shall have initial jurisdiction in proceedings
brought under this section.
 125-35 APPEALS.
   A.   Any person aggrieved by provision, decision or order of the Board of
Supervisors may appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board in accordance with the
procedures contained in
Chapter 150, Zoning.
   B.   Appeals to court shall be taken to the Court of Common Pleas of
Franklin County.
Exhibit A
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4fd837b3aefb17057c35f92d1d2d47efe32e01e3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3195.png]
 
Exhibit B
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4fd837b3aefb17057c35f92d1d2d47efe32e01e3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3197.png]
 
Exhibit C
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4fd837b3aefb17057c35f92d1d2d47efe32e01e3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3199.png]
 
Exhibit D
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4fd837b3aefb17057c35f92d1d2d47efe32e01e3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3201.png]
 
Exhibit E
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4fd837b3aefb17057c35f92d1d2d47efe32e01e3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3203.png]
 
Exhibit F
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4fd837b3aefb17057c35f92d1d2d47efe32e01e3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3205.png]
 
Exhibit G
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4fd837b3aefb17057c35f92d1d2d47efe32e01e3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3207.png]
 
Exhibit H
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4fd837b3aefb17057c35f92d1d2d47efe32e01e3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3209.png]
 
CHAPTER 126: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
   Article
      
I.   DEFINITIONS
      
II.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
III.   STORMWATER MANAGEMENT STANDARDS
      
IV.   STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SITE PLAN REQUIREMENTS
      
V.   OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE
      
VI.   PROHIBITIONS
      
VII.   FEES AND EXPENSES
      
VIII.   ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Antrim 2-14-
2023 by Ord. No. 363. Amendments noted where applicable.]
Section
Article I: Definitions
   
126-1   Definitions
Article II: General Provisions
   
126-2   Findings
   
126-3   Purpose
   
126-4   Statutory Authority
   
126-5   Applicability
   
126-6   Compatibility with Other Requirements
   
126-7   Erroneous Permit or Authorization
   
126-8   Waivers, Modifications, and Exemption
Article III: Stormwater Management Standards
   
126-9   General Requirements
   
126-10   Stormwater Management Districts
   
126-11   Stormwater Management District implementation Provisions (Performance
Standards)
   
126-12   Design Criteria for Stormwater Management Facilities
   
126-13   Groundwater Recharge (Infiltration/Recharge/Retention)
   
126-14   Water Quality Requirements
   
126-15   Riparian Buffers
Article IV: Stormwater Management Site Plan Requirements
   
126-16   Plan Requirements
   
126-17   Plan Submission
   
126-18   Plan Review
   
126-19   Modification or Revision of Plans
   
126-20   Resubmission of Disapproved SWM Site Plans
   
126-21   Authorization to Construct and Term of Validity
   
126-22   As-Built Plans, Completion Certificate, and Final Inspection
Article V: Operation and Maintenance
   
126-23   Performance Guarantee
   
126-24   Responsibilities of Developers and Landowners
   
126-25   Operation and Maintenance Agreements
Article VI: Prohibitions
   
126-26   Prohibited Discharges and Connections
   
126-27   Roof Drains and Sump Pumps
   
126-28   Alterations of SWM BMPs
Article VII: Fees and Expenses
(Reserved for Future Use)
Article VIII: Enforcement and Penalties
   
126-29   Right-of-Entry
   
126-30   Inspections
   
126-31   Enforcement
   
126-32   Suspension and Revocation
   
126-33   Public Nuisance
   
126-34   Penalties
   
126-35   Appeals
   
126-36   Repealer
   
126-37   Severability
   
Exhibit 1
   
Exhibit 2
   
Exhibit 3
ARTICLE I DEFINITIONS
 126-1 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this Chapter, certain terms and words used herein shall
be interpreted as follows:
   A.   Words used in the present tense include the future tense; the singular
number includes the plural, and the plural number includes the singular; words
of masculine gender include feminine gender; and words of feminine gender
include masculine gender.
   B.   The word includes or including shall not limit the term to the specific
example but is intended to extend its meaning to all other instances of like
kind and character.
   C.   The words shall and must are mandatory; the words may and should are
permissive.
   D.   These definitions do not necessarily reflect the definitions contained
in pertinent regulations or statutes and are intended for this Chapter only.
   ACCELERATED EROSION
The removal of the surface of the land through the combined action of man s
activity and the natural processes of a rate greater than would occur because
of the natural process alone.
   AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITY
Activities associated with agriculture such as agricultural cultivation,
agricultural operation, and animal heavy use areas. This includes the work of
producing crops including tillage, land clearing, plowing, disking, harrowing,
planting, harvesting crops or pasturing and raising of livestock and
installation of conservation measures. Construction of new buildings or
impervious area is not considered an agricultural activity.
   AGRICULTURAL OPERATION
An enterprise that is actively and continuously engaged in the commercial
production and preparation for market of crops, livestock and livestock
products and in the production, harvesting and preparation for market or use of
agricultural, agronomic, horticultural, silvicultural and aquacultural crops
and commodities. The term includes an enterprise that implements changes in
production practices and procedures or types of crops, livestock, livestock
products or commodities produced consistent with practices and procedures that
are normally engaged by farmers or are consistent with technological
development within the agricultural industry excluding the construction of
buildings, structures and impervious surfaces.
   ALTERATION
As applied to land, a change in topography as a result of the moving of soil
and rock from one location or position to another; also the changing of surface
conditions by causing the surface to be more or less impervious; land
disturbance.
   APPLICANT
A landowner, developer, or other person who has filed an application to the
Municipality for approval to engage in any regulated activity at a project site
in the Municipality.
   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (BMP)
Activities, facilities, designs, measures, or procedures used to manage
stormwater impacts from regulated activities, to meet state water quality
requirements, to promote groundwater recharge, and to otherwise meet the
purposes of this Chapter. Stormwater BMPs are commonly grouped into one of two
broad categories or measures: structural or non-structural. In this Chapter,
non-structural BMPs or measures refer to operational and/or behavior-related
practices that attempt to minimize the contact of pollutants with stormwater
runoff, whereas structural BMPs or measures are those that consist of a
physical device or practice that is installed to capture and treat stormwater
runoff. Structural BMPs include, but are not limited to, a wide variety of
practices and devices, from large-scale retention ponds and constructed
wetlands, to small-scale underground treatment systems, infiltration
facilities, filter strips, low impact design, bioretention, wet ponds,
permeable paving, grassed swales, riparian or forested buffers, sand filters,
detention basins, and manufactured devices. Structural stormwater BMPs are
permanent appurtenances to the project site.
   CONSERVATION DISTRICT
Franklin County Conservation District.
   CULVERT
A structure with appurtenant works, which carries a stream, or stormwater
runoff under or through an embankment or fill.
   DAM
An artificial barrier, together with its appurtenant works, constructed for the
purpose of impounding or storing water or another fluid or semi-fluid, or a
refuse bank, fill or structure for highway, railroad or other purposes which
does or may impound water or another fluid or semi-fluid.
   DESIGN STORM
The magnitude and temporal distribution of precipitation from a storm event
measured in probability of occurrence (e.g., a 5-year storm) and duration
(e.g., 24 hours) used in the design and evaluation of stormwater management
systems. Also see Return Period.
   DESIGNEE
The agent of the Antrim Township Planning Commission and/or agent of the Antrim
Township Board of Supervisors involved with the administration, review or
enforcement of any provisions of this Chapter by contract or memorandum of
understanding.
   DETENTION BASIN
A structure designed to temporarily detain surface runoff for a period of time
sufficient to reduce the velocity and rate of surface flows leaving a site.
Detention basins drain fully after rainfall has ceased.
   DEP
The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
   DEVELOPED
Manmade changes made to a property or lot, which may include, but are not
limited to, buildings or other structures for which a building permit must be
obtained under the requirements of the Uniform Construction Code, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or the
storage of equipment or materials.
   DEVELOPER
Any landowner, agent of such landowner or tenant with the permission of such
landowner who makes or causes to be made a subdivision of land, a land
development or any of the regulated activities as defined in §
126-4.
   EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY
A construction or other human activity which disturbs the surface of the land,
including, but not limited to: clearing and grubbing; grading; excavations;
embankments; road maintenance; building construction; and the moving,
depositing, stockpiling, or storing of soil, rock, or earth materials.
   EASEMENT
A right granted for the use of private land for certain public, quasi-public or
private purpose; also the land to which such right pertains.
   EROSION
The natural process by which the surface of the land is worn away by water,
wind, or chemical action.
   EROSION AND SEDIMENT POLLUTION CONTROL PLAN
A plan that is designed to minimize accelerated erosion and sedimentation.
   EXCEPTIONAL VALUE WATERS
Surface waters of high quality which satisfy Pennsylvania Code Title 25
Environmental Protections, Chapter 93 Water Quality Standards, Section 93.4b(b)
(relating to antidegradation).
   EXISTING CONDITION
The dominant land cover during the 5-year period immediately preceding a
proposed regulated activity.
   FEMA
Federal Emergency Management Agency.
   FLOOD
A general, but temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of
normally dry land areas from the overflow of streams, rivers, and other waters
of this Commonwealth.
   FLOODPLAIN
Any land area susceptible to inundation by water from any natural source or
delineated by applicable FEMA maps and studies as being a special flood hazard
area. Also includes areas that comprise Group 13 Soils, as listed in Appendix A
of the Pennsylvania DEP Technical Manual for Sewage Enforcement Officers (as
amended or replaced from time to time by DEP).
   FLOODWAY
The channel of the watercourse and those portions of the adjoining floodplains
that are reasonably required to carry and discharge the 100-year flood. Unless
otherwise specified, the boundary of the floodway is as indicated on maps and
flood insurance studies provided by FEMA. In an area where no FEMA maps or
studies have defined the boundary of the 100-year floodway, it is assumed
absent evidence to the contrary that the floodway extends from the stream to 50
feet from the top of the bank of the stream.
   FOREST MANAGEMENT/TIMBER OPERATIONS
Planning and activities necessary for the management of forestland. These
include conducting a timber inventory, preparation of forest management plans,
silvicultural treatment, cutting budgets, logging road design and construction,
timber harvesting, site preparation, and reforestation.
   FREEBOARD
The difference between the design flow elevation in the emergency spillway of a
basin and the top of the basin embankment; and the difference between the
design flow elevation of a swale and the top of the swale embankment.
   GRADE
A slope, usually of a road, channel or natural ground specified in percent and
shown on plans as specified herein. (To) Grade to finish the surface of a
roadbed, top of embankment or bottom of excavation.
   GRASSED WATERWAY (SWALE)
A natural or man-made drainageway of parabolic, trapezoidal, rectangular, or
triangular cross-section shaped to required dimensions and vegetated with
erosion-resistant grasses for conveyance of runoff.
   GREEN INFRASTRUCTURE
Systems and practices that use or mimic natural processes to infiltrate,
evapotranspire, or reuse stormwater on the site where it is generated.
   GROUNDWATER RECHARGE
Replenishment of existing natural underground water supplies.
   HIGH QUALITY WATERS
Surface waters having quality which exceeds levels necessary to support
propagation of fish, shellfish, and wildlife and recreation in and on the water
by satisfying Pennsylvania Code Title 25 Environmental Protection, Chapter 93
Water Quality Standards, § 93.4b(a).
   HYDROLOGIC SOIL GROUP (HSG)
Infiltration rates of soils vary widely and are affected by subsurface
permeability as well as surface intake rates. Soils are classified into four
HSGs (A, B, C, and D) according to their minimum infiltration rate, which is
obtained for bare soil after prolonged wetting. The NRCS defines the four
groups and provides a list of most of the soils in the United States and their
group classification. The soils in the area of the development site may be
identified from a soil survey report that can be obtained from local NRCS
offices or conservation district offices. Soils become less pervious as the HSG
varies from A to D (NRCS).
   IMPERVIOUS SURFACE
Any surface on a lot that, because of the surface s composition or compacted
nature, impedes or prevents natural infiltration of water into the soil,
including, but not limited to, roofs, solid decks, driveways, patios, swimming
pools, sidewalks (other than public walks located in Antrim Township s right-
of-way), parking areas, tennis courts, concrete, asphalt, or crushed stone
streets or paths, or compacted gravel or dirt surfaces, as determined by Antrim
Township.
   INFILTRATION FACILITY
A structure or other man-made feature designed to collect runoff and direct it
into the ground.
   INLET
A surface connection to a closed drain. A structure at the diversion end of a
conduit. The upstream end of any structure through which water may flow.
   KARST
A type of topography or landscape characterized by surface depressions,
sinkholes, rock pinnacles/uneven bedrock surface, underground drainage, and
caves. Karst is formed on carbonate rocks, such as limestone or dolomite.
   LAND DEVELOPMENT
Any of the following activities:
      A.   The improvement of one or two or more contiguous lots, tracts or
parcels of land for any purpose involving:
      (1)   A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings,
whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single non-residential
building on a lot or lots regardless of the number of occupants or tenure.
      (2)   The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially or
cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or prospective occupants by
means of, or for the purpose of streets, common areas, leaseholds,
condominiums, building groups or other features.
      B.   A subdivision of land.
      C.    Land Development does not include development which involves:
      (1)   The conversion of an existing single-family detached dwelling or
single-family semi-detached dwelling into not more than three residential
units, unless such units are intended to be condominiums.
      (2)   The addition of an accessory building, including farm buildings, on
a lot or lots subordinate to an existing principal building.
      (3)   The addition or conversion of buildings or rides within the
confines of an enterprise which would be considered an amusement park. For the
purpose of the subsection, an amusement park is defined as a tract or areas
used principally as a location for permanent amusement structures or rides.
This exclusion shall not apply to newly acquired acreage by an amusement park
until initial plans for the expanded area have been approved by the proper
authorities.
   LOT
A designated parcel, tract, or area of land established by a plat or otherwise
as permitted by law and to be used, developed, or built upon as a unit.
   LOW IMPACT DEVELOPMENT (LID)
Site design approaches and small-scale stormwater management practices that
promote the use of natural systems for infiltration, evapotranspiration, and
reuse of rainwater. LID can be applied to new development, urban retrofits, and
revitalization projects. LID utilizes design techniques that infiltrate,
filter, evaporate, and store runoff close to its source. Rather than rely on
costly large-scale conveyance and treatment systems, LID addresses stormwater
through a variety of small, cost-effective landscape features located on-site.
   MUNICIPALITY
Township of Antrim, Franklin County, Pennsylvania.
   NRCS
USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service (previously SCS).
   OPEN CHANNEL
A drainage element in which stormwater flows with an open surface. Open
channels include, but shall not be limited to, natural and man-made
drainageways, swales, streams, ditches, and canals.
   OUTLET
Points of water disposal from a stream, river, lake, tidewater or artificial
drain.
   PEAK DISCHARGE
The maximum rate of stormwater runoff from a specific storm event.
   PIPE
A culvert, closed conduit, or similar structure (including appurtenances) that
conveys stormwater.
   PERVIOUS AREA
Any area not defined as impervious.
   PLANNING COMMISSION
The planning commission of the Township of Antrim.
   PROJECT SITE
The specific area of land where any regulated activities in the Municipality
are planned, conducted, or maintained.
   PROPERTY OWNER OR OWNER
The owner of a lot as shown on the County tax records.
   QUALIFIED DESIGN PROFESSIONAL
A Pennsylvania registered professional engineer.
   REGULATED ACTIVITIES
Any earth disturbance activities or any activities that involve the alteration
or development of land in a manner that may affect stormwater runoff.
   REGULATED EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY
Activity involving earth disturbance subject to regulation under 25 Pa. Code
92a, 25 Pa. Code 102, or the Clean Streams Law.
   RELEASE RATE
The rate at which runoff is released from a site or sub-area measured in cubic
feet per second.
   RETENTION BASIN
A reservoir, formed from soil or other material, which is designed to retain
permanently a certain amount of stormwater which also may be designed to
temporarily detain surface runoff for a period of time sufficient to reduce the
velocity and rate of surface flows leaving a site. Retention basins also may
receive fresh water from year-round streams. Retention basins always contain
water, and thus may be considered man-made lakes or ponds.
   RETURN PERIOD
The average interval, in years, within which a storm event of a given magnitude
can be expected to occur one time. For example, the 25-year return period
rainfall would be expected to occur on average once every 25 years; or stated
in another way, the probability of a 25-year storm occurring in any one year is
0.04 (i.e., a 4% chance).
   RIPARIAN BUFFER
A permanent area of trees and shrubs located adjacent to streams, lakes, ponds
and wetlands.
   RUNOFF
Any part of precipitation that flows over the land.
   SEDIMENT
Soils or other materials transported by surface water as a product of erosion.
   SEDIMENTATION
The process by which mineral or organic matter is accumulated or deposited by
moving wind, water or gravity. Once this matter is deposited (or remains
suspended in water), it is usually referred to as sediment .
   SEDIMENT BASIN
A temporary dam or barrier constructed across a waterway or at other suitable
locations to intercept the runoff and to trap and retain the sediment.
   SHEET FLOW
Runoff that flows over the ground surface as a thin, even layer, not
concentrated in a channel.
   SPILLWAY
A depression in the embankment of a pond or basin which is used to pass peak
discharge greater than the maximum design storm controlled by the pond.
   STATE WATER QUALITY REQUIREMENTS
The regulatory requirements to protect, maintain, reclaim, and restore water
quality under Title 25 of the Pennsylvania Code and the Clean Streams Law.
   STORM SEWER
A pipe that conveys stormwater.
   STORMWATER
Drainage runoff from the surface of the land resulting from precipitation or
snow or ice melt.
   STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITY
Any structure, natural or man-made, that, due to its condition, design, or
construction, conveys, stores, or otherwise affects stormwater runoff. Typical
stormwater management facilities include, but are not limited to: detention and
retention basins; open channels; storm sewers; pipes; and infiltration
facilities.
   STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FEE
The fee charged for costs incurred by the Township of Antrim in providing
stormwater management services.
   STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SITE PLAN
The plan prepared by the developer or his representative indicating how
stormwater runoff will be managed at the development site in accordance with
this Chapter. Stormwater Management Site Plan will be designated as SWM Site
Plan throughout this Chapter.
   STORMWATER SERVICES
Antrim Township s program for stormwater quality and for the partial control
and conveyance of stormwater, including, but not limited to: public education;
monitoring; removing, and regulating stormwater pollutants; other activities
described in Antrim Township s NPDES permit; mapping; planning; regulating,
reviewing, and inspecting private stormwater infrastructure; operating,
constructing, improving, cleaning, and maintaining Antrim Township s stormwater
system; and any and all expenses deemed reasonably necessary to the management
of stormwater within Antrim Township in the judgment of Antrim Township Board
of Supervisors, including but not limited to the payment of principal and debt
service, and the establishment of a reserve fund, to pay for these services.
   STORMWATER SYSTEM
The system of natural and constructed conveyances for collecting, managing, and
transporting stormwater, including but not limited to lakes, ponds, rivers,
perennial, intermittent, and/or channeled streams, connected wetlands, open
ditches, catch basins, and other inlets, pipes, storm sewers, drains, culverts,
and created stormwater management facilities that provide partial treatment by
passive means such as wet detention ponds, detention basins, and stormwater
wetlands.
   SUBDIVISION
The division or re-division of a lot, tract or parcel of land by any means into
two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land including changes
in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of lease,
partition by the court for distribution to heirs or devisees, transfer of
ownership or building or lot development: Provided, however, that the
subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into parcels of more
than ten acres, not involving any new street or easement of access or any
residential dwelling, shall be exempted.
   SUPERVISORS
The Antrim Township Board of Supervisors.
   SWALE
See Grassed Waterway .
   TOWNSHIP
Antrim Township, Franklin County, Pennsylvania.
   USDA
United States Department of Agriculture.
   WATERCOURSE
A permanent stream, intermittent stream, river, brook, creek channel or ditch
for water, whether natural or man-made.
   WATERS OF THIS COMMONWEALTH
Any and all rivers, streams, creeks, rivulets, impoundments, ditches,
watercourses, storm sewers, lakes, dammed water, wetlands, ponds, springs, and
all other bodies or channels of conveyance of surface and underground water, or
parts thereof, whether natural or artificial, within or on the boundaries of
this Commonwealth.
   WATERSHED
Region or area drained by a river, watercourse, or other surface water of this
Commonwealth.
   WETLAND
Areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency
and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do
support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated
soil conditions, including swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas.
ARTICLE II GENERAL PROVISIONS
 126-2 FINDINGS.
   The Antrim Township Board of Supervisors finds that:
   A.   Inadequate management of accelerated stormwater runoff resulting from
development throughout a watershed increases flood flows and velocities,
contributes to erosion and sedimentation, overtaxes the carrying capacity of
existing streams and storm sewers, greatly increases the cost of public
facilities to convey and manage stormwater, undermines floodplain management
and flood reduction efforts in upstream and downstream communities, reduces
groundwater recharge, and threatens public health and safety.
   B.   A comprehensive program of stormwater management, including reasonable
regulation of development and activities causing accelerated erosion, is
fundamental to the public health, safety, welfare, and the protection of the
people of the Municipality and all the people of the Commonwealth, their
resources, and the environment.
   C.   Stormwater is an important water resource that provides groundwater
recharge for water supplies and supports the base flow of streams.
   D.   The use of green infrastructure and low impact development (LID) are
intended to address the root cause of water quality impairment by using systems
and practices which use or mimic natural processes to: 1) infiltrate and
recharge, 2) evapotranspire, and/or 3) harvest and use precipitation near where
it falls to earth. Green infrastructure practices and LID contribute to the
restoration or maintenance of pre-development hydrology.
   E.   Federal and state regulations require certain municipalities to
implement a program of stormwater controls. These municipalities are required
to obtain a permit for stormwater discharges from their separate storm sewer
systems under the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES)
program. In order to establish, operate, and maintain the stormwater
infrastructure of Antrim Township, sufficient and stable funding is required.
   F.   Antrim Township intends to establish fair and equitable stormwater
management fees to assure that each lot within the Township will pay its
proportionate share of the costs of operation, maintenance, administration, and
improvement of all stormwater services provided or paid for by Antrim Township.
 126-3 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this Chapter is to promote the public health, safety and
welfare within the Municipality and its watershed by minimizing damages and
maximizing the benefits described in the previous section of this Chapter
through provisions designed to:
   A.   Meet legal water quality requirements under state law, including
regulations at 25 Pa. Code 93 to protect, maintain, reclaim, and restore the
existing and designated uses of the waters of this Commonwealth.
   B.   Preserve natural drainage systems.
   C.   Manage stormwater runoff close to the source, reduce runoff volumes and
mimic predevelopment hydrology.
   D.   Provide procedures and performance standards for stormwater planning
and management.
   E.   Maintain groundwater recharge to prevent degradation of surface and
groundwater quality and to otherwise protect water resources.
   F.   Prevent scour and erosion of stream banks and streambeds.
   G.   Provide proper operation and maintenance of all stormwater best
management practices (BMPs) that are existing or implemented within the
Municipality.
   H.   Provide standards to meet NPDES permit requirements.
 126-4 STATUTORY AUTHORITY.
   A.   The Municipality is empowered to regulate land use activities that
affect runoff by the authority of the Act of July 31, 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247,
The Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended, and/or the Act of
October 4, 1978, P.L. 864 (Act 167), 32 P.S. Section 680.1, et seq., as
amended, The Stormwater Management Act.
   B.   The Municipality is empowered by [53 P.S. § 67705] to assess reasonable
and uniform fees for stormwater management activities and facilities.
 126-5 APPLICABILITY.
   All activities regulated by this Chapter, whether or not the activity
affects stormwater runoff, and all activities that may affect stormwater
runoff, including but not limited to, land development and earth disturbance
activity, are subject to regulation by this Chapter.
   The following is a list of some of the Regulated Activities that shall be
regulated by this Chapter. However, this Chapter shall also apply to any
activity regulated by the requirements of this Chapter whether or not included
in the list below.
   A.   Land Development
   B.   Subdivision
   C.   Construction of new or additional impervious or semi-pervious surfaces
(driveways, parking lots, etc.)
   D.   Construction of new buildings or additions to existing buildings
   E.   Diversion or piping of any natural or man-made stream channel
   F.   Installation of stormwater management facilities or appurtenances
thereto
   G.   Any activity requiring that a land development or subdivision plan (as
defined in
Chapter 125) be filed as required by
Chapter 125.
   H.   Creating, diverting, piping, changing the direction of, or altering the
flow of stormwater or non-stormwater discharge from property that will have an
adverse impact on other property/properties or be in violation of any of the
requirements as set forth in this Chapter.
 126-6 COMPATIBILITY WITH OTHER REQUIREMENTS.
   Approvals issued and actions taken under this Chapter do not relieve the
applicant of the responsibility to secure required permits or approvals for
activities regulated by any other code, law, regulation, or ordinance.
Approvals issued and actions taken under any other code, law, regulation, or
ordinance do not relieve the applicant of the requirements within this Chapter.
 126-7 ERRONEOUS PERMIT OR AUTHORIZATION.
   Any permit or authorization issued or approved based on false, misleading,
or erroneous information provided by an applicant is void without the necessity
of any proceedings for revocation. Any work undertaken or use established
pursuant to such permit or other authorization is unlawful. No action may be
taken by a board, agency or employee of the Municipality purporting to validate
such a violation.
 126-8 WAIVERS, MODIFICATIONS, AND EXEMPTIONS.
   A.   If the Municipality determines that any requirement under this Chapter
cannot be achieved for a particular regulated activity, the Municipality may,
after an evaluation of alternatives, approve measures other than those in this
Chapter, subject to §
126-8(B) and §
126-8(C).
   B.   Waivers or modifications of the requirements of this Chapter may be
approved by the Municipality if enforcement will exact undue hardship because
of peculiar conditions pertaining to the land in question, provided that the
modifications will not be contrary to the public interest and that the purpose
of the Chapter is preserved. Cost or financial burden shall not be considered a
hardship. Modification may be considered if an alternative standard or approach
will provide equal or better achievement of the purpose of the Chapter. A
request for modifications shall be in writing and accompany the Stormwater
Management Site Plan submission. The request shall provide the facts on which
the request is based, the provision(s) of the Chapter involved and the proposed
modification.
   C.   No waiver or modification of any regulated stormwater activity
involving earth disturbance greater than or equal to one acre may be granted by
the Municipality unless that action is approved in advance by the Department of
Environmental Protection (DEP) or the delegated county conservation district.
   D.   Residential regulated activities that result in cumulative earth
disturbances less than 1 acre are exempt from the requirements in §
126-10, §
126-13, and Article IV of this Chapter.
   E.   Agricultural activity is exempt from the SWM Site Plan preparation
requirements of this Chapter provided the activities are performed according to
the requirements of 25 Pa. Code Chapter 102.
   F.   Forest management and timber operations are exempt from the SWM Site
Plan preparation requirements of this Chapter provided the activities are
performed according to the requirements of 25 Pa. Code Chapter 102.
   G.   Exemptions from any provisions of this Chapter shall not relieve the
applicant from the requirements in §
126-9(D) through §
126-9(G).
   H.   Regulated activities that meet the exemption criteria in the following
table may be eligible for an exemption from the requirements of Article III of
this chapter, subject to a review by the Township Engineer and at the sole
discretion of the Township Supervisors. Requests for exemptions shall be
submitted in writing for review by the Township and shall clearly identify the
justification and basis for the request. The exemption criteria shall apply to
all regulated activities proposing construction of impervious surfaces after
the effective date of this chapter. Regulated activities related to commercial
and/or industrial development shall not be eligible for exemptions. The total
impervious surface area at a site shall be calculated for the area inclusive of
both existing and proposed impervious surfaces. Gravel and stone areas shall be
included in the impervious area calculation but can be reduced according to the
area reduction factors and sample calculation provided in Exhibit 2, Figure B-
1.
 
Stormwater Management Exemption Criteria
Total Parcel Size (acres) Maximum Impervious Area Exemption (square feet)
Less than or equal to 1/4 2,500
1/4 to 1                  5,000
1 to 2                    10,000
2 to 5                    15,000
More than 5               20,000
 
   I.   The Municipality may deny or revoke any exemption pursuant to this
Section at any time for any project that the Municipality believes may pose a
threat to public health and safety or the environment.
ARTICLE III STORMWATER MANAGEMENT STANDARDS
 126-9 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   A.   For all regulated activities, unless preparation of an SWM Site Plan is
specifically exempted in §
126-8:
      (1)   Preparation and implementation of an approved SWM Site Plan is
required.
      (2)   No regulated activities shall commence until the Municipality
issues written approval of a SWM Site Plan, which demonstrates compliance with
the requirements of this Chapter.
   B.   SWM Site Plans approved by the Municipality, in accordance with §
126-21 shall be on site throughout the duration of the regulated activity.
   C.   The Municipality may, after consultation with DEP, approve measures for
meeting the state water quality requirements other than those in this Chapter,
provided that they meet the minimum requirements of, and do not conflict with,
state law including, but not limited to, the Clean Streams Law.
   D.   For all regulated earth disturbance activities, erosion and sediment
control BMPs shall be designed, implemented, operated, and maintained during
the regulated earth disturbance activities (e.g., during construction) to meet
the purposes and requirements of this Chapter and to meet all requirements
under Title 25 of the Pennsylvania Code and the Clean Streams Law. Various BMPs
and their design standards are listed in the Erosion and Sediment Pollution
Control Program Manual (E&S Manual), No. 363-2134-008, as amended and updated.
   E.   Impervious areas:
      (1)   The measurement of impervious areas shall include all of the
impervious areas in the total proposed development even if development is to
take place in stages.
      (2)   For development taking place in stages, the entire development plan
must be used in determining conformance with this Chapter.
      (3)   For projects that add impervious area to a parcel, the total
impervious area on the parcel is subject to the requirements of this Chapter;
except that the volume controls in §
126-13 and the peak rate controls of §
126-10 do not need to be retrofitted to existing impervious areas that are not
being altered by the proposed regulated activity.
   F.   Stormwater flows onto adjacent property shall not be created,
increased, decreased, relocated, or otherwise altered without written
notification from the owner, developer, or representative to the adjacent
property owner(s). The Township shall be copied on these communications. In the
event the adjacent property owner disputes the flows, the owner/developer shall
propose a solution that satisfies the adjacent property owner, or the discharge
shall be altered to maintain a minimum of twenty (20) feet from the property
line. Such stormwater flows shall be subject to the requirements of this
Chapter.
   G.   All regulated activities shall include such measures as necessary to:
      (1)   Protect health, safety, and property.
      (2)   Meet the water quality goals of this Chapter by implementing
measures to:
         (a)   Minimize disturbance to floodplains, wetlands, and wooded areas.
         (b)   Maintain or extend riparian buffers.
         (c)   Avoid erosive flow conditions in natural flow pathways.
         (d)   Minimize thermal impacts to waters of this Commonwealth.
         (e)   Disconnect impervious surfaces by directing runoff to pervious
areas, wherever possible.
      (3)   Incorporate methods described in the Pennsylvania Stormwater Best
Management Practices Manual (BMP Manual). If methods other than green
infrastructure and LID methods are proposed to achieve the volume and rate
controls required under this Chapter, the SWM Site Plan must include a detailed
justification demonstrating that the use of LID and green infrastructure is not
practicable.
   H.   The design of all facilities over karst shall include an evaluation of
measures to minimize adverse effects.
   I.   Infiltration BMPs should be spread out, made as shallow as practicable,
and located to maximize use of natural on-site infiltration features while
still meeting the other requirements of this Chapter.
   J.   Normally dry, open top, storage facilities should completely drain both
the volume control and rate control capacities over a period of time not less
than 24 and not more than 72 hours from the end of the design storm.
   K.   The design storm volumes to be used in the analysis of peak rates of
discharge should be obtained from the latest version of the Precipitation-
Frequency Atlas of the United States, National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration (NOAA), National Weather Service, Hydrometeorological Design
Studies Center, Silver Spring, Maryland.
      (1)   NOAA s Atlas 14 can be accessed at: http://hdsc.nws.noaa.gov/hdsc/
pfds/.
   L.   For all regulated activities, SWM BMPs shall be designed, implemented,
operated, and maintained to meet the purposes and requirements of this Chapter
and to meet all requirements under Title 25 of the Pennsylvania Code, the Clean
Streams Law, and the Storm Water Management Act.
   M.   Various BMPs and their design standards are listed in the BMP Manual.
   N.   The following calculations methods are acceptable based on the
watershed size:
      (1)   Standard Rational Method shall be acceptable for analysis of
watersheds up to 20 acres in size.
      (2)   The Modified Rational Method shall be acceptable for analysis of
watersheds up to 200 acres in size.
      (3)   NRCS Methods (TR-55 or TR-20) shall be acceptable for watershed
analyses of all sizes.
   O.   Provide safe conveyance of the 100-year design storm runoff from
offsite watersheds, if any. All predevelopment calculations shall be based upon
existing land uses except existing agricultural uses, which shall be based on
      (1)   Cultivated Land with Conservation Treatment
      (2)   Pasture in Good Condition,
      (3)   Meadow in Good Condition,
      (4)   Farmstead
      (5)   Unless ground cover generates a lower CN or c
   P.   Rainfall intensities shall be consistent with appropriate times-of-
concentration for overland flow and return periods from the Design Storm Curves
of PA DOT Rainfall Curves (Figure B-3) in Exhibit 2.
   Q.   Runoff Curve Numbers (CN) for both existing and proposed conditions
shall be obtained from Table B-2 in Exhibit 2.
   R.   Runoff coefficients (c) for both existing and proposed conditions shall
be obtained from Table B-3 in Exhibit 2.
   S.   Storm sewers, swales and other stormwater conveyance structures shall
be designed to convey post development runoff from a 25-year design storm
without surcharging inlets and with adequate freeboard in open drainageways.
      (1)   6 of freeboard shall be provided in swales carrying 14 cfs or less.
      (2)   1 ft. of freeboard shall be provided in drainageways designed to
carry flow of 15 cfs or greater.
   T.   The minimum pipe diameter permitted for use in storm sewer system and/
or stormwater carry culverts shall be 15 .
   U.   The minimum pipe slope permitted for use in storm sewer system and/or
stormwater carry culverts shall be 0.35%.
   V.   Stormwater drainage systems shall be provided in order to permit
unimpeded flow along natural watercourses, except as modified by stormwater
management facilities or open channels consistent with this Chapter.
   W.   The existing points of diffused or concentrated drainage that discharge
onto adjacent property shall not be altered without written permission of the
affected property owner(s).
   X.   If existing diffused discharge becomes concentrated in Post Development
Condition and discharges onto adjacent property, document that adequate
downstream conveyance facilities exist to safely transport the concentrated
discharge, or otherwise prove that no E&S, flooding, or other harm will result
from the concentrated discharge.
   Y.   Where a development site is traversed by watercourses, drainage
easements shall be provided conforming to the line of such watercourses.
      (1)   Easements shall be centered on the watercourse and have a minimum
width of 20.0 ft.
      (2)   The terms of the easement shall prohibit excavation, the placing of
fill or structures and any alterations that may adversely affect the flow of
stormwater within any portion of the easement.
   Z.   When it can be shown that, due to topo conditions, natural drainageways
on the site cannot adequately provide for drainage, open channels may be
constructed conforming substantially to the line and grade of such natural
drainageways. Work within natural drainageways is subject to approval by DEP.
   AA.   Any SWM facilities that would be located in or adjacent to waters of
the Commonwealth or wetlands shall be subject to approval by PADEP and, if
applicable, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. When there is a question whether
wetlands may be involved, it is the responsibility of the Developer or his
agent to demonstrate to the applicable regulatory agencies that the land in
question cannot be classified as wetlands.
   BB.   Cleanout structures for storm sewers shall be installed at the
following max. spacing:
      (1)   15 pipe 200 ft spacing
      (2)   18 36 pipe 300 ft spacing
      (3)   42 60 pipe 500 ft spacing
      (4)    66 pipe unlimited
   CC.   The SWM plan shall include calculations indicating velocities of flow,
grades, sizes, and capacities of water carrying structures, and retention and
detention structures as well as sufficient design information to construct such
facilities.
   DD.   Proposed lots or buildings adjacent to basins and significant channels
shall have a finished floor elevation of 2 feet above the 100-year storm event
level calculated for these facilities.
   EE.   The plans shall specify the minimum allowable finished first floor
elevation for these lots or buildings.
   FF.   Stormwater runoff channels shall be designed and installed to avoid
trapping excess sediment.
   GG.   E&S pollution control measures shall be required for all plans
submitted and shall be in accordance with the applicable standards and
specifications set forth in the latest edition of the DEP E&S Pollution Control
Program Manual and all other aspects of DEP Chapter 102.
   HH.   Special provisions may be required for watersheds draining to high
quality (HQ) and exceptional value (EV) waters in accordance with PADEP regs.
   II.   Adequate erosion protection shall be provided along all open channels
at all points of discharge.
 126-10 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT DISTRICTS.
   Antrim Township is divided into stormwater management districts as shown on
the Stormwater Management District Map (Exhibit 1).
   In addition to the requirements specified below, the Ground Water Recharge
( §
126-13 ) and Water Quality ( §
126-14 ) requirements shall be implemented.
   Standards for managing runoff in each Stormwater Management District are
shown below. Development sites in Antrim Township must control post-development
runoff rates to pre-development runoff rates for each specified design storm as
follows:
District Design Storm Post-Development Design Storm Pre-Development
District Design Storm Post-Development Design Storm Pre-Development
         2-year                        1-year
         5-year                        5-year
A        10-year                       10-year
         25-year                       25-year
         50-year                       50-year
         100-year                      100-year
         2-year                        1-year
         5-year                        2-year
B        10-year                       5-year
         25-year                       10-year
         50-year                       25-year
         100-year                      50-year
         2-year                        1-year
         5-year                        5-year
C        10-year                       10-year
         25-year                       25-year
         50-year                       50-year
         100-year                      100-year
 
 126-11 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT DISTRICT IMPLEMENTATION PROVISIONS (PERFORMANCE
STANDARDS).
   A.   General Post-development peak rates of runoff from any regulated
activity shall meet the peak release rates of runoff prior to development for
the design storms specified on the Stormwater Management District Map (Exhibit
1) and this section.
   B.   District Boundaries The boundaries of the Stormwater Management
Districts are shown on the Stormwater Management District Map that is available
for inspections at the municipal office. A copy of the Stormwater Management
District Map at a reduced scale is included in the Chapter (Exhibit 1). The
exact location of the Stormwater Management District boundaries as they apply
to a given development site shall be determined by mapping the boundaries using
the two-foot topographic contours (or most accurate data required) provided as
part of the Drainage Plan.
   C.   Sites located in more than one (1) District for proposed development
located in two (2) or more Stormwater Management Districts, the allowable post-
development peak discharge rate shall be determined based on the location of
the point(s) of discharge from the site. Stormwater discharge shall be detained
according to the provisions of the Stormwater Management District in which the
point of discharge is located. Existing district boundaries shall not be
altered by development beyond that which is required to construct the proposed
structures and/or facilities and provide proper access to and from the site
given the natural topographic limitations and constraints of the site.
 126-12 DESIGN CRITERIA FOR STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITIES.
   A.   Stormwater Management Facilities are not permitted unless it is proven
that all other options to use LID BMPs have been exhausted.
   B.   Release rates from storage structures shall be based on the runoff from
the 1-year, 2-year, 5-year and 10-year, 25-year, 50-year and 100-year pre-
development storm events according to the Stormwater Management District Map in
(Exhibit 1).
   C.   All stormwater facilities shall be designed in accordance with the
following minimum standards.
      (1)   Embankment material used for basin construction shall be comprised
of either on-site or imported fill which meets the following criteria:
         (a)   Free of organic material, ash, cinders, and demolition debris.
         (b)   Particle size distribution that is well graded.
         (c)   Plasticity index less than 10, liquid limit less than 30.
         (d)   Less than 15% by weight rock fragments larger than 3 inches,
less than 30% by weight larger than 3/4 inch and less than 30% smaller than No.
200 sieve.
      (2)   Embankment slopes shall not be steeper than one (1) foot vertical
in three (3) feet horizontal.
      (3)   The top width of basin embankments shall not be less than six (6)
feet.
      (4)   Emergency spillways in berms or earthen embankments shall be
designed to convey the peak discharge from a 100-year design storm event while
maintaining a minimum 1.0 foot of freeboard, assuming that the principal outlet
structure is completely blocked. Proper erosion control measures shall be
provided to protect the spillway and embankment against the erosive effects of
accelerated discharge. Calculations for erosion protection shall be provided.
      (5)   All embankments shall incorporate a compacted clay core and cutoff
key trench meeting the criteria for embankment material as well as the
following additional criteria:
         (a)   Soil shall be relatively impermeable and meet the following USCS
classification groups as determined by ASTM D2487/D2488: CL and/or CL-ML.
      (6)   Top width of compacted clay core shall be a minimum of 2 feet with
a top elevation equal to the 25-year storm peak water storage elevation or
higher. The bottom width of clay key trench shall be a minimum of 4 feet and
the key shall extend a minimum of 2 feet into virgin, undisturbed soil below
the topsoil layer.
      (7)   Anti-seep collars shall be installed on all basin outlet pipes. The
required size and spacing of the collars shall be confirmed through
calculations.
      (8)   Basins which are not designed to infiltrate shall be kept in a
maintainable condition with a minimum bottom slope of 1% sloped toward the
principal outlet structure. If paved low flow channels are used, then the basin
bottom slope can be reduced to 0.5%. Paved low flow channels shall have a
minimum width of 4 feet and be constructed of four-inch-thick concrete over
four-inches of compacted PennDOT No. 2A stone.
      (9)   Underdrains are highly discouraged in stormwater basins. If an
underdrain is proposed, include a note with the underdrain detail that states
the following:
         (a)   The Township must be notified when the underdrain is open and
when it is closed again. Once the underdrain has been closed, the Township
reserves the right to verify. When the underdrain is opened for maintenance
purposes, the basin is to be restored to the approved design. This requires
infiltration tests to be done to verify that the approved infiltration rates
have been restored.
      (10)   Storage facilities shall be designed to release the 1-year post
development storm runoff volume over a minimum duration of 24-hours.
 126-13 GROUND WATER RECHARGE (INFILTRATION/RECHARGE/RETENTION).
   A.   The ability to retain and maximize the ground water recharge capacity
of the area being developed is preferred and shall be proposed wherever
feasible. Design of the infiltration/recharge stormwater management facilities
shall give consideration to providing ground water recharge to compensate for
the reduction in the percolation that occurs when the ground surface is paved
and roofed over. These measures are required in hydrologic soil groups A and B
and should be utilized wherever feasible. Soils used for the construction of
basins shall have low-erodibility factors ( K factors).
      (1)   The Township reserves the right to waive the requirements of this
section if the Township receives documentation from a qualified design
professional which demonstrates the implementation of infiltration practices
would pose a threat to public health, safety, welfare and the protection of the
people of the Municipality, their resources and the environment, or if site-
specific soils testing demonstrates that suitable infiltration rates cannot be
achieved. At a minimum, a site s suitability for infiltration practices shall
be determined using the criteria in §
126-13 (D)(1) and §
126-13 (E)(4).
   B.   The green infrastructure and low impact development practices provided
in the BMP Manual shall be utilized for all regulated activities wherever
possible. Water volume controls shall be implemented using the Design Storm
Method in Subsection 1.
      (1)   The Design Storm Method (CG-1 in the BMP Manual) is applicable to
any size of regulated activity. This method requires detailed modeling based on
site conditions. This method shall be performed for each point of interest,
individually, on the project.
         (a)   Do not increase the post-development total runoff volume for all
storms equal to or less than the 2-year 24-hour duration precipitation.
         (b)   For modeling purposes:
            [1]   Existing (predevelopment) non-forested pervious areas must be
considered meadow in good condition.
            [2]   20% of existing impervious area, when present, shall be
considered meadow in good condition in the model for existing conditions.
   C.   The recharge volume provided at the site shall be directed to the most
permeable HSG available, if feasible.
   D.   A detailed soils evaluation of the project site shall be required to
determine the suitability of recharge facilities. The evaluation shall be
performed by a qualified design professional, and at a minimum, address soil
permeability, depth to bedrock and normal or seasonal high-water table,
susceptibility to sinkhole formation, and subgrade stability. The general
process for designing the infiltration BMP shall be:
      (1)   Analyze hydrologic soil groups as well as natural and man-made
features within watershed to determine general areas of suitability for
infiltration practices.
      (2)   Provide field tests to determine the presence of appropriate soil
percolation rates between 0.55 and 8.25 in/hr. Values outside this range may be
acceptable with recommendation from a qualified professional.
      (3)   Infiltration testing procedures shall follow the steps outlined in
DEP s Pennsylvania Stormwater BMP Manual, Appendix C.
      (4)   Testing shall be performed at the location of each proposed bottom
elevation of the Infiltration BMP. A plan including the frequency and locations
of soil tests shall be submitted to the Township for review and approval.
      (5)   The design infiltration rate shall be the average of all
infiltration tests taken, including tests that are 0.0 in/hr, with a factor of
safety depending on the infiltration test method:
         (a)   Double Ring Infiltrometer test factor of safety = 2
         (b)   Percolation Test factor of safety = 3
      (6)   Infiltration BMPs shall be capable of completely infiltrating the
collected runoff volume within 3 days (72 hours).
      (7)   Infiltration BMP bottoms shall be separated by a minimum of 24
vertically from the seasonal high-water table and/or bedrock layer, as
documented by on site soil testing.
      (8)   Infiltration BMPs shall be constructed in virgin soil, where
practical. In the event that Infiltration BMPs are constructed in fill
material, the fill material shall be comprised of 50% sand and 50% compost.
      (9)   Recharge/infiltration facilities shall not be used as sediment
basins where practical. If a recharge/infiltration facility is used as a
sediment basin, the bottom of the sediment basin shall be over excavated a
minimum of 2 and backfilled with amended soils before being converted to a
recharge/infiltration facility.
      (10)   Specific requirements shall be included on the plans to protect
infiltration BMPs from compaction by equipment and to prevent sediment from
entering infiltration BMPs during construction. This requirement shall be
provided in note form on the plan.
      (11)   Infiltration BMPs shall be at least 20 feet down-gradient, or 100
feet upgradient from on-site and/or offsite building foundations.
      (12)   Infiltration BMPs shall be a minimum of 100 feet from any water
supply well where the runoff is from commercial or industrial pervious parking
areas. For all other applications a minimum distance of 50 feet shall be used.
      (13)   Infiltration BMPs shall not be located within 50 feet of septic
systems and/or septic system drain fields.
      (14)   All infiltration BMPs shall incorporate a conveyance and control
for overflow runoff.
      (15)   Waiver of any or all of these requirements will be evaluated on an
individual basis and may be granted at the discretion of the Township only upon
written request and explanation of the reason(s) that these requirements should
not apply provided by a Qualified Design Professional.
   E.   Extreme caution shall be exercised where infiltration is proposed in
geologically susceptible areas such as strip mine or limestone areas. Extreme
caution shall also be exercised where salt or chloride would be a pollutant
since soils do little to filter this pollutant and it may contaminate the
groundwater. It is also extremely important that the qualified design
professional evaluate the possibility of groundwater contamination from the
proposed infiltration/recharge facility and recommend a hydrogeologic
justification study be performed if necessary. Whenever a basin will be located
in an area underlain by limestone, a geological evaluation of the proposed
location shall be conducted to determine susceptibility to sinkhole formations.
The design of all facilities over limestone formations shall include measures
to prevent ground water contamination and, where necessary, sinkhole formation.
The infiltration requirement in the High Quality/Exceptional Waters shall be
subject to the PADEP's Chapter 93 and Antidegradation Regulations. The
Municipality may require the installation of an impermeable liner in detention
basins. A detailed hydrogeologic investigation may be required by the Township.
All prevention provisions shall be stated and shown on the plan with details
provided for each.
      (1)   Infiltration BMPs shall have loading ratios no greater than 8.0:
1 overall drainage area to infiltration bottom area, and 5.0:1 impervious
drainage area to infiltration bottom area. If the site is underlain by karst
topography, the infiltration BMPs shall have loading ratios no greater than
8.0:1 overall drainage area to infiltration bottom area, and 3.0:1 impervious
drainage area to infiltration bottom area.
      (2)   If pretreatment is to be used in order to meet the required loading
ratio, the following needs to be provided:
         (a)   Pretreatment BMPs need to be called out as Pretreatment in the
PCSM report and on the plans. The pretreatment BMPs shall be labeled to
designate for which BMP they provide pretreatment.
         (b)   Demonstrate through calculations that the pretreatment BMPs are
creating an equivalent, acceptable loading ratio.
      (3)   Stormwater runoff from significant pollutant producing sources (so-
called hot spots such as industrial uses, gas stations, fast-food and other
commercial uses generating large numbers of vehicle trips, and other uses at
the determination of the Township) shall be filtered and/or pretreated using a
water quality BMP before being discharged.
      (4)   In these cases, the Township may require that a detailed geologic
evaluation of the project site be performed to determine the suitability for
recharge, including both the potential for groundwater contamination and
potential for sinkhole formation. The evaluation shall be performed by a
registered professional geologist licensed in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
and/or any other Township-approved professional, and at a minimum, address soil
permeability, depth to bedrock, susceptibility to sinkhole formation, and
subgrade stability.
   It shall be the developer s responsibility to verify if the site is
underlain by limestone. The following note shall be attached to all drainage
plans and signed and sealed by the developer s engineer or geologist:
   I, ____________________, hereby certify that the proposed detention basin /
infiltration BMP (circle one) is / is not underlain by limestone.
   F.   The Municipality may require the developer to provide safeguards
against groundwater contamination for uses which may cause groundwater
contamination should there be a mishap or spill.
   G.   Where pervious pavement is permitted for parking lots, recreational
facilities, non-dedicated streets, or other areas, pavement construction
specifications and maintenance schedules shall be noted on the plan.
   H.   Recharge/infiltration facilities may be used in conjunction with other
innovative or traditional BMPs, stormwater control facilities, and
nonstructural stormwater management alternatives.
 126-14 WATER QUALITY REQUIREMENTS.
   A.   In addition to the performance standards and design criteria
requirements of
Article III  of this Chapter, the land developer shall comply with the
following water quality requirements of this Article unless otherwise exempted
by provisions of this Chapter.
      (1)   The Township reserves the right to waive the requirements of this
section if the Township believes that the implementation of infiltration
practices would pose a threat to public health, safety, welfare, property and
the protection of the people of the Municipality, their resources and the
environment.
      (2)   Developed areas will provide adequate storage and treatment
facilities necessary to capture and treat stormwater runoff. The Recharge
Volume computed under § 126-13 may be a component of the Water Quality Volume.
If the Recharge Volume is less than the Water Quality Volume, the remaining
Water Quality Volume may be captured and treated by methods other than
recharge/infiltration BMPs.
      (3)   The Water Quality Volume (WQv) is the storage capacity needed to
treat stormwater runoff produced by P inch of rainfall (90% Rule) from the
developed areas of the site ( For P Values, see Exhibit 2, Table B-5). The
following calculation formula is used to determine the storage volume, WQv, in
acre-feet of storage:
   WQv = [(P)(Rv)(A)]/12
   WQv = Water Quality Volume
   P = Rainfall Amount (90% of events producing this rainfall (Exhibit 2, Table
B-5)
   A = Area in acres
   Rv = 0.05 + 0.009(I) where I is the impervious surface percentage
   B.   Water quality requirements must be addressed in the Post Construction
Stormwater Management narrative.
   C.   WQv shall be designed as part of a stormwater management facility which
incorporates water quality BMPs as a primary benefit of using that facility, in
accordance with design specifications contained in Pennsylvania Handbook of
Best Management Practices for Developing Areas .
   Design of infiltration BMPs proposed to comply with the water quality
requirements of this section shall be in accordance with the design
requirements outlined in the previous §
126-12 .
 126-15 RIPARIAN BUFFERS.
   A.   In order to protect and improve water quality, a Riparian Buffer
Easement shall be created and recorded as part of any subdivision or land
development that encompasses a Riparian Buffer, as applicable per DEP
regulations.
   B.   Except as required by 25 Pa. Code Chapter 102, the Riparian Buffer
Easement shall be measured to be the greater of the limit of the 100 year
floodplain or a minimum of 35 feet from the top of the streambank (on each
side).
   C.   Minimum Management Requirements for Riparian Buffers.
      (1)   Existing native vegetation shall be protected and maintained within
the Riparian Buffer Easement
      (2)   Whenever practicable, invasive vegetation shall be actively removed
and the Riparian Buffer Easement shall be planted with native trees, shrubs and
other vegetation to create a diverse native plant community appropriate to the
intended ecological context of the site.
   D.   The Riparian Buffer Easement shall be enforceable by the Municipality
and shall be recorded in the Franklin County Recorder of Deeds Office, so that
it shall run with the land and shall limit the use of the property located
therein. The easement shall allow for the continued private ownership and shall
count toward the minimum lot area as required by Zoning Chapter.
   E.   Recreational trails may be permitted, at the discretion of the
Township, within the Riparian Buffer Easement and shall be constructed and
maintained in a manner that will maintain the extent of the existing 100-year
floodplain, improve or maintain the stream stability, and preserve and protect
the ecological function of the floodplain.
   F.   The following conditions shall apply when public and/or private
recreation trails are permitted within Riparian Buffers:
      (1)   Trails shall be for non-motorized use only.
      (2)   Trails shall be designed to have the least impact on native plant
species and other sensitive environmental features.
   G.   Septic drain fields and sewage disposal systems shall not be permitted
within the Riparian Buffer Easement and shall comply with setback requirements
established under 25 Pa. Code Chapter 73.
ARTICLE IV STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SITE PLAN REQUIREMENTS
 126-16 PLAN REQUIREMENTS.
   The following items shall be included in the SWM Site Plan and shall be
signed and sealed by a Pennsylvania licensed engineer.
   A.   Appropriate sections from the Municipality s Subdivision and Land
Development Chapter, and other applicable local Chapters or ordinances, shall
be followed in preparing the SWM Site Plans.
   B.   No SWM Site Plan shall be implemented without Municipal approval. The
Municipality shall not approve any SWM Site Plan that is deficient in meeting
the requirements of this Chapter. At its sole discretion and in accordance with
this Article, when a SWM Site Plan is found to be deficient, the Municipality
may either disapprove the submission and require a resubmission, or in the case
of minor deficiencies, the Municipality may accept submission of modifications.
   C.   Provisions for permanent access or maintenance easements for all
physical SWM BMPs, such as ponds and infiltration structures, as necessary to
implement the Operation and Maintenance (O&M) Plan discussed in §
126-25  below.
   D.   SWM Site Plans shall be submitted, reviewed, and approved as part of
the Subdivision and/or Land Development Plan. If a SWM Site Plan is proposed
without a Subdivision and/or Land Development Plan, it is at the Township's
discretion how to process the SWM Site Plan.
   E.   The SWM Site Plan shall be submitted on 24-inch x 36-inch sheets and
shall be prepared in a form that meets the requirements for recording at the
offices of the Recorder of Deeds of Franklin County. The SWM Site Plan shall
provide the following information:
      (1)   A general description of the project and a detailed narrative of
the stormwater management proposal and conclusions describing the management
techniques, types of storage and conveyance facilities, and a comparison
between the pre-development and post-development peak runoff levels.
      (2)   Staging and implementation schedule for constructing the proposed
stormwater management facilities.
      (3)   A note which states: During all stages of construction, the Owner,
Developer and/or Contractor shall ensure that stormwater runoff is effectively
managed prior to discharging from the property through collection and
conveyance through approved on site stormwater management and erosion and
sediment pollution control facilities. Developer, Owner and/or Contractor shall
be jointly and severally liable for ensuring that the stormwater runoff is
effectively managed prior to discharge onto other property.
      (4)   A note which states: All owners of lots/land on this plan are
advised that the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection (PADEP)
may revise the stormwater requirements for said lots/land in the future. All
owners of lots/land on this plan shall be required to comply with the revised
DEP regulations, even though said regulations may be different than the
regulations currently in effect.
      (5)   A note which states: The inspector for Antrim Township s
Engineering firm must be present at the preconstruction meeting and for the
installation of stormwater controls and BMPs. Construction may not commence or
proceed without them.
      (6)   A note on the plan indicating the location and responsibility for
maintenance of stormwater management facilities that would be located off-site.
All off-site facilities shall meet the performance standards and design
criteria specified in this Chapter.
      (7)   A statement, signed by the landowner, acknowledging the stormwater
management system to be a permanent fixture that can be altered or removed only
after approval of a revised plan by the Municipality.
      (8)   A note which states that no person shall modify, remove, fill,
landscape or alter any existing stormwater BMP, unless it is part of an
approved maintenance program, without the written approval of the Municipality.
      (9)   A note which states that no person shall place any structure, fill,
landscaping or vegetation into a stormwater BMP or within a drainage easement,
which would limit or alter the functioning of the BMP, without the written
approval of the Municipality.
      (10)   A determination of site conditions in accordance with the BMP
Manual. A detailed site evaluation shall be completed for projects proposed in
areas of carbonate geology or karst topography, and other environmentally
sensitive areas, such as brownfields.
      (11)   Complete hydrologic and hydraulic structural computations for all
stormwater management facilities. Structural computations shall be submitted to
the Municipality and their Engineer.
      (12)   Stormwater runoff design computations and documentation as
specified in this Ordinance, or as otherwise necessary to demonstrate that the
maximum practicable measures have been taken to meet the requirements of this
Ordinance, including the recommendations and general requirements in §
126-9 .
      (13)   The effect of the project (in terms of runoff volumes, water
quality, and peak flows) on surrounding properties and aquatic features and on
any existing stormwater conveyance system that may be affected by the project,
including offsite watersheds, if any.
      (14)   Overland drainage paths of proposed swales or channels to convey
water. The plans shall show all points of discharge from the site (swale, pipe,
watercourse, sheet flow, etc.).
      (15)   A soil erosion and sediment control plan, where applicable, as
prepared for and submitted to the approval authority.
      (16)   The location of all erosion and sedimentation control facilities.
      (17)   The location of the project relative to highways, municipalities,
or other identifiable landmarks.
      (18)   The 100-year flood plain as determined by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA).
      (19)   Existing contours at intervals of two feet. In areas of steep
slopes (greater than 15 percent), five-foot contour intervals may be used.
      (20)   Existing streams, lakes, ponds, or other bodies of water and
wetlands within the project area.
      (21)   Other physical features including sinkholes, streams, existing
drainage courses, and areas of natural vegetation to be preserved.
      (22)   The locations of all existing and proposed utilities, sanitary
sewers, and water lines on the property being developed and within 50 feet of
the subject property lines.
      (23)   An overlay showing soil names and boundaries.
      (24)   Proposed changes to the land surface and vegetative cover,
including the type and amount of impervious area that would be added.
      (25)   Existing and proposed structures, roads, paved areas, and
buildings. These features shall be shown within 50 feet of the property lines
when access is permitted.
      (26)   Final contours at intervals of two feet. In areas of steep slopes
(greater than 15 percent), five-foot contour intervals may be used.
      (27)   Construction details, sections and specifications for stormwater
facilities with sufficient information and dimensions for construction
interpretation that will provide the developer and constructor with sufficient
information to meet the requirements of this Chapter.
      (28)   The name of the development, the name and address of the owner of
the property, and the name of the individual or firm preparing the plan.
      (29)   The date of submission and all subsequent revisions.
      (30)   A graphic and written scale not smaller than fifty (50) feet to
the inch.
      (31)   North arrow.
      (32)   The total tract boundary and size with distances marked to the
nearest hundredth of a foot and bearings to the nearest second.
      (33)   Existing and proposed land use(s).
      (34)   A key map showing all existing man-made features beyond the
property boundary that would be affected by the project.
      (35)   Plan and profile drawings of all SWM BMPs, including drainage
structures, pipes, open channels, and swales.
      (36)   SWM Site Plan shall show the locations of existing and proposed
on-lot wastewater facilities and water supply wells.
      (37)   The SWM Site Plan shall include an O&M Plan for all existing and
proposed physical stormwater management facilities. This plan shall address
long-term ownership and responsibilities for O&M as well as schedules and costs
for O&M activities.
      (38)   Easements shall be placed around all stormwater management
facilities that would prohibit structures and other obstructions from being
placed in areas intended and required for stormwater management. Easements
shall have a minimum width of twenty (20) feet and be centered on the facility
(i.e. pipe, swale) to which access is being provided. For storage, retention
and infiltration facilities the easement shall conform substantially to the
size, shape and configuration of such facility.
      (39)   A note shall be provided to grant the Township access to inspect
stormwater structures and facilities during reasonable times in regard to any
aspect regulated by this Chapter. In the case of an emergency, the Municipality
shall have immediate access.
      (40)   Maintenance and ownership provisions in accordance with Article V.
      (41)   The following signature block for the design engineer who is
licensed in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania:
      _______________, on this date _____________, have reviewed and hereby
certify that,
      (Design Engineer)         (date of signature)
      to the best of my knowledge and ability, the stormwater management plan
meets all design standards and criteria of Antrim Township Stormwater
Management Chapter.
      (42)   A list of the waivers of this Chapter that are requested.
      (43)   A justification must be included in the SWM Site Plan if BMPs
other than green infrastructure methods and LID practices are proposed to
achieve the volume, rate and water quality controls under this Chapter.
 126-17 PLAN SUBMISSION.
   The SWM Site Plan shall be submitted as follows:
   A.   The SWM Site Plan must be submitted as part of the Subdivision and/or
Land Development plan.
   B.   Letter of Transmittal listing all submitted items.
   C.   Seven (7) paper copies of the full plan set.
   D.   One (1) searchable PDF of the full plan set.
   E.   One (1) completed Administrative Stormwater Checklist and one (1)
completed Technical Stormwater Checklist with notes of where the information
can be found in the reports or on the plan.
   F.   One (1) PDF of full PCSM and E&S Reports/Calculations/Worksheets.
   G.   One (1) digital plan submitted in State Plane 83 South after all
comments are addressed.
   Antrim Township will distribute the necessary submitted documents to the
Municipal Engineer and Franklin County Planning Office. It is the
responsibility of the Owner, Developer, and/or Applicant to submit SWM Site
Plans to the Franklin County Conservation District and the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection.
 126-18 PLAN REVIEW.
   A.   SWM Site Plans shall be reviewed by the Municipality and their engineer
for consistency with the provisions of this Chapter. All costs incurred by the
Municipality for such reviews shall be reimbursed to the Municipality by the
developer.
   B.   The Municipality shall notify the applicant in writing within 45 days
whether the SWM Site Plan is approved or disapproved. If the SWM Site Plan
involves a Subdivision and Land Development Plan, the notification shall occur
within the time period allowed by the Municipalities Planning Code (90 days).
If a longer notification period is provided by other statute, regulation, or
ordinance, the applicant will be so notified by the Municipality. This timing
provision restarts with each resubmission of the SWM Site Plan.
   C.   Extensions of time may be agreed to by the Municipality and developer/
owner to allow comments to be addressed. Such extensions shall be submitted in
writing in the form provided by the Municipality and acted on by the Board of
Supervisors.
   D.   For any SWM Site Plan that proposes to use any BMPs other than green
infrastructure and LID practices to achieve the volume and rate controls
required under this Chapter, the Municipality will not approve the SWM Site
Plan unless it determines that green infrastructure and LID practices are not
practicable.
   E.   If the Municipality disapproves the SWM Site Plan, the Municipality
will state the reasons for the disapproval in writing.
   F.   The Municipality may approve the SWM Site Plan with conditions and, if
so, shall provide the acceptable conditions for approval in writing. The SWM
Site Plan is not approved until the conditions are satisfied.
 126-19 MODIFICATION OR REVISION OF PLANS.
   A modification to a submitted SWM Site Plan that involves a change in SWM
BMPs or techniques, or that involves the relocation or redesign of SWM BMPs,
that is necessary because soil or other conditions are not as stated on the SWM
Site Plan as determined by the Municipality, or to address review comments
shall require a resubmission of the modified SWM Site Plan in accordance with
this Article. The timing provision shall restart with each resubmission or
modification. Detailed comment response letters stating how and where each
comment has been addressed is required with each submission.
   Modifications to a SWM Site Plan that is approved by the Municipality and
recorded shall be submitted to the Municipality for review. The Municipality,
at its sole discretion, shall determine if the modification will be permitted
and the method of amending the recorded SWM Site Plan.
 126-20 RESUBMISSION OF DISAPPROVED SWM SITE PLANS.
   A disapproved SWM Site Plan may be resubmitted, with the revisions
addressing the Municipality s concerns, to the Municipality in accordance with
this Article. Each resubmission shall include a full submission of all project
documents. The applicable review fee must accompany a resubmission of a
disapproved SWM Site Plan.
 126-21 AUTHORIZATION TO CONSTRUCT AND TERM OF VALIDITY.
   The Municipality s approval of a SWM Site Plan authorizes the regulated
activities contained in the SWM Site Plan for a maximum term of validity of 5
years following the date of approval. The Municipality may specify a term of
validity shorter than 5 years in the approval for any specific SWM Site Plan.
Terms of validity shall commence on the date the Municipality signs the
approval for a SWM Site Plan. If an approved SWM Site Plan is not completed
according to §
126-22  within the term of validity, then the Municipality may consider the SWM
Site Plan disapproved and may revoke any and all permits. SWM Site Plans that
are considered disapproved by the Municipality shall be resubmitted in
accordance with §
126-20  of this Chapter.
   In the event a SWM Site Plan is required to meet new regulations or be
amended by DEP, EPA or any other entity, the modified plan shall be submitted
to the Municipality for review and shall not be deemed approved until the
modified SWM Site Plan is satisfactory to all entities.
 126-22 AS-BUILT PLANS, COMPLETION CERTIFICATE AND FINAL INSPECTION.
   A.   The developer shall be responsible for providing as-built plans of all
SWM BMPs and drainage included in the approved SWM Site Plan. The as-built
plans and an explanation of any discrepancies with the construction plans shall
be submitted to the Municipality. As-built plans shall be submitted as follows:
      (1)   PDF submission
      (2)   Paper submission in the quantity set forth by the Municipality
      (3)   Plans in State Plane 83 South after a satisfactory review and
inspection
   B.   The as-built submission shall include:
      (1)   A certification of completion signed by a Pennsylvania Licensed
Engineer verifying that all permanent SWM BMPs and drainage have been
constructed according to the approved plans and specifications.
      (2)   The latitude and longitude coordinates for all permanent SWM BMPs
at the central location of the BMPs.
      (3)   If any licensed qualified design professionals contributed to the
construction plans, then a licensed qualified design professional must sign the
completion certificate.
      (4)   Red lined changes or confirmation of the following:
         (a)   Actual constructed BMPs overlaid on the approved SWM site plan
         (b)   Actual constructed drainage systems and drainage facilities on
the approved site plan
         (c)   Actual constructed inverts, top of grates, slopes, and
capacities on the drainage profiles
      (5)   Detailed written explanation of any discrepancies.
   C.   After receipt of the completion certification by the Municipality, the
Municipality may conduct a final inspection.
ARTICLE V OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE
 126-23 PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE.
   The applicant shall provide a financial guarantee to the Township for the
proper installation and construction of all stormwater management controls as
required by the approved Stormwater Management Site Plan and this Chapter in
the amount of 110% of the total estimated construction cost of all elements of
the approved plan. Performance guarantees may, at the Township s sole
discretion, be released in part upon written request after required
improvements have been constructed. Such request shall be made in the form
provided by the Township. Full release of Performance guarantees shall not
occur until after as built drawings have been received and approved and a final
on-site inspection has been completed. Financial Security for stormwater
management controls to be constructed pursuant to Section 508 of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code may be used in lieu of the financial
security required by this Section.
 126-24 RESPONSIBILITIES OF DEVELOPERS AND LANDOWNERS.
   A.   The Municipality shall make the final determination on the continuing
maintenance responsibilities prior to final approval of the SWM Site Plan. The
Municipality may require a dedication of such facilities as part of the
requirements for approval of the SWM Site Plan. Such a requirement is not an
indication that the Municipality will accept the facilities. The Municipality
reserves the right to accept or reject the ownership and operating
responsibility for any portion of the stormwater management controls.
   B.   Facilities, areas, or structures used as SWM BMPs shall be enumerated
as permanent real estate appurtenances and recorded as deed restrictions or
conservation easements that run with the land.
   C.   The O&M Plan shall be recorded as a restrictive deed covenant that runs
with the land.
   D.   The Municipality may take enforcement actions against an owner for any
failure to satisfy the provisions of this Article.
   E.   When ownership will ultimately be the responsibility of a Homeowners
Association an agreement shall be provided to the Township by the Applicant/
Owner/Developer defining the terms and conditions under which ownership and
maintenance responsibilities will be transferred to the Homeowners Association.
Other items may be required in the agreement where determined necessary to
guarantee satisfactory installation and maintenance of all facilities. The
agreement shall be subject to the review and approval of the Municipality.
   F.   Identification of the responsible party or entity for ownership and
maintenance of both temporary and permanent stormwater management and erosion
and sediment control facilities. In meeting these requirements, the following
priority for ownership is herein established:
      (1)   As a first priority, the facilities should be incorporated within
individual lots so that respective lot owners will own and be responsible for
maintenance in accordance with this section and the recorded deed restrictions.
      (2)   As a second priority, in the event that the first priority cannot
be achieved, ownership and maintenance shall be the responsibility of a
Homeowners Association. The Township shall have complete discretion in
determining whether or not the first priority can be achieved. The stated
responsibilities of the Homeowners Association in terms of owning and
maintaining the stormwater management facilities shall be submitted with final
plans for determination of their adequacy and, upon their approval, shall be
recorded with the approved subdivision and/or land development plan with the
recorder of deeds of Franklin County, Pennsylvania. In addition, the approved
subdivision and/or land development plan and any deed written from said plan
for a lot or lots shown therein shall contain a condition that it shall be
mandatory for the owner or owners of said lot to be members of said Homeowners
Association.
      (3)   Municipal ownership shall not be permitted.
 126-25 OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE AGREEMENTS.
   A.   Prior to final approval of the SWM Site Plan, the property owner shall
sign and record a Stormwater Facilities Operation and Maintenance (O&M)
Agreement (see Exhibit 3) covering all stormwater control facilities which are
to be privately owned.
      (1)   The owner, successor and assigns shall maintain all facilities in
accordance with the approved SWM Site Plan and the approved maintenance
schedule in the O&M Agreement.
      (2)   Description of maintenance requirements and outline of routine
maintenance actions and schedules necessary to ensure proper operation of the
facility(ies).
      (3)   Upon presentation of proper credentials, duly authorized
representatives of the municipality may enter at reasonable times upon any
property within the municipality to inspect the condition of the stormwater
structures and facilities in regard to any aspect regulated by this Chapter. In
the event of an emergency, the Municipality shall have immediate access. The
owner shall keep on file with the Municipality the name, address, and telephone
number of the person or company responsible for maintenance activities; in the
event of a change, new information shall be submitted by the owner to the
Municipality within ten (10) working days of the change.
   B.   The owner is responsible for operation and maintenance (O&M) of the SWM
BMPs. If the owner fails to adhere to the O&M Agreement, the Municipality may
perform the services required and charge the owner appropriate fees. Nonpayment
of fees may result in a lien against the property.
ARTICLE VI PROHIBITIONS
 126-26 PROHIBITED DISCHARGES AND CONNECTIONS.
   A.   Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, that
allows any non-stormwater discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and
wash water to enter a regulated small MS4 or to enter the surface waters of
this Commonwealth is prohibited.
   B.   No person shall allow, or cause to allow, discharges into a regulated
small MS4, or discharges into waters of this Commonwealth, which are not
composed entirely of stormwater, except (1) as provided in paragraph (C) below
and (2) discharges authorized under a state or federal permit.
   C.   The following discharges are authorized unless they are determined to
be significant contributors to pollution in a regulated small MS4 or to the
waters of this Commonwealth:
      (1)   Discharges or flows from firefighting activities.
      (2)   Discharges from potable water sources including water line flushing
and fire hydrant flushing, if such discharges do not contain detectable
concentrations of Total Residual Chlorine (TRC).
      (3)   Non-contaminated irrigation water, water from lawn maintenance,
landscape drainage and flows from riparian habitats and wetlands.
      (4)   Diverted stream flows and springs.
      (5)   Non-contaminated HVAC condensation and water from geothermal
systems.
      (6)   Residential (i.e., not commercial) vehicle wash water where
cleaning agents are not utilized.
      (7)   Non-contaminated hydrostatic test water discharges, if such
discharges do not contain detectable concentrations of TRC.
   D.   In the event that the Municipality or DEP determines that any of the
discharges identified in Subsection (C) significantly contribute pollutants or
is causing erosion or sedimentation to a regulated small MS4 or to the waters
of this Commonwealth, the Municipality or DEP will notify the responsible
person(s) to cease the discharge.
 126-27 ROOF DRAINS AND SUMP PUMPS.
   A.   Include the following notes on the plans:
      (1)   Roof drains shall not be connected to streets, sanitary or storm
sewers or roadside ditches, except as provided in §
126-27 (A)(2).
      (2)   When it is more advantageous to connect directly to streets or
storm sewers, connections of roof drains to streets or roadside ditches may be
permitted by the Municipality when proposed and approved on SWM site plan.
      (3)   Roof drains and sump pumps shall discharge to infiltration or
vegetative BMPs designed and planned to receive such flows.
 126-28 ALTERATION OF SWM BMPS.
   Include the following note on the plans: No person shall modify, remove,
fill, landscape, or alter any SWM BMPs, facilities, areas, or structures that
were installed as a requirement of this Chapter without the written approval of
the Municipality.
ARTICLE VII FEES AND EXPENSES
(Reserved for future use)
ARTICLE VIII ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES
 126-29 RIGHT-OF-ENTRY.
   Upon presentation of proper credentials, the Municipality or its designated
agent may enter at reasonable times upon any property within the Municipality
to inspect the condition of the stormwater structures and facilities in regard
to any aspect regulated by this Chapter.
 126-30 INSPECTION.
   A.   The landowner or the owner s designee shall inspect SWM BMPs,
facilities and/or structures installed under this Chapter according to the
following frequencies, at a minimum, to ensure the BMPs, facilities and/or
structures continue to function as intended:
      (1)   Annually for the first 5 years
      (2)   Once every 3 years thereafter
      (3)   During or immediately after the cessation of a 10-year or greater
storm
   B.   The Municipality or the assigned inspector shall inspect the privately
owned SWM BMPs as deemed necessary by the Township.
   C.   Inspections should be conducted by the owner or designee during or
immediately following precipitation events. A written inspection report shall
be created to document each inspection. The inspection report shall contain the
date and time of the inspection, the individual(s) who completed the
inspection, the location of the BMP, facility or structure inspected,
observations on performance, and recommendations for improving performance, if
applicable. Inspection reports shall be submitted to the Municipality upon
request. Property owner shall have 30 days to submit reports when requested.
   D.   The Municipal Engineer or his Municipal assignee shall observe any
phases of the installation of the permanent stormwater management facilities
that are deemed appropriate by the Municipal Engineer and the Municipality.
   E.   During any stage of the work, if the Municipal Engineer determines that
the permanent stormwater management facilities are not being installed in
accordance with the approved Stormwater Management Plan, the Municipality shall
revoke any existing building/land use permits until a revised Drainage Plan is
submitted and approved, as specified in this Chapter.
 126-31 ENFORCEMENT.
   A.   It shall be unlawful for a person to undertake any regulated activity
except as provided in an approved SWM Site Plan, unless specifically exempted
in §
126-8 .
   B.   It shall be unlawful to violate §
126-28  of this Chapter.
   C.   The municipal governing body is hereby authorized and directed to
enforce all of the provisions of this Chapter. Inspections regarding compliance
with the SWM Site Plan are a responsibility of the Municipal engineer or other
qualified persons designated by the Municipality.
      (1)   A set of design plans approved by the Municipality shall be on file
at the site throughout the duration of the construction activity. Periodic
inspections may be made by the Municipality or designee during construction.
      (2)   Adherence to Approved Plan
         (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to
undertake any regulated activity under §
126-5  on any property except as provided for in the approved drainage plan and
pursuant to the requirements of this Chapter. It shall be unlawful to alter or
remove any control structure required by the drainage plan pursuant to this
Chapter or to allow the property to remain in a condition which does not
conform to the approved drainage plan.
      (3)   After receipt of the certification by the Municipality, a final
inspection shall be conducted by the municipal engineer or designated
representative to certify compliance with this Chapter.
      (4)   Prior to revocation or suspension of an approval or permit, the
governing body will schedule a meeting to discuss the non-compliance if there
is no immediate danger to life, public health or property.
   D.   The Municipality or its representatives may enter upon the Property and
take whatever action is deemed necessary to maintain said BMP(s) in the event
the Landowner fails to operate and maintain the BMPs in accordance with the
approved SWM site plan. All costs incurred by the Municipality shall be
reimbursed to the Township. It is expressly understood and agreed that the
Municipality is under no obligation to maintain or repair said facilities, and
in no event shall be construed to impose any such obligation on the
Municipality.
   E.   In the event there is a chemical spill or discharge of a substance that
may contaminate the soil or groundwater, the Municipality may enter the site
and take whatever remediation action is necessary in the event the landowner
fails to remediate the site immediately. All costs incurred by the Municipality
shall be reimbursed to the Township.
   F.   In the event the Municipality performs work of any nature or expends
any funds in performance of said work for labor, use of equipment, supplies,
materials, and the like, the Landowner shall reimburse the Municipality for all
expenses (direct and indirect) incurred within thirty (30) days of receipt of
invoice from the Municipality. If not paid within said thirty (30) day period,
the Municipality may enter a lien against the property in the amount of such
costs, or may proceed to recover his costs through proceedings in equity or at
law as authorized under the provisions of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code.
 126-32 SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.
   A.   Any approval or permit issued by the Municipality pursuant to this
Chapter may be suspended or revoked for:
      (1)   Non-compliance with or failure to implement any provision of the
approved SWM Site Plan or O&M Agreement.
      (2)   A violation of any provision of this Chapter or any other
applicable law, ordinance, rule, or regulation relating to the Regulated
Activity.
      (3)   The creation of any condition or the commission of any act during
the Regulated Activity which constitutes or creates a hazard, nuisance,
pollution, or endangers the life or property of others.
   B.   A suspended approval may be reinstated by the Municipality when:
      (1)   The Municipality has inspected and approved the corrections to the
violations that caused the suspension.
      (2)   The Municipality is satisfied that the violation has been
corrected.
   C.   An approval that has been revoked by the Municipality cannot be
reinstated. The applicant may apply for a new approval under the provisions of
this Chapter.
   D.   If a violation causes no immediate danger to life, public health, or
property, at its sole discretion, the Municipality may provide a limited time
period for the owner to correct the violation. In these cases, the Municipality
will provide the owner, or the owner's designee, with a written notice of the
violation and the time period allowed for the owner to correct the violation.
If the owner does not correct the violation within the allowed time period, the
Municipality may revoke or suspend any, or all, applicable approvals and
permits pertaining to any provision of this Chapter.
   E.   An occupancy permit shall not be issued unless the certification of
compliance has been secured. The occupancy permit shall be required for each
lot owner and/or developer for all subdivisions and land development in the
Municipality.
 126-33 PUBLIC NUISANCE.
   A.   The violation of any provision of this Chapter is hereby deemed a
Public Nuisance.
   B.   Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate
violation.
 126-34 PENALTIES.
   A.   Anyone violating the provisions of this Chapter shall be subject to a
fine of not more than $1,000 for each violation, recoverable with costs
including, but not limited to attorney fees, court costs, filing fees, etc., or
imprisonment of not more than 90 days, or both. Each day that the violation
continues shall be a separate offense.
   B.   In addition, Antrim Township, through its solicitor may institute
injunctive, mandamus or any other appropriate action or proceeding at law or in
equity for the enforcement of this Chapter. Any court of competent jurisdiction
shall have the right to issue restraining orders, temporary or permanent
injunctions, mandamus or other appropriate forms of remedy or relief.
 126-35 APPEALS.
   A.   Any person aggrieved by any action of the Municipality or its designee,
relevant to the provisions of this Chapter, may appeal to the Municipality
within 30 days of that action.
   B.   Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Municipality, relevant to
the provisions of this Chapter, may appeal to the County Court of Common Pleas
in the county where the activity has taken place within 30 days of the
Municipality s decision.
 126-36 REPEALER.
   Any other Chapter provision(s) or regulation of the Municipality
inconsistent with any of the provisions of this Chapter is hereby repealed to
the extent of the inconsistency only.
 126-37 SEVERABILITY.
   If any article, section, or provision in this ordinance should be decided by
the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect
the validity of this ordinance as a whole or any part thereof other than the
parts so decided to be unconstitutional or invalid.
EXHIBIT 1 ANTRIM TOWNSHIP STORMWATER MANAGEMENT DISTRICT MAP
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4fd837b3aefb17057c35f92d1d2d47efe32e01e3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3211.png]
 
 
EXHIBIT 2
FIGURE B-l:   Gravel/Stone Impervious Area Reduction Factor Table and Sample
Impervious Area Calculation
FIGURE B-2:   PennDOT Delineated Regions
FIGURE B-3:   Storm Intensity-Duration-Frequency Curve (PennDOT Region 3)
TABLE B-2:   Runoff Curve Numbers (NRCS (SCS) TR-55)
TABLE B-3:   Rational Runoff Coefficients
TABLE B-4:   Roughness Coefficients (Manning s N ) For Overland Flow (U.S. Army
Corps Of Engineers, Hec-1 Users Manual)
TABLE B-5:   24-Hour Storm Values Representing 90% Of Annual Rainfall (Pa
Handbook Of Best Management Practices For Developing Areas)
TABLE B-6:   Stormwater Credits for Computing Post Development Hydrograph
FIGURE B-1
 
Gravel/Stone Impervious Area Reduction Factor
Hydrologic Soil Group A    B    C    D
Reduction Factor      0.58 0.77 0.85 0.89
 
Sample Impervious Area Calculation
GIVEN:   Property Size (parent tract)                  = 5+ acres
Hydrologic Soil Group                     = C
Existing Impervious Areas (paving, rooftops, etc.)   = 2,500 SF
Proposed Impervious Areas                  = 8,000 SF
Existing Gravel/Stone Areas                  = 4,000 SF
Proposed Gravel/Stone Areas               = 6,000 SF
FIND:   Total impervious area to determine if the project is eligible for an
exemption review by the Township based on the criteria in Section 204.1.
SOLUTION:
1.   For hydrologic soil group C, tire gravel/stone area impervious reduction
factor is 0.85.
2.   Total Impervious Area = (2,500 SF + 8,000 SF) + [(4,000 SF + 6,000 SF) x
0.85]
=         10,500 SF      +      8,500 SF
=                  19.000 SF
3.   19.000 SF < 20.000 SF therefore, in accordance with Section 204.1, this
site may be exempt from the requirements of Article III, subject to the review
of the Township Engineer and at the sole discretion of the Township
Supervisors.
FIGURE B-2 PENNDOT DELINEATED REGIONS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4fd837b3aefb17057c35f92d1d2d47efe32e01e3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3213.png]
 
FIGURE B-3 PENNDOT STORM INTENSITY-DURATION-FREQUENCY CURVE
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4fd837b3aefb17057c35f92d1d2d47efe32e01e3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3215.png]
 
   TABLE B-2
   Runoff Curve Numbers
   (From NRCS (SCS) TR-55)
LAND USE DESCRIPTION HYDROLOGIC SOIL GROUP
                     A B C D
LAND USE DESCRIPTION                                 HYDROLOGIC SOIL GROUP
                                                     A    B  C  D
Open Space                                           44   65 77 82
Orchard                                              44   65 77 82
Meadow                                               30** 58 71 78
Agricultural                                         59   71 79 83
Forest                                               36** 60 73 79
Commercial                          (85% Impervious) 89   92 94 95
Industrial                          (72% Impervious) 81   88 91 93
Institutional                       (50% Impervious) 71   82 88 90
Residential
Average Lot Size                    % impervious
1/8 acre or less                    65               77   85 90 92
1/8 1/3 acre                        34               59   74 82 87
1/3 1 acre                          23               53   69 80 85
1 4 acres                           12               46   66 78 82
Farmstead                                            59   74 82 86
Smooth Surfaces (Concrete, Asphalt,                  98   98 98 98
Gravel or Bare Compacted Soil)
Water                                                98   98 98 98
Mining/Newly Graded Areas (Pervious                  77   86 91 94
Areas Only)
* Includes Multi-Family Housing unless justified lower density can be
provided.
** Caution - CN values under 40 may produce erroneous modeling results.
Note: Existing site conditions of bare earth or fallow shall be considered
as meadow when choosing a CN value.
 
TABLE B-3 RATIONAL RUNOFF COEFFICIENTS
                     HYDROLOGIC SOIL GROUP
LAND USE DESCRIPTION A B C D
                                                         HYDROLOGIC SOIL GROUP
LAND USE DESCRIPTION                                     A    B    C   D
Cultivated Land : without conservation treatment         .49  .67  .81 .88
          : with conservation treatment         .27  .43  .61 .67
Pasture or range land : poor condition                   38   .63  .78 .84
             : good conditions               ___* .25  .51 .65
Meadow : good conditions                                 ___* ___* .44 .61
Wood or Forest Land : thin stand, poor cover, no mulch   ___* .34  .59 .70
             : good cover                    ___* ___* .45 .59
Open Spaces, lawns, parks, golf courses, cemeteries
Good conditions : grass cover on 75% or more of the area ___* .25  .51 .65
Fair conditions : grass cover on 50% to 75% of the area  ___* .45  .63 .74
Commercial and business areas (85% impervious)           .84  .90  .93 .96
Industrial districts (72% impervious)                    .67  .81  .88 .92
Residential:
   Average lot siAverage % Impervious
   1/8 acre or le65                                   .59  .76  .86 .90
   1/4 acre      38                                   .25  .49  .67 .78
   1/3 acre      30                                   ___* .49  .67 .78
   1/2 acre      25                                   ___* .45  .65 .76
   1 acre        20                                   ___* .41  .63 .74
Paved parking lots, roofs, driveways, etc.               .99  .99  .99 .99
Streets and roads :
   Paved with curbs and storm sewers                  .99  .99  .99 .99
   Gravel                                             .57  .76  .84 .88
   Dirt                                               .49  .69  .80 .84
 
Notes: Values are based on S.C.S. definitions and are average values.
      Values indicated by ___ should be determined by the design engineer based
on site characteristics.
Source: New Jersey Department of Transportation. Technical Manual for Stream
Encroachment, August, 1984
TABLE B-4 Roughness Coefficients (Manning s n ) for Overland Flow
Surface Description n
Surface Description                                             n
Dense Growth                                                    0.4   -   0.5
Pasture                                                         0.3   -   0.4
Lawns                                                           0.2   -   0.3
Bluegrass Sod                                                   0.2   -   0.5
Short Grass Prairie                                             0.1   -   0.2
Sparse Vegetation                                               0.05   -   0.1
Bare Clay-Loam Soil (eroded)                                    0.01   -   0.0
Concrete/Asphalt   -   very shallow depths (less than 1/4 0.10   -   0.1
            -   small depths (1/4 inch to several0.05   -   0.1
 
   Roughness Coefficients (Manning s n ) For Channel and Pipe Flow
Reach Description n
Reach Description                                             n
Natural stream, clean, straight, no rifts or pools            0.03
Natural stream, clean, winding, some pools or shoals          0.04
Natural stream, winding, pools, shoals, stony with some weeds 0.05
Natural stream, sluggish deep pools and weeds                 0.07
Natural stream or swale, very weedy or with timber underbrush 0.10
Concrete pipe, culvert or channel                             0.013
Corrugated metal pipe                                         0.024
Spiral rib metal pipe                                         0.012
Corrugated polyethylene pipe                                  0.020
Smooth-lined corrugated polyethylene pipe                     0.012
 
TABLE B-5
24-Hour Storm Values Representing 90% of Annual Rainfall PA Handbook of Best
Management Practices for Developing Areas
 
PennDOT Rainfall Region P Inches
1                       1.13
2                       1.48
3                       1.50
4                       1.95
5                       2.04
 
TABLE B-6
Stormwater Credits for Computing Post-Development HydrographThe developer may,
subject to approval of the municipal engineer, use the stormwater credit
described in the following table, in computing post-development hydrograph:
 
Stormwater      Description
Credit
                   Conservation of natural areas such as forest, wetlands, or other sensitive
                areas in a protected easement thereby retaining their pre-development hydrologic
Natural Area    and water quality characteristics. Using this credit, a designer may subtract
Conservation    conservation areas from total site area when computing the required water
                quality volume. Additionally, the post-development curve number (CN) for these
                areas may be assumed to be forest in good condition.
                   Credit is given when rooftop runoff is disconnected and then directed over a
                pervious area where it may either infiltrate into the soil or filter over it.
Disconnection   Credit is typically obtained by grading the site to promote overland flow or by
of Rooftop      providing bioretention on single-family residential lots. If a rooftop area is
Runoff          adequately disconnected, the impervious area may be deducted from the total
                impervious cover. Additionally, the post-development CNs for disconnected
                rooftop areas may be assumed to be forest in good condition.
Disconnection      Credit is given for practices that disconnect surface impervious cover by
of Non-Rooftop  directing it to pervious areas where it is either infiltrated or filtered though
Runoff          the soil. As with rooftop runoff, the impervious area may be deducted from the
                total impervious cover thereby reducing the required water quality volume.
                   Credit is given when a stream buffer effectively treats stormwater runoff.
                Effective treatment constitutes capturing runoff from pervious and impervious
Stream Buffer   areas adjacent to the buffer and treating the runoff through overland flow
Credit          across a grass or forested area. Areas treated in this manner may be deducted
                from total site area in calculating and may contribute to meeting requirements
                for groundwater recharge.
                   Credit may be given when open grass channels are used to reduce the volume of
Grass Channel   runoff and pollutants during smaller storms. Use of grass channels will
(Open Section   automatically meet the minimum groundwater recharge requirement. If designed
Roads)          according to appropriate criteria, these channels may meet water quality
                criteria for certain types of residential development.
                   Credit is given when a group of environmental site design techniques are
Environmentally applied to low density or rural residential development. This credit eliminates
Sensitive Rural the need for structural practices to treat both the required recharge volume and
Development     water quality volume. The designer must still address the channel protection
                volume, the overbank protection and overbank/extreme flood event requirements
                for all roadway and connected impervious surfaces.
 
 
EXHIBIT 3 STORMWATER FACILITIES OPERATION & MAINTENANCE (O&M) AGREEMENT UPI
NUMBER
   STORMWATER FACILITIES OPERATION & MAINTENANCE (O&M) AGREEMENT
THIS AGREEMENT, made and entered into this ____ day of ______________, 20____,
by and between _____________________________, a __________________________ with
principal offices located at ______________________________________________
(hereinafter the Landowner ), and Antrim Township, Franklin County,
Pennsylvania, a municipal corporation with principal offices located at 10655
Antrim Church Road, Greencastle PA 17225 (hereinafter Municipality ).
WITNESSETH
   WHEREAS, the Landowner is the owner of certain real property as recorded by
deed in the land records of Franklin County, Pennsylvania, Deed Book/Instrument
Number _____________________, (hereinafter Property ), and
   WHEREAS, the Landowner is proceeding to build and develop the Property, and
   WHEREAS, the Subdivision/Land Management Plan (hereinafter Plan ) for the
________________________ which is expressly made a part hereof, as approved or
to be approved by the Municipality, provides for the detention or retention of
stormwater within the confines of the Property, and
   WHEREAS, the Municipality and the Landowner, his successor and assigns agree
that the health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the Municipality
require that on-site stormwater management facilities be constructed and
maintained on the Property, and
   WHEREAS, the Municipality requires, through the implementation of the
Conococheague Creek Watershed Stormwater Management Plan, that stormwater
management facilities as shown on the Plan be constructed and adequately
maintained by the Landowner, his successors and assigns.
   NOW, THEREFORE, in consideration of the foregoing premises, the mutual
covenants contained herein, and the following terms and conditions, the parties
hereto agree as follows:
   1.   The on-site stormwater management facilities shall be constructed by
the Landowner, his successors and assigns, in accordance with the terms,
conditions and specifications identified in the Plan.
   2.   The Landowner, his successors and assigns, shall maintain the
stormwater management facilities in good working condition, acceptable to the
Municipality so that they are performing their design functions.
   3.   The Landowner, his successors and assigns, hereby grant permission to
the Municipality, its authorized agents and employees, upon presentation of
proper identification, to enter upon the Property at reasonable times, and to
inspect the stormwater management facilities whenever the Municipality deems
necessary. The purpose of the inspection is to assure safe and proper
functioning of the facilities. The inspection shall cover the entire
facilities, berms, outlet structures, pond areas, access road, etc. When
inspections are conducted, the Municipality shall give the Landowner, his
successors and assigns, copies of the inspection report with findings and
evaluations. At a minimum, maintenance inspections shall be performed in
accordance with the following schedule:
       Annually for the first 5 years after the construction of the stormwater
facilities,
       Once every 3 years thereafter, or
       During or immediately after the cessation of a 10 year or greater storm.
   4.   All reasonable costs for said inspection shall be borne by the
Landowner and payable to the Municipality.
   5.   The Landowner shall convey to the Municipality easements and/or rights-
of-way to assure access for periodic inspections by the Municipality and
maintenance, if required.
   6.   In the event the Landowner, his successors and assigns, fail to
maintain the stormwater management facilities in good working condition
acceptable to the Municipality, the Municipality may enter upon the Property
and take such necessary and prudent action to maintain said stormwater
management facilities and to charge the costs of the maintenance and/or repairs
to the Landowner, his successors and assigns. This provision shall not be
construed as to allow the Municipality to erect any structure of a permanent
nature on the land of the Landowner, outside of any easement belonging to the
Municipality. It is expressly understood and agreed that the Municipality is
under no obligation to maintain or repair said facilities, and in no event
shall this Agreement be construed to impose any such obligation on the
Municipality.
   7.   The Landowner, his successors and assigns, will perform maintenance in
accordance with the maintenance schedule for the stormwater management
facilities including sediment removal as outlined on the approved schedule and/
or Subdivision/Land Management Plan.
   8.   In the event the Municipality, pursuant to this Agreement, performs
work of any nature, or expends any funds in performance of said work or labor,
use of equipment, supplies, materials, and the like on account of the Landowner
s or his successors and assigns failure to perform such work, the Landowner,
his successors and assigns, shall reimburse the Municipality upon demand,
within 30 days of receipt of invoice thereof, for all costs incurred by the
Municipality hereunder. If not paid within said 30-day period, the Municipality
may enter a lien against the Property in the amount of such costs, or may
proceed to recover its costs through proceedings in equity or at law as
authorized under the provisions of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code.
   9.   The Landowner, his successors and assigns, shall indemnify the
Municipality and its agents and employees against any and all damages,
accidents, casualties, occurrences or claims which might arise or be asserted
against the Municipality for the construction, presence, existence or
maintenance of the stormwater management facilities by the Landowner, his
successors and assigns.
   10.   In the event a claim is asserted against the Municipality, its agents
or employees, the Municipality shall promptly notify the Landowner, his
successors and assigns, and they shall defend, at their own expense, any suit
based on such claim. If any judgment or claims against the Municipality, its
agents or employees shall be allowed, the Landowner, his successors and assigns
shall pay all costs and expenses in connection therewith.
   11.   In the event of an emergency or the occurrence of special or unusual
circumstances or situations, the Municipality may enter the Property, if the
Landowner is not immediately available, without notification or identification,
to inspect and perform necessary maintenance and repairs, if needed, when the
health, safety or welfare of the citizens is at jeopardy. However, the
Municipality shall notify the Landowner of any inspections, maintenance or
repair undertaken within 5 days of the activity. The Landowner shall reimburse
the Municipality for its costs.
This Agreement shall be recorded among the land records of Franklin County,
Pennsylvania and shall constitute a covenant running with the Property and/or
equitable servitude, and shall be binding on the Landowner, his administrators,
executors, assigns, heirs and any other successors in interest, in perpetuity.
Witness:
______________________________                     _______________________
Witness:                                       ANTRIM TOWNSHIP
______________________________                     _______________________
                                             Board of Supervisors
COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA   :
                                 : SS
COUNTY OF FRANKLIN               :
   This record was acknowledged before me on ___________________________ by
____________________________________________.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I hereunto set my hand and official seal.
                           _____________________________________
                           Notary Public
                           Printed Name:
                           My Commission Expires on _______________
COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA   :
                                 : SS
COUNTY OF FRANKLIN               :
   ON ______________________, 20____, before me, a Notary Public, the
undersigned officer, personally appeared   ____________________, who
acknowledged himself to be __________________ of the Antrim Township Board of
Supervisors, a municipal corporation, and that he as such officer, being
authorized to do so, executed the foregoing instrument for the purpose therein
contained by signing the name of the Board by himself as Chairman.
   IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I hereunto set my hand and official seal.
                           _____________________________________
                           Notary Public
                           Printed Name:
                           My Commission Expires on _______________
   CERTIFICATE OF RESIDENCE
   I hereby certify that the precise residence of the Township of Antrim is:
   10655 Antrim Church Road
   Greencastle, PA 17225
   Witnessed by my hand this ____ day of ____________________, 20____.
                           ____________________________________
CHAPTER 127 CHAPTER 129: RESERVED
CHAPTER 130: TAXATION
   Article
      
I.   EARNED INCOME AND NET PROFITS TAX
      
II.   LOCAL SERVICES TAX
      
III.   REALTY TRANSFER TAX
      
IV.   AMUSEMENT TAX
      
V.   COLLECTOR OF DELINQUENT TAXES
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Antrim as
indicated in article histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
Section
Article I: Earned Income and Net Profits Tax
   
130-1   Title
   
130-2   Definitions and word usage
   
130-3   Imposition of tax
   
130-4   Filing return and payment of tax
   
130-5   Collection at the source
   
130-6   Optional fiscal year
   
130-7   Failure to receive forms
   
130-8   Powers and duties of the Income Tax Officer
   
130-9   Compensation of Income Tax Officer
   
130-10   Suit for collection of tax
   
130-11   Interest and penalties
   
130-12   Violations and penalties
   
130-13   Payment and refunds
   
130-14   Applicability
Article II: Local Services Tax
   
130-15   Definitions
   
130-16   Levy of tax
   
130-17   Exemption and refunds
   
130-18   Duty of employers to collect
   
130-19   Returns
   
130-20   Dates for determining tax liability and payment
   
130-21   Self-employed individuals
   
130-22   Individuals engaged in more than one occupation or employed in more
than one political subdivision
   
130-23   Nonresidents subject to tax
   
130-24   Administration of tax
   
130-25   Suits for collection
   
130-26   Violations and penalties
   
130-27   Interpretation
Article III: Realty Transfer Tax
   
130-28   Title
   
130-29   Imposition of tax
   
130-30   Definitions
   
130-31   Imposition of tax; interest
   
130-32   Exempt parties
   
130-33   Excluded transactions
   
130-34   Documents relating to associations or corporations and members,
partners, stockholders or shareholders thereof
   
130-35   Acquired company required to pay realty transfer tax
   
130-36   Credits against tax
   
130-37   Proceeds of judicial sale
   
130-38   Duties of Recorder of Deeds
   
130-39   Statement of value
   
130-40   Penalty of nonpayment
   
130-41   Lien
   
130-42   Enforcement; regulations
   
130-43   Violations and penalties
Article IV: Amusement Tax
   
130-44   Definitions
   
130-45   Imposition of tax
   
130-46   Exemptions
   
130-47   Collection of tax
   
130-48   Penalties and interest
   
130-49   Tax estimate
   
130-50   Violations and penalties
   
130-51   Rules and regulations
Article V: Collector of Delinquent Taxes
   
130-52   Appointment
   
130-53   Powers, rights, privileges, duties and obligations
   
130-54   Term of appointment
   
130-55   Vacancy
   
130-56   Bond
   
130-57   Accounting
   
130-58   Compensation
ARTICLE I EARNED INCOME AND NET PROFITS TAX
[Adopted 5-26-1987 as Ch. 24, Part 1 of the 1987 Code of Ordinances]
 130-1 TITLE.
   This article shall be known and may be cited as Antrim Township Earned
Income Tax Ordinance.
 130-2 DEFINITIONS AND WORD USAGE.
   A.   The singular shall include the plural, and the masculine shall include
the feminine and the neuter.
   B.   Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall have, for
the purposes of this article, the meanings indicated in this section:
   ASSOCIATION
A partnership, limited partnership, joint venture or any other form of
unincorporated group of two or more persons.
   BUSINESS
An enterprise, activity, profession or any other undertaking of an
unincorporated nature conducted for profit, or ordinarily conducted for profit,
whether by an individual, partnership, association or any other entity.
   CORPORATION
A corporation or joint-stock association organized under the laws of the United
States, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, or any other state, territory or
foreign country or dependency.
   CURRENT YEAR
The calendar year for which the tax is levied.
   DOMICILE
The place where one lives and has his or her permanent home and to which he or
she has the intention of returning whenever he or she is absent. Actual
residence is not necessarily domicile, for domicile is the fixed place of abode
which, in the intention of the taxpayer, is permanent rather than transitory.
Domicile is the voluntary fixed place of habitation of a person, not for a mere
special or limited purpose, but with the present intention of making a
permanent home. In the case of businesses or associations, the domicile is the
place considered as the center of business affairs and the place where its
functions are discharged.
      [Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 246]
   EARNED INCOME
Salaries, wages, commissions, bonuses, incentive payments, fees, tips and other
compensation received by a person or his or her personal representative for
services rendered, whether directly or through an agent, and whether in cash or
in property; not including, however, wages or compensation paid to persons on
active military service; periodic payments for sickness and disability other
than regular wages received during a period of sickness; liability or
retirement or payments rising under workmen s compensation acts, occupational
disease acts and similar legislation; or payments commonly recognized as old-
age benefits, retirement pay or pensions paid to persons retired from service
after reaching a specific age or after a stated period of employment; or
payments commonly known as public assistance; or unemployment compensation
payments made by any governmental agency or payments to reimburse expenses or
payments made by employers or labor unions for wage and salary supplemental
programs, including, but not limited to, programs covering hospitalization,
sickness, disability or death, supplemental unemployment benefits, strike
benefits, social security and retirement.
   EMPLOYEE
Any person who renders services to another for a financial consideration or its
equivalent, under an express or implied contract, and who is under the control
and direction of said other person, and shall include persons employed on a
temporary, provisional, casual or part-time basis.
   EMPLOYER
A person, partnership, association, corporation, institution, governmental body
or unit or agency or any other entity employing one or more persons for a
salary, wage, commission or other compensation.
   INCOME TAX OFFICER OR OFFICERS
The person, official, public employee, private agency or firm designated by
resolution or ordinance of the Board of Supervisors of Antrim Township,
Franklin County, Pennsylvania, to collect and administer the tax on earned
income received and net profits earned, or any successor or agent so appointed.
   NET PROFITS
The net income from the operation of a business, profession or other activity,
except corporations, after provision for all costs and expenses incurred in the
conduct thereof, determined either on a cash or accrual basis in accordance
with the accounting system used in such business, profession or other activity,
but without deduction of taxes based on income.
   NONRESIDENT
An individual, partnership, association or other entity, domiciled outside of
the Township of Antrim, Franklin County, Pennsylvania.
   PERSON or INDIVIDUAL
Every natural person. Whenever used in any clause prescribing and imposing a
penalty, the term person as applied to association shall mean the partners or
members thereof and, as applied to corporations, the officers thereof.
   POLITICAL SUBDIVISION
Any city, borough, town, Township or school district existing under the laws of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania as they shall be deemed subject to this
article by the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
   PRECEDING YEAR
The calendar year before the current year.
   RESIDENT
An individual, partnership, association or other entity, domiciled in the
Township of Antrim, Franklin County, Pennsylvania.
   SUCCEEDING YEAR
The calendar year following the current year.
   TAXPAYER
A person, whether an individual, partnership, association or any other entity,
required hereunder to file a return of earned income or net profits, or to pay
a tax thereon.
   TOWNSHIP or TOWNSHIP OF ANTRIM or ANTRIM TOWNSHIP
The political subdivision or municipality within the corporate limits of the
Township of Antrim, Franklin County, Pennsylvania, which was incorporated by
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania as the Township of Antrim, Franklin County,
Pennsylvania.
 130-3 IMPOSITION OF TAX.
   A.   A tax for general revenue purposes at the rate of 1/2% per year is
hereby imposed on the following:
      (1)   Earned income received on and after July 1, 1978, by residents of
the Township of Antrim.
      (2)   Net profits earned on and after July 1, 1978, by residents of the
Township of Antrim.
   B.   The tax levied under Subsection (A)(1) herein shall relate to, but is
not limited to, and is imposed upon earned income paid by an employer or on his
or her behalf to a person who is employed by him or her. The tax levied under
Subsection (A)(2) herein shall relate to and be imposed on the net profits of
any business, profession or other activity carried on by any person or persons.
   C.   Every corporation which is subject to the Pennsylvania Corporate Net
Income Tax or exempt from the Pennsylvania Corporate Net Income Tax and every
foreign corporation which is subject to the Pennsylvania Franchise Tax or
exempt from the Pennsylvania Franchise Tax shall be exempt from the tax imposed
by this article.
   D.   The tax levied by this article shall be applicable to earned income
received and to net profits earned beginning July 1, 1978, which are subject to
this tax, and shall continue on a calendar-year basis. The first year shall end
December 31, 1978; however, the tax shall remain effective for each full
calendar year thereafter until the same is repealed.
 130-4 FILING RETURN AND PAYMENT OF TAX.
   A.   Every taxpayer who is employed for a salary, wage, commission or other
compensation and who received any earned income not subject to the provisions
relating to collection at source ( §
130-5 herein) shall make and file with the Officer on a form prescribed or
approved by the Officer, a quarterly return on or before April 30 of the
current year, July 31 of the current year, October 31 of the current year and
January 31 of the succeeding year, setting forth the aggregate amount of earned
income not subject to withholding by him or her during the three-month periods
ending March 31 of the current year, June 30 of the current year, September 30
of the current year and December 31 of the current year, respectively, and
subject to the tax, together with such other information as the Officer may
require. Every taxpayer making such return shall, at the time of the filing
thereof, pay to the Officer the amount of tax shown as due thereon. [Amended 7-
8-1997 by Ord. No. 246]
   B.   All persons and entities who are exempt from filing federal and state
declarations of estimated income and all persons and entities earning less than
$5,000 per annum shall be exempt from the filing requirements of §
130-4(A) above. [Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 246]
   C.   Every taxpayer making net profits shall, on or before April 15 of the
current year, make and file with the Tax Collection Officer (hereinafter called
the Officer ) on a form prescribed or approved by the Officer, a declaration of
his or her estimated net profits during the period beginning January 1 and
ending December 31 of the current year, and pay to the Officer in four
quarterly installments the tax due thereon as follows: the first installment at
the time of filing the declaration and the other installments on or before June
15 of the current year, September 15 of the current year and January 15 of the
succeeding year, respectively. The requirements of this subsection shall be met
if the taxpayer in the current year pays tax estimated equal to or greater than
the prior year total tax liability.
   D.   Any taxpayer who first anticipates any net profits after April 15 of
the current year shall make and file the declaration hereinabove required on or
before June 15 of the current year, September 15 of the current year, or
December 31 of the current year, whichever of these dates next follows the date
on which the taxpayer first anticipates such net profit, and pay to the Officer
in equal installments the tax due thereon on or before the quarterly payment
dates which remain after filing of the declaration.
   E.   Every taxpayer shall, on or before April 15 of the succeeding year,
make and file with the Officer on a form prescribed or approved by the Officer
a final return showing the amount of net profits earned during the period
beginning January 1 of the current year and ending December 31 of the current
year, the total amount of tax due thereon, and the total amount of tax paid
thereon. At the time of filing the final return, the taxpayer shall pay the
Officer the balance of tax due or shall make demand for refund or credit in the
case of overpayment. Any taxpayer may, in lieu of paying the fourth quarterly
installment of his or her estimated tax, elect to make and file with the
Officer, on or before January 31 of the succeeding year, the final return as
hereinabove required.
   F.   The Officer may be authorized to provide by regulation for the making
and filing of adjusted declaration of estimated net profits and for the
payments of estimated tax in cases where a taxpayer who has failed the
declaration hereinabove required anticipates additional net profits not
previously declared or finds that he or she has overestimated his or her
anticipated net profits.
   G.   All persons and entities who are exempt from filing federal and state
declarations of estimated income and all persons and entities earning less than
$5,000 per annum shall be exempt from the filing requirements of the subsection
above. [Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 246]
   H.   From the effective date of these amendments, it shall be legally
permissible to apply net losses of one business against wages and income from
another source in calculating earned income and net profits under the School
District s Earned Income Tax Resolution of May 14, 1969. [Amended 6-12-1990 by
Ord. No. 200]
 130-5 COLLECTION AT THE SOURCE.
   A.   Every employer having an office, factory, workshop, branch, warehouse
or other place of business within the Township of Antrim who employs one or
more residents or nonresidents of the Township, other than employees performing
domestic services in the employer s home, for a salary, wage, commission or
other compensation shall, within 15 days after becoming an employer, register
with the Income Tax Officer his or her name, address, number of employees and
such other information as the Officer may require.
   B.   Every employer described in Subsection (A) above shall deduct from each
employee s salary, wage, commission or other compensation, at the time of
payment thereof, the tax imposed thereon by this article and shall remit the
same to the Income Tax Officer, accompanied by returns on forms prescribed and
approved by the Board of Supervisors of Antrim Township, Franklin County,
Pennsylvania, at the following times:
 
For Quarter Comprising the Following Months in Which Payment Due On or Before:
Wages are Paid:
January, February, March                             April 30
April, May, June                                     July 31
July, August, September                              October 31
October, November, December                          January 31
 
   C.   Employer s returns for each quarter shall state, with respect to that
quarter, the aggregate wages from which, and number of employees from whom,
reported tax was withheld, the aggregate amount of tax withheld, the commission
(if any) which the employer is entitled to deduct, the net amount of tax
remitted and any other pertinent information which may be required by the
Officer.
   D.   On or before February 28 of each succeeding year, every employer shall
file with the Income Tax Officer:
      (1)   An annual return showing the total amount of earned income paid,
the total amount of tax deducted, and the total amount of tax paid to the
Officer for the period beginning January 1 of the current year and ending
December 31 of the current year. [Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 246]
      (2)   A return withholding statement for each employee employed during
all or any part of the period beginning January 1 of the current year and
ending December 31 of the current year setting forth the employee s name,
address and social security or account number, the total amount of earned
income paid, the amount of tax deducted, the political subdivision or
subdivisions imposing the tax upon the employee, and the amount of tax paid to
the Officer. Every employer shall furnish two copies of the individual return
to the employee for whom it is filed. [Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 246]
      (3)   Any employer (or his or her legal representatives) who discontinues
business shall file a final quarterly return and annual return, and pay tax,
covering periods not previously reported, within 30 days following such
discontinuance.
   E.   Any taxpayer subject to the tax imposed by this article may report and
pay said tax through a qualified and approved bulk reporter, that is, a
qualified and approved natural person, partnership, association, corporation,
governmental body or unit or agency or any other entity reporting and/or paying
tax for persons subject to the tax, who shall, on behalf of the Township and
the Income Tax Officer, issue a receipt therefor. Bulk reporters shall register
with the Officer such bulk reporter s name and address and such other
information as the Officer may require, on or before October 1, 1978, or within
15 days after becoming a bulk reporter and shall maintain complete records of
the taxpayers for whom reporting is made for a period of six years, in such
form as to enable the Income Tax Officer to determine the liability of the
taxpayers for whom bulk reporting is being made, the actual amount transmitted
to the Officer and such other information available to such bulk reporters as
will enable the Officer to carry out his or her responsibilities. Bulk
reporters shall file with the Income Tax Officer quarterly reports and annual
returns on the same dates and for the same periods as are provided for with
respect to employers in Subsections (B), (C) and (D) of this section. Annual
returns filed by bulk reporters shall show the full name and address of the
employer and the employees for whom bulk reporting and payment is being made,
said employees social security numbers and/or account numbers and the total
wages paid to all employees during the preceding calendar year for whom bulk
reporting and payment is being made, together with such other information and
reconciliations of quarterly reports as the Officer may require.
   F.   Any nonresident employer beyond the limits of this Township who
desires, for the convenience and with the consent of his or her employees
residing in this Township, to deduct the tax imposed hereunder from such
employee s wages shall become subject to all obligations of timely filing of
returns, reports and remittances, and of maintaining and disclosing records,
and to all interest and penalties, with respect to such tax as he or she may
actually deduct, in all respects, and with the same incidents, as though he or
she were a resident employer. But no such connection shall obligate such
employer to continue to make future deductions.
   G.   Tax deducted from wages by any employer shall at all times be and
remain the property of this Township, and shall constitute a trust fund in the
employer s hands until remitted to the Officer; and deduction of tax from wages
shall, as between the employee and this Township, constitute payment of the tax
by the employee, regardless of any insolvency or failure to remit on the
employer s part.
   H.   Every employer who willfully or negligently fails or omits to make the
deductions required by this article shall be liable for payment of the taxes
which he or she was required to withhold to the extent that such taxes have not
been recovered from the employee.
   I.   The failure or omission of any employer to make the deductions required
by this article shall not relieve any employee from liability for payment of
the tax or from the duty to comply with the requirements of this article
relating to the filing of returns.
 130-6 OPTIONAL FISCAL YEAR.
   Any taxpayer, for his or her convenience, and subject to any adjustments
required by the Officer for previous or future returns made on the basis of a
calendar year or different fiscal year, may elect to report and pay tax
hereunder on the taxpayer s fiscal-year basis instead of on the calendar-year
basis provided for in §§
130-4 and
130-5. Such election shall be filed with the Officer and shall contain a
written agreement by the taxpayer that his or her earned income for such fiscal
year shall be deemed in all respects to constitute, and shall be a substitute
for, earned income of the calendar year which is subjected to tax by this
article. Such election shall be at the risk of the taxpayer with respect to any
adjustment of tax paid to or claimed by other taxing districts with respect to
the same income. A fiscal year taxpayer shall report and pay tax in full, in
one payment, on or before the 105th day after the close of his or her fiscal
year.
 130-7 FAILURE TO RECEIVE FORMS.
   Failure of a taxpayer or employer to receive forms or returns shall not
excuse any failure to file any reports which may be required or to pay any tax
due hereunder.
 130-8 POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE INCOME TAX OFFICER.
   A.   It shall be the duty of the Income Tax Officer to collect and receive
the taxes, fines and penalties imposed by this article. It shall also be his or
her duty to keep a record, showing the amount received by him or her from each
person or business paying the tax and, if paid by such person in respect of
another person, the name of such person and the date of such receipt.
   B.   Each Officer, before entering his or her official duties, shall give
and acknowledge a bond to the Board of Supervisors of Antrim Township, Franklin
County, Pennsylvania, which shall be conditioned and shall provide for all
rights and obligations on the respective parties as set forth in The Local Tax
Enabling Act, 1965, December 31, P.L. 1257, as amended, being 53 P.S. §§
6924.101 et seq. Said bond shall be delivered to the Secretary of the Board of
Supervisors of Antrim Township, Franklin County, Pennsylvania, and maintained
with its records or at such place as is required by law.
   C.   The Income Tax Officer is hereby charged with the administration and
enforcement of the provisions of this article and is hereby empowered to
prescribe, adopt, promulgate and enforce rules and regulations relating to any
matter pertaining to the administration and enforcement of this article,
including provisions for the reexamination and correction of returns and of
payments alleged or found to be incorrect or as to which an overpayment is
claimed or found to have occurred and to make refunds in cases of overpayment
for any period of time not to exceed six years subsequent to the date of
payment of the sum involved and to prescribe forms necessary for the
administration of this article. No rule or regulation of any kind shall be
enforceable unless it has been approved by resolution or ordinance of the Board
of Supervisors of Antrim Township, Franklin County, Pennsylvania. A copy of
such rules and regulations currently in force shall be available for public
inspection.
   D.   The Officer shall refund, on petition of and proof by the taxpayer,
earned income tax paid on the taxpayer s ordinary and necessary business
expenses, to the extent that such expenses are not paid by the taxpayer s
employer.
   E.   The Officer and agents designated by him or her are hereby authorized
to examine the books, papers and records of any employer or of any taxpayer or
of any person whom the Officer reasonably believes to be an employer or
taxpayer, in order to verify the accuracy of any return, or if no return was
filed, to ascertain the tax due. Every employer and every taxpayer and every
person whom the Officer reasonably believes to be an employer or taxpayer, is
hereby directed and required to give to the Officer, or to any agent designated
by him or her, the means, facilities and opportunity for such examination and
investigations, as are hereby authorized.
   F.   Any information gained by the Officer, his or her employees, agents or
by any other official or agent of the Township, as a result of any returns,
investigations, hearings or verifications required or authorized by this
article shall be confidential, except for official purposes and except in
accordance with a proper judicial order, or as otherwise provided by law.
 130-9 COMPENSATION OF INCOME TAX OFFICER.
   The Income Tax Officer shall receive such compensation for his or her
services and expenses as shall be determined and fixed by the Board of
Supervisors of Antrim Township, Franklin County, Pennsylvania, and as shall be
permitted by law. In fixing such compensation, said municipality may, pursuant
to a resolution or ordinance, enter into such written agreement for such
compensations as shall be deemed necessary.
 130-10 SUIT FOR COLLECTION OF TAX.
   A.   The Income Tax Officer may sue in the name of the Board of Supervisors
of Antrim Township, Franklin County, Pennsylvania, for the recovery of taxes
due and unpaid under this article.
   B.   Any suit brought to recover the tax imposed by this article shall be
begun within three years after such tax is due, or within three years after the
declaration or return has been filed, whichever date is later; provided,
however, that this limitation shall not prevent the institution of a suit for
the collection of any tax due or determined to be due in the following cases:
      (1)   Where no return was filed by any person although a return was
required to be filed by him or her under provisions of this article, there
shall be no limitation.
      (2)   Where an examination of the return filed by any person, or of other
evidence relating to such return in the possession of the Officer, reveals a
fraudulent evasion of taxes, there shall be no limitation.
      (3)   In the case of substantial understatement of tax liability of 25%
or more, and no fraud, suit shall be begun within six years.
      (4)   Where any person has deducted taxes under the provisions of this
article, and has failed to pay the amounts so deducted to the Officer or where
any person has willfully failed or omitted to make the deductions required by
this article, there shall be no limitation.
   C.   This section shall not be construed to limit the governing body from
recovering delinquent taxes by any other means provided by this article.
   D.   The Officer may sue for recovery of an erroneous refund provided such
suit is begun two years after making such refund, except that the suit may be
brought within five years if it appears that any part of the refund was induced
by fraud or misrepresentation of material fact.
 130-11 INTEREST AND PENALTIES.
[Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 246]
   A.   If the earned income or net profits tax is not paid when due, interest
at the rate the taxpayer is required to pay to the Commonwealth under section
806 of the act of April 9, 1929 (P.L. 343, No. 176), known as The Fiscal Code,
being 72 P.S. §§ 1 et seq., on the amount of the earned income or net profits
tax, and an additional penalty of 1% of the amount of the unpaid earned income
or net profits tax for each month or fraction of a month during which the
earned income or net profits tax remains unpaid shall be added and collected
but the amount shall not exceed 15% in the aggregate. Where an action is
brought for the recovery of the earned income or net profits tax, the taxpayer
liable for the earned income or net profits tax shall, in addition, be liable
for the costs of collection, interest and penalties. [Amended 11-22-2016 by
Ord. No. 350]
   B.   Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection (A), the governing body
may, by ordinance or resolution, establish a one-time period during which
interest or interest and penalties that would otherwise be imposed for the
nonreporting or under-reporting of earned income tax liabilities or for the
nonpayment of earned income taxes previously imposed and due shall be waived in
total or in part if the taxpayer voluntarily files delinquent returns and pays
the taxes in full during the period so established. The Board of Supervisors
may adopt regulations to implement the provisions of this subsection.
   C.   The provisions of Subsection (B) shall not affect or terminate any
petitions, investigations, prosecutions or other proceedings pending under the
provisions of this article, or prevent the commencement or further prosecution
of any proceedings by the proper authorities for violations of this article. No
proceedings shall, however, be commenced on the basis of delinquent returns
filed pursuant to Subsection (B) if the returns are determined to be
substantially true and correct and the taxes are paid in full within the
prescribed time.
 130-12 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
   A.   Any person who fails, neglects or refuses to make any return required
by this article, any employer who fails, neglects or refuses to register or to
pay the tax deducted from his or her employees, or fails, neglects or refuses
to deduct or withhold the tax from his or her employees, any person who refuses
to permit the Officer, or any agent designated by him or her, to examine his or
her books, records and papers, and any person who knowingly makes any
incomplete, false or fraudulent return or attempts to do anything whatsoever to
avoid the full disclosure of the amount of his or her net profits or earned
income in order to avoid the payment of the whole or any part of the tax
imposed by this article shall, upon conviction thereof before a District
Justice or the Franklin County Court in the event of an appeal, be sentenced to
pay a fine of not more than $500 plus costs of prosecution and, in default of
payment of said fine and costs, to imprisonment for not more than 30 days.
[Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 246]
   B.   Any person who divulges or permits to be divulged any information which
is confidential under the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $500 plus costs of
prosecution and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to imprisonment
for a term not to exceed 30 days. Every day that a violation of this article
continues shall constitute a separate offense. [Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No.
246]
   C.   The penalties imposed under this section shall be in addition to any
other penalty imposed by any other section of this article.
   D.   The failure of any person to receive or procure forms required for
making the returns required by this article shall not excuse him or her from
making such return.
 130-13 PAYMENT AND REFUNDS.
   The Income Tax Officer is hereby authorized to accept payments of the amount
of tax claimed by the Township in any case where any person disputes the
validity or amount of the Township s claim for the tax. If it is thereafter
judicially determined by a court of competent jurisdiction that there has been
an overpayment to the Income Tax Officer, the amount of the overpayment shall
be refunded to the person who paid.
 130-14 APPLICABILITY.
   A.   The tax imposed by this article shall not apply to:
      (1)   Any person as to whom it is beyond the legal power of the Board of
Supervisors of Antrim Township, Franklin County, Pennsylvania, to impose the
tax provided for under the Constitution of the United States and the
Constitution and laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
      (2)   The net profits of any institution or organization operated for
public, religious, educational or charitable purposes, to an institution or
organization not organized or operated for private profit, or to a trust or a
foundation established for any of said purposes.
   B.   This section shall not be construed to exempt any person who is an
employer from the duty of collecting the tax at the source from his or her
employees and paying the amount collected to the Board of Supervisors of Antrim
Township, Franklin County, Pennsylvania, under the provisions of this article.
ARTICLE II LOCAL SERVICES TAX
[Adopted 12-11-2012 by Ord. No. 326]
 130-15 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words and phrases, when used in this Article, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this Section, except where the context or language
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
POLITICAL SUBDIVISION
The area within the corporate limits of the Township of Antrim.
COLLECTOR
The person, public employee or private agency designated by the political
subdivision to collect and administer the tax herein imposed.
DCED
The Department of Community and Economic Development of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
EARNED INCOME
Compensation as this term is defined in the Local Tax Enabling Act, the Act of
December 31, 1965, P.L. 1257, No. 511, as amended, being 53 P.S. §§ 6924.101 et
seq.
EMPLOYER
An individual, partnership, association, limited liability corporation, limited
liability partnership, corporation, governmental body, agency or other entity
employing one or more persons on a salary, wage, commission or other
compensation basis, including a self-employed person.
HE, HIS OR HIM
Indicates the singular and plural number, as well as male, female and neuter
genders.
INDIVIDUAL
Any person, male, or female, engaged in any occupation, trade or profession
within the corporate limits of the political subdivision.
NET PROFITS
The net income from the operation of a business, profession; or other activity
as this term is defined in the Local Tax Enabling Act, the Act of December 31,
1965, P.L. 1257, No. 511, as amended.
OCCUPATION
Any trade, profession, business or undertaking of any type, kind or character,
including services, domestic or other, earned on or performed within the
corporate limits of the political subdivision for which compensation is charged
or received; whether by means of salary, wages, commission or fees for services
rendered.
TAX
The local services tax at the rate fixed in Section
130-16 of this Article.
TAX YEAR
The period from January 1 until December 31 in any year; a calendar year.
 130-16 LEVY OF TAX.
[Amended 11-22-2016 by Ord. No. 350]
   For specific revenue purposes, an annual Local Services Tax is hereby levied
and assessed, commencing January 1, 2013; upon the privilege of engaging in an
occupation with a primary place of employment within the Township of Antrim
during the tax year. Each natural person who exercises such privilege for any
length of time during any tax year shall pay the tax for that year in the
amount of $52.00, in accordance with the provisions of this Article. This tax
may be used solely for the following purposes as the same may be allocated by
the Township of Antrim from time to time: (1) emergency services, which shall
include emergency medical services and/or fire and rescue services; (2) road
and off-road construction and/or maintenance, which shall include storm water
management plans and facilities; or (3) reduction of property taxes. The
political subdivision shall use no less than twenty-five percent of the funds
derived from the tax for emergency services. This tax is in addition to all
other taxes of any kind or nature heretofore levied by the political
subdivision. The tax shall be no more than $52.00 on each person for each
calendar year, irrespective of the number of political subdivisions within
which a person may be employed.
 130-17 EXEMPTION AND REFUNDS.
   A.   Exemption. Any person whose total earned income and net profits from
all sources within the political subdivision is less than twelve thousand
($12,000) dollars for any calendar year in which the tax is levied is exempt
from the payment of the tax for that calendar year. In addition, the following
persons are exempt from payment of the tax:
      (1)   Any person who has served in any war or armed conflict in which the
United States was engaged and is honorably discharged or released under
honorable circumstances from active service, if, as a result of military
service, the person is blind, paraplegic or a double or quadruple amputee or
has a service-connected disability declared by the United States Veterans
Administration or its successor to be a total one hundred percent disability.
      (2)   Any person who serves as a member of a reserve component of the
Armed Forces and is called to active duty at any time during the taxable year.
For the purposes of this subsection, reserve component of the Armed Forces
shall mean the United States Army Reserve, United States Navy Reserve, United
States Marine Corps Reserve, United States Coast Guard Reserve, United States
Air Force Reserve, the Pennsylvania Army National Guard or the Pennsylvania Air
National Guard.
   B.   Procedure to Claim Exemption.
      (1)   A person seeking to claim an exemption from the LST may annually
file an exemption certificate with the political subdivision and with the
person s employer affirming that the person reasonably expects to receive
earned income and net profits from all sources within the political subdivision
of less than twelve thousand dollars ($12,000) in the calendar year for which
the exemption certificate is filed. In the event the political subdivision
utilizes a tax collection officer, it shall provide a copy of the exemption
certificate to that officer. The exemption certificate shall have attached to
it a copy of all the employee s last pay stubs or W-2 forms from employment
within the political subdivision for the year prior to the fiscal year for
which the employee is requesting to be exempted from the tax. Upon receipt of
the exemption certificate and until otherwise instructed by the political
subdivision or except as required by subsection (B)(2), the employer shall not
withhold the tax from the person during the calendar year or the remainder of
the calendar year for which the exemption certificate applies. Employers shall
ensure that the exemption certificate forms are readily available to employees
at all times and shall furnish each new employee with a form at the time of
hiring. The exemption certificate form shall be the uniform form provided by
the political subdivision or the collector.
      (2)   With respect to a person who claimed an exemption for a given
calendar year from the tax, upon notification to an employer by the person or
by the political subdivision that the person has received earned income and net
profits from all sources within the political subdivision equal to or in excess
of twelve thousand dollars ($12,000) in that calendar year or that the person
is otherwise ineligible for the tax exemption for that calendar year, or upon
an employer s payment to the person of earned income within the municipality in
an amount equal to or in excess of twelve thousand dollars ($12,000) in that
calendar year, an employer shall withhold the LST from the person under
subsection (B)(3) below.
      (3)   If a person who claimed an exemption for a given calendar year from
the tax becomes subject to the tax for the calendar year under subsection (B)
(2), the employer shall withhold the tax for the remainder of that calendar
year. The employer shall withhold from the person, for the first payroll period
after receipt of the notification under subsection (B)(2), a lump sum equal to
the amount of tax that was not withheld from the person due to the exemption
claimed by the person under this subsection, plus the per payroll amount due
for that first payroll period. The amount of tax withheld per payroll period
for the remaining payroll periods in that calendar year shall be the same
amount withheld for other employees. In the event the employment of a person
subject to withholding of the tax under this clause is subsequently severed in
that calendar year, the person shall be liable for any outstanding balance of
tax due, and the political subdivision may pursue collection under this
Article.
      (4)   Except as provided in subsection (B)(2) above, it is the intent of
this subsection that employers shall not be responsible for investigating
exemption certificates, monitoring tax exemption eligibility or exempting any
employee from the LST.
   C.   Refunds. The Township of Antrim, in consultation with the Collector and
DCED, shall establish procedures for the processing of refund claims for any
tax paid by any person who is eligible for exemption, which procedures shall be
in accordance with provisions of the general municipal law relating to refunds
of overpayments and interest on overpayments. As a minimum, the LST Refund
Application to be provided by the collector shall be the vehicle utilized by
those persons who are eligible for exemption and are claiming a refund. Refunds
made within seventy-five days of a refund request or seventy-five days after
the last day the employer is required to remit the tax for the last quarter of
the calendar year, whichever is later, shall not be subject to interest. No
refunds shall be made for amounts overpaid in a calendar year that do not
exceed one dollar ($1). The Township of Antrim or the Collector shall determine
eligibility for exemption and provide refunds to exempt persons.
 130-18 DUTY OF EMPLOYERS TO COLLECT.
   A.   Each employer within the political subdivision, as well as those
employers situated outside the political subdivision but who engage in business
within the political subdivision, is hereby charged with the duty of collecting
the tax from each of his employees engaged by him or performing for him with
the political subdivision and making a return and payment thereof to the
Collector. Further, each employer is hereby authorized to deduct this tax for
each employee in his or her employ, whether said employee is paid by salary,
wage or commission and whether or not all such services are performed within
the political subdivision.
   B.   The employer of a person required to pay the LST shall collect the tax
pursuant to the requirements contained in the Local Tax Enabling Act (53 P.S.
6924.301.1)
   C.   No person shall be subject to the payment of the LST by more than one
political subdivision during each payroll period.
   D.   In the case of concurrent employment, an employer shall refrain from
withholding the tax if the employee provides a recent pay statement from a
principal employer that includes the name of the employer, the length of the
payroll period and the amount of the tax withheld and a statement from the
employee that the pay statement is from the employee s principal employer and
the employee will notify other employers of a change in principal place of
employment within two weeks of its occurrence. The employee s statement shall
be provided on the form approved by DCED.
   E.   The tax shall be no more than fifty-two dollars ($52) on each person
for each calendar year, irrespective of the number of political subdivisions
within which a person may be employed. The political subdivision shall provide
a taxpayer a receipt of payment upon request by the taxpayer.
   F.   No employer shall be held liable for failure to withhold the tax or for
the Payment of the withheld tax money to the political subdivision if the
failure to withhold taxes arises from incorrect information submitted by the
employee as to the employee s place or places of employment, the employee s
principal office or where the employee is principally employed. Further, an
employer shall not be liable for payment of the LST in an amount exceeding the
amount withheld by the employer if the employer complies with the provisions of
this Article and remits the amount so withheld in accordance with this Article.
   G.   Employers shall be required to remit the local services taxes thirty
days after the end of each quarter of a calendar year.
 130-19 RETURNS.
   Each employer shall prepare and file a return showing a computation of the
tax on forms to be supplied to the employer by the Collector. If an employer
fails to file the return and pay the tax, whether or not the employer makes
collection thereof from the salary, wages or commissions paid by him or her to
an employee, except as provided hereafter in this Article, the employer shall
be responsible for the payment of the tax in full as though the tax had been
originally levied against the employer.
 130-20 DATES FOR DETERMINING TAX LIABILITY AND PAYMENT.
   In each tax year, each employer shall use his or her employment records to
determine the number of employees from whom such tax shall be deducted and paid
over to the Collector on or before the thirtieth day following the end of each
calendar quarter of each tax year.
 130-21 SELF-EMPLOYED INDIVIDUALS.
   Each self-employed individual who performs services of any type or kind or
engages in any occupation or profession within a primary place of employment
within the political subdivision shall be required to comply with this Article
and pay the tax due to the Collector on or before the thirtieth day following
the end of each quarter.
 130-22 INDIVIDUALS ENGAGED IN MORE THAN ONE OCCUPATION OR EMPLOYED IN MORE
THAN ONE POLITICAL SUBDIVISION.
   The situs of the tax shall be the place of employment on the first day the
person becomes subject to the tax during each payroll period. In the event a
person is engaged in more than one occupation, that is, concurrent employment,
or an occupation which requires the person working in more than one political
subdivision during a payroll period, the priority of claim to collect the LST
shall be in the following order.
   1.   First, the political subdivision in which the person maintains his or
her principal office or is principally employed;
   2.   Second, the political subdivision in which the person resides and works
if the tax is levied by that political subdivision;
   3.   Third, the political subdivision in which a person is employed and
which imposes the tax nearest in miles to the person s home.
   In case of dispute, a tax receipt of the taxing authority for that calendar
year declaring that the taxpayer has made prior payment constitutes prima facie
certification of payment to all other political subdivisions.
 130-23 NONRESIDENTS SUBJECT TO TAX.
   All employers and selfemployed individuals residing or having their places
of business outside of the political subdivision but who perform services of
any type or kind or engage in any occupation or profession within the political
subdivision do, by virtue thereof, agree to be bound by and subject themselves
to the provisions, penalties and regulations promulgated under this Article
with the same force and effect as though they were residents of the political
subdivision. Further, any individual engaged in an occupation within the
political subdivision and an employee of a nonresidential employer may, for the
purpose of this Article, be considered a self-employed person, and in the event
his or her tax is not paid, the political subdivision shall have the option of
proceeding against either the employer or employee for the collection of this
tax as hereinafter provided.
 130-24 ADMINISTRATION OF TAX.
   A.   The Collector shall be appointed by Resolution of the political
subdivision. It shall be the duty of the Collector to accept and receive
payments of this tax and to keep a record thereof showing the amount received
by him or her from each employer or self-employed person, together with the
date the tax was received.
   B.   The Collector is hereby charged with the administration and enforcement
of this Article, and is hereby charged and empowered, subject to municipal
approvals, to proscribe, adopt and promulgate rules and regulations relating to
any matter pertaining to the administration and enforcement of this Article,
including provisions for the examination of payroll records of any employer
subject to this Article, the examination and correction of any return made in
compliance with this Article and any payment alleged or found to be incorrect
or as to which overpayment is claimed or found to have occurred. Any person
aggrieved by any decision of the Collector shall have the right to appeal
consistent with the Local Taxpayers Bill of Rights under Act 50 of 1998, being
53 Pa. C.S. 130-16130-16 8421 et seq.
   C.   The Collector is hereby authorized to examine the books and payroll
records of any employer in order to verify the accuracy of any return made by
an employer or, if no return was made, to ascertain the tax due. Each employer
is hereby directed and required to give the Collector the means, facilities and
opportunity for such examination.
 130-25 SUITS FOR COLLECTION.
   A.   In the event that any tax under this Article remains due or unpaid 30
days after the due dates above set forth, the Collector may sue for the
recovery of any such tax due or unpaid under this Article, together with
interest and penalty.
   B.   If the local services tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate
the taxpayer is required to pay to the Commonwealth under section 806 of the
act of April 9, 1929 (P.L. 343, No. 176), known as the Fiscal Code, being 72
P.S. § 1 et seq., on the amount of the local services tax, and an additional
penalty of 1% of the amount of the unpaid local services tax for each month or
fraction of a month during which the local services tax remains unpaid shall be
added and collected but the amount shall not exceed 15% in the aggregate. Where
an action is brought for the recovery of the local services tax, the taxpayer
liable for the local services tax shall, in addition, be liable for the costs
of collection, interest and penalties. [Amended 11-22-2016 by Ord. No. 350]
 130-26 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
   Whoever makes any false or untrue statement on any return required by this
Article, or whoever refuses inspection of the books, records or accounts in his
or her custody and control setting forth the number of employees subject to
this tax who are in his or her employment, or whoever fails or refuses to file
any return required by this Article shall be guilty of a violation and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600 and
costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, to
imprisonment for not more than 30 days. The action to enforce the penalty
prescribed may be instituted against any person in charge of the business of
any employer who shall have failed or who refuses to file a return required by
this Article.
 130-27 INTERPRETATION.
   A.   Nothing contained in this Article shall be construed to empower the
political subdivision to levy and collect the tax hereby imposed on any
occupation not within the taxing power of the political subdivision under the
Constitution of the United States and the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
   B.   If the tax hereby imposed under the provisions of this Article shall be
held by any court of competent jurisdiction to be in violation of the
Constitution of the United States or of the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania as to any individual, the decision of the court shall not affect
or impair the right to impose or collect said tax or the validity of the tax so
imposed on other persons or individuals as herein provided.
ARTICLE III REALTY TRANSFER TAX
[Adopted 7-28-1987 by Ord. No. 159; amended 9-24-2013 by Ord. No. 329]
 130-28 TITLE.
   This article shall be known as the Realty Transfer Tax Ordinance of Antrim
Township, Franklin County, Pennsylvania.
 130-29 IMPOSITION OF TAX.
   A realty transfer tax for general revenue purposes is hereby imposed upon
the transfer of real estate or an interest in real estate situated within
Antrim Township, Franklin County, Pennsylvania, regardless of where the
documents making the transfer are made, executed or delivered, or where the
actual settlements on such transfer took place as authorized by Article XI-D,
Local Real Estate Transfer Tax, 72 P.S. § 8101-D et seq.
 130-30 DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ASSOCIATION
A partnership, limited partnership or any other form of unincorporated
enterprise owned or conducted by two or more persons other than a private trust
or decedent s estate.
CORPORATION
A corporation, joint-stock association, business trust or banking institution
which is organized under the laws of this commonwealth, the United States or
any other state, territory, foreign country or dependency.
DOCUMENT
Any deed, instrument or writing which conveys, transfers, devises, vests,
confirms or evidences any transfer or devise of title to real estate but does
not include wills, mortgages, deeds of trust or other instruments of like
character given as security for a debt and deeds of release thereof to the
debtor, land contracts whereby the legal title does not pass to the grantee
until the total consideration specified in the contract has been paid or any
cancellation thereof unless the consideration is payable over a period of time
exceeding 30 years, or instruments which solely grant, vest or confirm a public
utility easement. Document shall also include a declaration of acquisition
required to be presented for recording under §
130-35 of this article.
   [Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 246]
FAMILY FARM CORPORATION
A corporation of which at least 75% of its assets are devoted to the business
of agriculture and at least 75% of each class of stock of the corporation is
continuously owned by members of the same family. The business of agriculture
shall not be deemed to include:
   A.   Recreational activities, such as but not limited to hunting, fishing,
camping, skiing, show competition or racing.
   B.   The raising, breeding or training of game animals or game birds, fish,
cats, dogs or pets or animals intended for use in sporting or recreational
activities.
   C.   Fur farming.
   D.   Stockyard and slaughterhouse operations.
   E.   Manufacturing or processing operations of any kind.
FAMILY FARM PARTNERSHIP
[Added 7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 246]
A partnership of which at least 75% of its assets are devoted to the business
of agriculture and at least 75% of the interests in the partnership are
continuously owned by members of the same family. The business of agriculture
shall not be deemed to include:
   A.   Recreational activities, such as but not limited to hunting, fishing,
camping, skiing, show competition or racing.
   B.   The raising, breeding or training of game animals or game birds, fish,
cats, dogs or pets or animals intended for use in sporting or recreational
activities.
   C.   Fur farming.
   D.   Stockyard and slaughterhouse operations.
   E.   Manufacturing or processing operations of any kind.
MEMBERS OF THE SAME FAMILY
Any individual, such individual s brothers and sisters, the brothers and
sisters of such individual s parents and grandparents, the ancestors and lineal
descendents of any of the foregoing, a spouse of any of the foregoing and the
estate of any of the foregoing. Individuals related by half-blood or legal
adoption shall be treated as if they were related by the whole blood.
PERSON
Every natural person, association or corporation. Whenever used in any clause
prescribing and imposing a fine or imprisonment, or both, the term person as
applied to associations shall include the responsible members or general
partners thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers thereof.
REAL ESTATE
   A.   All lands, tenements or hereditaments within Antrim Township, Franklin
County, Pennsylvania, including without limitation buildings, structures,
fixtures, mines, minerals, oil, gas, quarries, spaces with or without upper or
lower boundaries, trees and other improvements, immovables or interests which
by custom, usage or law pass with a conveyance of land, but excluding
permanently attached machinery and equipment in an industrial plant. [Amended
7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 246]
   B.   A condominium unit.
   C.   A tenant-stockholder s interest in a cooperative housing corporation,
trust or association under a proprietary lease or occupancy agreement.
REAL ESTATE COMPANY
A corporation or association which is primarily engaged in the business of
holding, selling or leasing real estate, 90% or more of the ownership interest
of which is held by 35 or fewer persons and which:
   A.   Derives 60% or more of its annual gross receipts from the ownership or
disposition of real estate; or
   B.   Holds real estate, the value of which comprises 90% or more of the
value of its entire tangible asset holdings exclusive of tangible assets which
are freely transferable and actively traded on an established market.
TITLE TO REAL ESTATE
   A.   Any interest in real estate which endures for a period of time, the
termination of which is not fixed or ascertained by a specific number of years,
including without limitation an estate in fee simple, life estate or perpetual
leasehold; or
   B.   Any interest in real estate ending for a fixed period of years but
which, either by reason of the length of the term or the grant of a right to
extend the term by renewal or otherwise, consists of a group of rights
approximating those of an estate in fee simple, life estate or perpetual
leasehold, including without limitation a leasehold interest or possessory
interest under a lease of occupancy agreement for a term of 30 years or more or
a leasehold interest or possessory interest in real estate in which the lessee
has equity.
TRANSACTION
The making, executing, delivering, accepting or presenting for recording of a
document.
VALUE
   A.   In the case of any bona fide sale of real estate at arm s length for
actual monetary worth, the amount of the actual consideration therefor, paid or
to be paid, including liens or other encumbrances thereon existing before the
transfer and not removed thereby, whether or not the underlying indebtedness is
assumed, and ground rents, or a commensurate part thereof where such liens or
other encumbrances and ground rents also encumber or are charged against other
real estate, provided that where such documents shall set forth a nominal
consideration, the value thereof shall be determined from the price set forth
in or actual consideration for the contract of sale.
   B.   In the case of a gift, sale by execution upon a judgment or upon the
foreclosure of a mortgage by a judicial officer, transactions without
consideration or for consideration less than the actual monetary worth of the
real estate, a taxable lease, an occupancy agreement, a leasehold or possessory
interest, any exchange of properties, or the real estate of an acquired
company, the actual monetary worth of the real estate determined by adjusting
the assessed value for the real estate for local real estate tax purposes for
the common level ratio of assessed values to market values of the taxing
district as established by the State Tax Equalization Board, or a commensurate
part of the assessment where the assessment includes other real estate.
[Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 246]
   C.   In the case of an easement or other interest in real estate the value
of which is not determinable under Subsection (A) or (B), the actual monetary
worth of such interest.
   D.   The actual consideration for or actual monetary worth of any executory
agreement for the construction of buildings, or other permanent improvements to
real estate between the grantor and other persons existing before the transfer
and not removed thereby or between the grantor, the agent or principle of the
grantor of a related corporation, association or partnership and the grantee
existing before or effective with the transfer.
 130-31 IMPOSITION OF TAX; INTEREST.
   A.   Every person who makes, executes, delivers, accepts or presents for
recording any document or in whose behalf any document is made, executed,
delivered, accepted or presented for recording shall be subject to pay for and
in respect to the transaction or any part thereof, a tax at the rate of 1% of
the value of the real estate represented by such document, which tax shall be
payable at the earlier of the time the document is presented for recording or
within 30 days of acceptance of such document or within 30 days of becoming an
acquired company.
   B.   The payment of the tax imposed herein shall be evidenced by the
affixing of an official stamp or writing by the Recorder or other designee
whereon the date of the payment of the tax, amount of the tax and the signature
of the collecting agent shall be set forth.
   C.   It is the intent of this article that the entire burden of the tax
imposed herein on a person or transfer shall not exceed the limitations
prescribed in The Local Tax Enabling Act, Act of December 1, 1965, P.L. 1257,
53 P.S. §§ 6924.101 et seq., so that if any other political subdivision shall
impose or hereafter shall impose such tax on the same person or transfer then
the tax levied by the Supervisors of Antrim Township, Franklin County,
Pennsylvania under the authority of that Act shall during the time such
duplication of the tax exists, except as hereinafter otherwise provided, be 1/
2 of the rate and such one-half rate shall become effective without any action
on the part of the Supervisors of Antrim Township, Franklin County,
Pennsylvania; provided, however, that the Board of Supervisors of Antrim
Township and any other political subdivision which impose such tax on the same
person or transfer may agree that, instead of limiting their respective rates
to 1/2 of the rate herein provided, they will impose respectively different
rates, the total of which shall not exceed the maximum rate permitted under The
Local Tax Enabling Act.
   D.   If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate in
effect at the time the tax is due shall be added and collected.
 130-32 EXEMPT PARTIES.
   The United States, the commonwealth, or any of their instrumentalities,
agencies or political subdivisions shall be exempt from payment of the tax
imposed by this article. The exemption of such governmental bodies shall not,
however, relieve any other party to a transaction from liability for the tax.
 130-33 EXCLUDED TRANSACTIONS.
   A.   The tax imposed by §
130-31 shall not be imposed upon:
      (1)   A transfer to the commonwealth, or to any of its instrumentalities,
agencies or political subdivisions, by gift, dedication or deed in lieu of
condemnation or deed of confirmation in connection with condemnation
proceedings, or a reconveyance by the condemning body of the property condemned
to the owner of record at the time of condemnation which reconveyance may
include property line adjustments, provided that said reconveyance is made
within one year from the date of condemnation.
      (2)   A document which the Supervisors of Antrim Township, Franklin
County, Pennsylvania, is prohibited from taxing under the Constitution or
statutes of the United States.
      (3)   A conveyance to a municipality, Township, school district or county
pursuant to acquisition by the municipality, Township, school district or
county of a tax delinquent property at sheriff sale or tax claim bureau sale.
      (4)   A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration which corrects or
confirms a transfer previously recorded, but which does not extend or limit
existing record legal title or interest.
      (5)   A transfer of division in kind for no or nominal actual
consideration of property passed by testate or intestate succession and held by
cotenants; however, if any of the parties take shares greater in value than
their undivided interest, tax is due on the excess.
      (6)   A transfer between husband and wife, between persons who were
previously husband and wife who have since been divorced, provided that the
property or interest therein subject to such transfer was acquired by the
husband and wife or husband or wife prior to the granting of the final decree
in divorce, between parent and child or the spouse of such child, between
brother or sister or spouse of a brother or sister and grandparent and
grandchild or the spouse of such grandchild, except that a subsequent transfer
by the grantee within one year shall be subject to tax as if the grantor were
making such transfer.
      (7)   A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration of property
passing by testate or intestate succession from a personal representative of a
decedent to the decedent s devisee or heir.
      (8)   A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration to a trustee of
an ordinary trust where the transfer of the same property would be exempt if
the transfer was made directly from the grantor to all of the possible
beneficiaries, whether or not such beneficiaries are contingent or specifically
named. No such exemption shall be granted unless the Recorder of Deeds is
presented with a copy of the trust instrument that clearly identifies the
grantor and all possible beneficiaries.
      (9)   A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from a trustee to
a beneficiary or any ordinary trust.
      (10)   A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from a trustee
to a successor trustee.
      (11)   A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration to an agent or
straw party; or from or to an agent of straw party, where, if the agent or
straw party were his or her principal, no tax would be imposed under this
article. Where the document by which title is acquired by a grantee or
statement of value fails to set forth that the property was acquired by the
grantee from, or for the benefit of, his or her principal, there is a
rebuttable presumption that the property is the property of the grantee in his
or her individual capacity if the grantee claims an exemption from taxation
under this clause. [Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 246]
      (12)   A transfer made pursuant to the statutory merger or consolidation
of a corporation or statutory division of a nonprofit corporation, except where
the Supervisors of Antrim Township, Franklin County, Pennsylvania, reasonably
determine that the primary intent for such merger, consolidation or division is
avoidance of the tax imposed by this article.
      (13)   A transfer from a corporation or association of real estate held
of record in the name of the corporation or association where the grantee owns
stock of the corporation or an interest in the association in the same
proportion as his or her interest in or ownership of the real estate being
conveyed and where the stock of the corporation or the interest in the
association has been held by the grantee for more than two years.
      (14)   A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or
authority to a grantee of property conveyed by the grantee to that agency or
authority as security for a debt of the grantee or a transfer to a nonprofit
industrial development agency or authority.
      (15)   A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or
authority to a grantee purchasing directly from it, but only if:
         (a)   The grantee shall directly use such real estate for the primary
purpose of manufacturing, fabricating, compounding, processing, publishing,
research and development, transportation, energy conversion, energy production,
pollution control, warehousing or agriculture.
         (b)   The agency or authority has the full ownership interest in the
real estate transferred.
      (16)   A transfer by a mortgagor to the holder of a bona fide mortgage in
default in lieu of a foreclosure or a transfer pursuant to a judicial sale in
which the successful bidder is the bona fide holder of a mortgage, unless the
holder assigns the bid to another person.
      (17)   Any transfer between religious organizations or other bodies or
persons holding title for a religious organization if such real estate is not
being or has not been used by such transferor for commercial purposes.
      (18)   A transfer to an entity which possesses a tax exempt status
pursuant to Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, [68A Stat.
3, 26 U.S.C. Section 501 (c)(3)] and which has as its primary purpose
preservation of land for historic, recreational, scenic, agricultural or open
space opportunities, or a transfer from such a conservancy to the United
States, Commonwealth or to any of their instrumentalities, agencies or
political subdivisions. [Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 246]
      (19)   A transfer of real estate devoted to the business of agriculture
to a family farm corporation by a member of the same family which directly owns
at least 75% of each class of the stock thereof.
      (20)   A transfer of real estate devoted to the business of agriculture
to a family farm partnership by a member of the same family, which family
directly owns at least seventy-five percent of the interests in the
partnership. [Added 7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 246]
      (21)   A transfer between members of the same family of an ownership
interest in a real estate company, family farm corporation or family farm
partnership which owns real estate. [Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 246]
      (22)   A transfer between members of the same family of an ownership
interest in a real estate company or family farm corporation.
      (23)   A transaction wherein the tax due is $1 or less.
      (24)   Leases for the production or extraction of coal, oil, natural gas
or minerals and assignments thereof.
   B.   In order to exercise any exclusion provided in this section, the true
full and complete value of the transfer shall be shown on the statement of
value. A copy of the Pennsylvania Realty Transfer Tax Statement of Value may be
submitted for this purpose. For leases of coal, oil, natural gas or minerals,
the statement of value may be limited to an explanation of the reason such
document is not subject to tax under this article.
 130-34 DOCUMENTS RELATING TO ASSOCIATIONS OR CORPORATIONS AND MEMBERS,
PARTNERS, STOCKHOLDERS OR SHAREHOLDERS THEREOF.
   Except as otherwise provided in §
130-33, documents which make, confirm or evidence any transfer or devise of
title to real estate between associations or corporations and the members,
partners, shareholders or stockholders thereof are fully taxable. For the
purposes of this article, corporations and associations are entities separate
from their members, partners, stockholders or shareholders.
 130-35 ACQUIRED COMPANY REQUIRED TO PAY REALTY TRANSFER TAX.
   A.   Within 30 days after becoming an acquired company, the company shall
present a declaration of acquisition with the recorder of each county in which
it holds real estate for the fixation of documentary stamps and recording. Such
declaration shall set forth the value of real estate holdings of the acquired
company in such county. Transfer tax shall be required to be paid on the value
of the real estate holdings.
   B.   A real estate company is an acquired company upon a change in the
ownership interest in the company, however affected, if the change does not
affect the continuity of the company and, of itself or together with prior
changes, has the effect of transferring, directly or indirectly, 90% or more of
the total ownership interest in the company within a period of three years.
   C.   With respect to real estate acquired after February 16, 1986, a family
farm corporation is an acquired company when, because of voluntary or
involuntary dissolution, it ceases to be a family farm corporation or when,
because of issuance or transfer of stock or because of acquisition or transfer
of assets that are devoted to the business of agriculture, it fails to meet the
minimum requirements of a family farm corporation under this act.
 130-36 CREDITS AGAINST TAX.
   A.   Where there is a transfer of a residential property by a licensed real
estate broker of property which was transferred to him or her within the
preceding year as consideration for the purchase of other residential property,
a credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the transfer to him or
her shall be given to him or her toward the amount of the tax due upon the
transfer.
   B.   Where there is a transfer by a builder of residential property which
was transferred to the builder within the preceding year as consideration for
the purchase of new, previously unoccupied residential property, a credit for
the amount of the tax paid at the time of the transfer to the builder shall be
given to the builder toward the amount of the tax due upon the transfer.
   C.   Where there is a transfer of real estate which is devised by the
grantor, a credit for the amount of tax paid at the time of the devise shall be
given the grantor toward the tax due upon the transfer. [Amended 7-8-1997 by
Ord. No. 246]
   D.   Where there is a conveyance by deed of real estate which was previously
sold under a land contract by the grantor, a credit for the amount of tax paid
at the time of the sale shall be given the grantor toward the tax due upon the
deed.
   E.   If the tax due upon the transfer is greater than the credit given under
this section, the difference shall be paid. If the credit allowed is greater
than the amount of tax due, no refund or carry-over credit shall be allowed.
 130-37 PROCEEDS OF JUDICIAL SALE.
   The tax herein imposed shall be fully paid, and have priority out of the
proceeds of any judicial sale of real estate before any other obligation,
claim, lien, judgment, estate or costs of the sale and of the writ upon which
the sale is made except the state realty transfer tax, and the Sheriff, or
other officer, conducting said sale shall pay the tax herein imposed out of the
first moneys paid to him or her in connection therewith. If the proceeds of the
sale are insufficient to pay the entire tax herein imposed, the purchaser shall
be liable for the remaining tax.
 130-38 DUTIES OF RECORDER OF DEEDS.
   A.   As provided in 16 P.S. § 11011-6, as amended by Act of July 7, 1983
(P.L. 40, No. 21), the Recorder of Deeds shall be the collection agent for the
local realty transfer tax, including any amount payable to the Supervisors of
Antrim Township, Franklin County, Pennsylvania based on a redetermination of
the amount of tax due by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania of the Pennsylvania
realty transfer tax, without compensation from the Supervisors of Antrim
Township, Franklin County, Pennsylvania.
   B.   In order to ascertain the amount of taxes due when the property is
located in more than one political subdivision, the Recorder shall not accept
for recording such a deed unless it is accompanied by a statement of value
showing what taxes are due each municipality.
   C.   On or before the tenth of each month, the Recorder shall pay over to
the Supervisors of Antrim Township, Franklin County, Pennsylvania all local
realty transfer taxes collected, less 2% for use of the county, together with a
report containing the information as is required by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania in reporting collections of the Pennsylvania realty transfer tax.
The 2% commission shall be paid to the county.
   D.   Upon a redetermination of the amount of realty transfer tax due by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the Recorder shall rerecord the deed or record
the additional realty transfer tax form only when both the state and local
amounts and a rerecording or recording fee has been tendered.
 130-39 STATEMENT OF VALUE.
   Every document lodged with or presented to the Recorder of Deeds for
recording shall set forth therein and as a part of such document the true, full
and complete value thereof, or shall be accompanied by a statement of value
executed by a responsible person connected with the transaction showing such
connection and setting forth the true, full and complete value thereof or the
reason, if any, why such document is not subject to tax under this article. A
copy of the Pennsylvania Realty Transfer Tax Statement of Value may be
submitted for this purpose. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply
to any excludable real estate transfers which are exempt from taxation based on
family relationship. Other documents presented for the affixation of stamps
shall be accompanied by a certified copy of the document and statement of value
executed by a responsible person connected with the transaction showing such
connection and setting forth the true, full and complete value thereof or the
reason, if any, why such document is not subject to tax under this article.
 130-40 PENALTY OF NONPAYMENT.
   A.   If any part of any underpayment of tax imposed by this article is due
to fraud, there shall be added to the tax an amount equal to 50% of the
underpayment.
   B.   In the case of failure to record a declaration required under this
article on the date prescribed therefor, unless it is shown that such failure
is due to reasonable cause, there shall be added to the tax 5% of the amount of
such tax if the failure is for not more than one month, with an additional 5%
for each additional month or fraction thereof during which such failure
continues, not exceeding 50% in the aggregate.
 130-41 LIEN.
   The tax imposed by this article shall become a lien upon the lands,
tenements or hereditaments or any boundaries of the Supervisors of Antrim
Township, Franklin County, Pennsylvania, which lands, tenements, hereditaments
or interests therein are described in or conveyed by or transferred by the deed
which is the subject of the tax imposed, assessed and levied by this article,
said lien to begin at the time when the tax under this article is due and
payable, and continue until discharge by payment, or in accordance with the
law, and the solicitor is authorized to file a municipal or tax claim in the
Court of Common Pleas of the 39th Judicial District of Pennsylvania, Franklin
County Branch, in accordance with the provisions of the Municipal Claims and
Liens Act of 1923, 53 P.S. § 7101 et seq., its supplements and amendments.
 130-42 ENFORCEMENT; REGULATIONS.
   A.   All taxes imposed by this article, together with interest and penalties
prescribed herein, shall be recoverable as other debts of like character are
recovered.
   B.   The Township Administrator of the Board of Supervisors of Antrim
Township, Franklin County, Pennsylvania is charged with enforcement and
collection of tax and is empowered to promulgate and enforce reasonable
regulations for enforcement and collection of the tax. The regulations which
have been promulgated by 72 P.S. 8101-C et seq. are incorporated into and made
a part of this article.
 130-43 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
[Added 7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 246]
   Any person who violates or permits a violation of this article, upon being
found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding, shall pay a fine of
not more than $600 plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney s fees,
incurred by the Township in the enforcement of this chapter. No judgment shall
be imposed until the date of the determination of the violation by the District
Justice and/or Court. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the
judgment, the Township may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable
rules of civil procedure. Each day a violation exists shall constitute a
separate offense. Further, the appropriate officers or agents of the Township
are hereby authorized to seek equitable relief, including injunction, to
enforce compliance herewith.
ARTICLE IV AMUSEMENT TAX
[Adopted 5-28-1991 as Ord. No. 214; amended 9-24-2013 by Ord. No. 329]
 130-44 DEFINITIONS.
   A.   As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
   AMUSEMENT
All manner or form of entertainment, diversion, sport, pastime or recreation,
including but not limited to trade shows, craft shows and similar exhibitions,
within the Township of Antrim for which admission is charged or paid.
Specifically excluded from this tax are admissions to movie theaters and
membership admissions, membership dues, fees or assessments, donations,
contributions or monetary charges of any character whatsoever paid by the
general public, or a limited or selected number thereof, for such person to
enter into any place, indoors or outdoors, to engage in any activities, the
predominant purpose or nature of which is exercise, fitness, health,
maintenance, improvement or rehabilitation, health or nutrition education, or
weight control.
      [Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 246]
   ADMISSION or PRICE
Monetary charge of any character, including contributions, donations, dues or
membership fees, periodic or otherwise, charged for the privilege of attending
or engaging in amusements as previously defined.
   AMUSEMENT FACILITY
The physical site or building upon or within which the amusement takes place
and to which admission fees are charged for entry thereto.
   PERSON
Every natural person, copartnership, association, joint venture or corporation.
Whenever used in the clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, the term person
as applied to copartnerships, associations or joint ventures shall mean
partners or members thereof, and as applied to corporations, shall mean the
officers thereof.
   PRODUCER
Any person conducting any place of amusement as previously defined.
   TOWNSHIP
Antrim Township, Franklin County, Pennsylvania, or one of its designated
representatives.
   B.   If applicable, the singular shall include the plural; the plural shall
include the singular; the masculine shall include the feminine and the neuter.
 130-45 IMPOSITION OF TAX.
   The following tax is hereby imposed upon the privilege to attend or engage
in any amusements within the Township of Antrim, County of Franklin,
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania: a tax is hereby imposed for general Township
purposes for the use of the Board of Supervisors of said Township at the rate
of 0% of the admission price to each and every amusement conducted in the
Township of Antrim, County of Franklin, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, on or
after July 1, 1991. [Amended 12-11-2012 by Ord. No. 326]
   A.   Where the price is not fixed or established, the tax shall be
collected, based upon the gross admission fee or fees collected.
   B.   Where the price of admission is wholly or in part included in the price
paid for refreshment, parking, service and/or merchandise or where in
consideration of the price paid for refreshment, parking and/or merchandise
admission is granted or the admission price is reduced, then the price paid for
such refreshment, parking, service and/or merchandise shall be deemed to be
part of the price paid for admission and taxable as such.
 130-46 EXEMPTIONS.
   A.   No tax shall be levied upon charitable or nonprofit corporations,
institutions, groups or associations whose sole purpose is charitable and whose
aims are for the well-being of the community and its citizens, including but
not limited to churches, schools and fire companies, and their activities.
   B.   In order to obtain an exemption from payment of this tax, the
charitable organizations described as aforesaid must request the exemption from
the Township Secretary, in writing, no later than 30 days prior to the
scheduled event. A failure to strictly follow this requirement and/or a failure
to fully and accurately provide any relevant information requested by the
Township to verify the basis for the exemption shall be cause for the Township
to deny the exemption.
 130-47 COLLECTION OF TAX.
   A.   All producers shall collect the tax imposed by this article and shall
be liable to the Board of Supervisors as taxpayers for the payment of the same.
   B.   Each producer conducting an amusement shall transmit to the Township on
January 15, April 15, July 15 and October 15, under oath, on examination, a
report of the amount of tax collected by the said producer during the preceding
three calendar months, which report shall be on forms prescribed by the
Township, and the amount of tax shall be due and payable on the day the reports
in such cases are required to be made to the Township.
   C.   The Township is hereby authorized to examine the books, papers and
records of any producer in order to verify the accuracy of any return made to
ascertain the amount to the tax due by any person under this article, and, to
accomplish this purpose, the Township is authorized to examine any person under
oath concerning any taxes which were or should have been returned, and the
Township may compel the production of books, papers, reports, records and the
attendance of all persons before the Township whether as persons or witnesses
whom it is believed have knowledge of any such matters.
 130-48 PENALTIES AND INTEREST.
   A.   All taxes imposed by this article remaining unpaid after they shall
become due shall bear interest, in addition to the amount of unpaid tax, at the
rate of 1/2% per month or fractional part of the month from the day they are
due and payable until paid.
   B.   All taxes imposed by this article, together with all interest and
penalties, shall be recovered as other debts of like character are recovered.
 130-49 TAX ESTIMATE.
   If any producer or taxpayer shall neglect or refuse to make any report and
payment of the tax required by this article, the Township shall estimate the
tax due by such producer or taxpayer and determine the amount due by him or her
for taxes, penalties and interest thereon as prescribed herein.
 130-50 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
[Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 246]
   Any person who violates or permits a violation of this article, upon being
found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding, shall pay a fine of
not more than $600 plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney s fees,
incurred by the Township in the enforcement of this chapter. No judgment shall
be imposed until the date of the determination of the violation by the District
Justice and/or Court. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the
judgment, the Township may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable
rules of civil procedure. Each day a violation exists shall constitute a
separate offense. Further, the appropriate officers or agents of the Township
are hereby authorized to seek equitable relief, including injunction, to
enforce compliance herewith.
 130-51 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The Board of Supervisors may pass by resolution at any time after the
enactment of this article any rules and/or regulations they deem necessary to
implement, effectuate, interpret, enforce, construe or apply to this article.
ARTICLE V COLLECTOR OF DELINQUENT TAXES
[Adopted 12-27-2001 by Ord. No. 275; amended 9-24-2013 by Ord. No. 329]
 130-52 APPOINTMENT.
   The elected Tax Collector of the Township of Antrim is hereby appointed as
the Delinquent Tax Collector.
 130-53 POWERS, RIGHTS, PRIVILEGES, DUTIES AND OBLIGATIONS.
   The elected Tax Collector appointed as the Delinquent Tax Collector shall
have the same powers, rights, privileges, duties and obligations as set forth
in 24 P.S. 6-686 of the Public School Code of 1949. The Collector of Delinquent
Taxes shall also have all the authority and power now vested by law in the
collector of nondelinquent Township taxes for the collection of such delinquent
taxes.
 130-54 TERM OF APPOINTMENT.
   This appointment and authorization shall remain in effect until the Board of
Supervisors, by ordinance, takes further action, as required by law.
 130-55 VACANCY.
   In the event of a vacancy in the office of Tax Collector during the term of
this appointment, the successor Tax Collector shall automatically succeed to
the powers and duties set forth herein.
 130-56 BOND.
   The Collector of Delinquent Taxes shall not be required to give additional
bond on account of this appointment.
 130-57 ACCOUNTING.
   The Collector of Delinquent Taxes shall account to the Board of Supervisors
for all delinquent tax collections made, in the same manner as required for the
reporting of nondelinquent tax collections.
 130-58 COMPENSATION.
   The Collector of Delinquent Taxes shall be compensated in the same manner as
provided for the collection of nondelinquent taxes within the Township.
CHAPTER 131 CHAPTER 138: RESERVED
CHAPTER 139: VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
   Article
      
I.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
II.   GENERAL TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
      
III.   PARKING
      
IV.   REMOVAL AND IMPOUNDMENT OF ILLEGALLY PARKED VEHICLES
      
V.   SNOW AND ICE EMERGENCY
      
VI.   ROAD ABANDONMENT
      
VII.   ENFORCEMENT
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Antrim 5-26-
1987 as Ch. 15, Parts 1 through 5 of the 1987 Code of Ordinances; amended in
its entirety 7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 246. Subsequent amendments noted where
applicable.]
Section
Article I: General Provisions
   
139-1   Definitions and word usage
   
139-2   Manner of adopting permanent traffic and parking regulations
   
139-3   Provisions to be continuation of existing regulations
   
139-4   Temporary and emergency regulations
   
139-5   Experimental regulations
   
139-6   Traffic on streets closed or restricted for construction, maintenance
or special events
Article II: General Traffic Regulations
   
139-7   Use of streets by processions and assemblages
   
139-8   Maximum speed limits established on certain streets
   
139-9   Maximum speed limits established on certain bridges and elevated
structures
   
139-10   Maximum speed limits established for certain vehicles on hazardous
grades
   
139-11   Maximum speed limits established in parks
   
139-12   Traffic signals at certain locations
   
139-13   Intersections where turn prohibited on red signal
   
139-14   One-way streets established
   
139-15   Rotary traffic islands established
   
139-16   Turning at certain intersections prohibited or restricted
   
139-17   Right turns only permitted at certain intersections
   
139-18   U-turns prohibited at certain locations
   
139-19   No-passing zones established
   
139-20   Through highways established
   
139-21   Stop intersections established
   
139-22   Yield intersections established
   
139-23   Vehicle weight limits established on certain streets and bridges
   
139-24   Restrictions on size of vehicles on certain streets and bridges
   
139-25   Restrictions as to weight and size of vehicles on certain streets and
bridges
   
139-26   Truck traffic restricted on certain streets
Article III: Parking
   
139-27   Vehicles to be parked within marked spaces
   
139-28   Angle parking required on portions of certain streets
   
139-29   Parking prohibited at all times in certain locations
   
139-30   Parking prohibited in certain locations certain days and hours
   
139-31   Parking of trucks, buses and certain other vehicles prohibited in
certain locations
   
139-32   Parking time limited in certain locations certain days and hours
   
139-33   Special purpose parking zones established
   
139-34   Standing or parking on roadway for loading or unloading
   
139-35   Violations and penalties
Article IV: Removal and Impoundment of Illegally Parked Vehicles
   
139-36   Applicability and scope
   
139-37   Authority to remove and impound
   
139-38   Definitions
   
139-39   Tow-away zones designated
   
139-40   Designation of approved towing companies
   
139-41   Minimum qualifications for an authorized/designated towing company
   
139-42   General regulations, Town rotation, and Prohibited acts
   
139-43   Payment of towing and storage charges
   
139-44   Reclamation costs
   
139-45   Records of vehicles removed and impounded
   
139-46   Violations and penalties
   
139-47   Reports and disposition of unclaimed vehicles
Article V: Snow and Ice Emergency
   
139-48   Declaration of snow and ice emergency
   
139-49   Parking prohibited, driving motor vehicles restricted on snow
emergency routes during emergency
   
139-50   Snow emergency routes designated
Article VI: Road Abandonment
   
139-51    I Grant Shook Road
   
139-51    II Snyder Road
Article VII: Enforcement
   
139-52   Violations and penalties
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks - See Ch. 122.
ARTICLE I GENERAL PROVISIONS
 139-1 DEFINITIONS AND WORD USAGE.
   A.   Words and phrases, when used in this chapter, except for sections or
parts to which different or additional definitions apply, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in The Vehicle Code (the Act of June 17, 1976, P.L.
162, No. 81), as amended, being 75 Pa. C.S. §§ 101 et seq., except that, in
this chapter, the word street may be used interchangeably with the word
highway, and shall have the same meaning as the word highway as defined in the
Vehicle Code.
   B.   The term legal holidays as used in this chapter shall mean and include:
New Year s Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day and
Christmas Day.
   C.   In this chapter, the singular shall include the plural, the plural
shall include the singular, and the masculine shall include the feminine.
 139-2 MANNER OF ADOPTING PERMANENT TRAFFIC AND PARKING REGULATIONS.
   All traffic and parking regulations of a permanent nature shall be enacted
as ordinances, as parts of ordinances, as amendments to ordinances, or as
amendments to this chapter, except where the law specifically authorizes less
formal action.
 139-3 PROVISIONS TO BE CONTINUATION OF EXISTING REGULATIONS.
   The provisions of this chapter, so far as they are the same as those of
ordinances and regulations in force immediately before the enactment of this
chapter, are intended as a continuation of those earlier ordinances and
regulations, and not as new enactments. Nothing in this chapter shall affect
any act done or liability incurred, or any suit or prosecution pending or to be
instituted under any of those repealed or superseded ordinances or regulations.
 139-4 TEMPORARY AND EMERGENCY REGULATIONS.
   A.   The Board of Supervisors or its designee shall have the following
powers to regulate traffic and parking temporarily and in time of emergency:
      (1)   In the case of fire, flood, storm or other emergency, to establish
temporary traffic and/or parking regulations.
      (2)   In the case of emergency or to facilitate public works, or in the
conduct of parades, processions or public events, to restrict or prohibit
traffic and/or parking in limited areas for periods of not more than 72 hours.
   B.   Such temporary and emergency regulations shall be enforced by the Board
of Supervisors or its designee in the same manner as permanent regulations. Any
person who shall operate or park a vehicle or tractor in violation of any such
regulations, or who shall move, remove, destroy, injure or deface any sign or
marking erected, posted or made to give notice of any such regulation, shall,
upon conviction thereof, be subject to the penalty set forth in the law or
elsewhere in this chapter for a violation of such nature.
 139-5 EXPERIMENTAL REGULATIONS.
   The Board of Supervisors may, from time to time by resolution, designate
places upon and along the highways in the Township of Antrim where for a period
of not more than 90 days, specific traffic and/or parking regulations,
prohibitions and restrictions shall be in force and effect, and shall designate
such locations by proper signs and markings. Such regulations, prohibitions and
restrictions shall be effective as if they had been specified in this chapter.
No person shall operate or park a vehicle or tractor in violation of any such
regulation, prohibition or restriction, and no person shall move, remove,
destroy or deface any sign or marking erected, posted or made by authority of
this section. Any person who shall violate any provision of this section shall,
upon conviction thereof, be subject to the penalty set forth in the law or
elsewhere in this chapter for a violation of such nature, provided that the
purpose of this section is to allow for the test and experimental determination
of the feasibility and desirability of permanent changes in the ordinances of
the Township of Antrim relative to traffic and parking.
 139-6 TRAFFIC ON STREETS CLOSED OR RESTRICTED FOR CONSTRUCTION, MAINTENANCE OR
SPECIAL EVENTS.
   A.   The Board of Supervisors shall have authority to close any street or
specific part of a street to vehicular traffic and to place barriers at each
end of the closed portion, while construction or maintenance work is underway
or a special event is being conducted on the closed portion. It shall be
unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle upon any such closed portion.
   B.   The Board of Supervisors shall have authority to establish a restricted
traffic area upon any street where construction or maintenance work is underway
and to station flagmen at each end of the restricted portion. It shall be
unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle upon any such restricted traffic
area at any time when the flagman is displaying a sign directing that vehicle
to stop, or is signaling that vehicle, by a flag or other device, not to
proceed.
ARTICLE II GENERAL TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
 139-7 USE OF STREETS BY PROCESSIONS AND ASSEMBLAGES.
   A.   For the purpose of this section, the words assemblage and procession
shall have the following meanings:
   ASSEMBLAGE
A gathering of people without vehicles, which interferes with the movement of
pedestrian or vehicular traffic on any street.
   PROCESSION
A group of individuals, vehicles, animals and/or objects moving along a street
in a way that interferes with the normal movement of traffic. A procession
shall not include a funeral caravan or military convoy.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any person to hold or participate in any
assemblage unless the person organizing or conducting the assemblage first
obtains a permit from the Township Administrator, which shall be issued without
fee. Application for the permit shall be made at least one week in advance of
the day on which the assemblage is proposed to be held, but in any case where a
state-designated highway is proposed to be used, application shall be made at
least three weeks in advance of the proposed date. The permit shall state the
place where and the date when the assemblage is to be held, the hour when the
assemblage may convene and the hour by which it shall have been completely
dispersed. It shall be unlawful for any person to hold or to participate in any
assemblage unless the permit has been granted, or at any time or place other
than that authorized by the permit.
   C.   It shall be unlawful for any person to hold or participate in any
procession unless the person organizing or conducting the procession first
obtains a permit from the Township Administrator, which shall be issued without
fee. Application for the permit shall be made at least two weeks in advance of
the day when the procession is proposed to be held, but in any case where a
state-designated highway is proposed to be used, application shall be made at
least three weeks in advance of the proposed date. The permit shall specify the
date on which the procession is to be held, the route to be followed by the
procession, the hour when and place where participants may commence to assemble
and form before the procession is underway, the time when the procession may
commence to move along its route, and the time by which the end of the
procession shall have reached the end of the route of the procession and the
procession shall have been disbanded. It shall be unlawful for any person to
hold or to participate in any procession unless the permit shall have been
granted, or under any conditions as to time or route or otherwise than those
stated in the permit.
 139-8 MAXIMUM SPEED LIMITS ESTABLISHED ON CERTAIN STREETS.
   Maximum speed limits are established throughout the Township at 45 miles per
hour except on portions of specified streets, as follows. It shall be unlawful
for any person to drive a vehicle on any part of a street where a maximum speed
limit applies at a higher speed than the maximum prescribed for that part of
the street:
Street Location Maximum Speed Limit (mph)
Street                     Location                   Maximum Speed Limit (mph)
                           From Clay Hill Road north
Angle Road                 on Angle Road to past the  25
                           Ruritan Development
Antrim Lane                Entire length              25
Brenda Drive               Entire length              25
Brian Drive                Entire length              25
Burkholder Road            Entire length              30
Carl Avenue                Entire length              25
Carol Drive                Entire length              25
Center Street              Entire length              25
Clear View Avenue          Entire length              25
Colonial Drive             Entire length              25
Corporal Rihl Lane [Added  Bemisderfer Road to
12-11-2001 by Ord. No.     Grindstone Hill Road       35
274]
Coseytown Road             Martin Land to Harbaugh    35
                           Land (5940 feet)
Countryside Drive          Entire length              25
Cresap Avenue              Entire length              25
Farm Lane                  Entire length              25
Filer Road (T# 347) [Added
7-22-2014 by Ord. No. 333; Entire length              25
amended 8-12-2014 by Ord.
No. 335]
Friendship Village Road    Entire length              25
Grant Shook Road (T-348)   Between Weaver Road (T-
[Added 5-9-2006 by Ord.    341) and Shanks Church     35
No. 300]                   Road (T-349)
Greenview Drive            Entire length              25
Grindstone Hill Road       From Pa. Route 16 to
[Added 12-11-2001 by Ord.  Leitersburg Road           35
No. 274]
Hade Street                Entire length              25
Hykes Road (T# 351) [Added From Greenmount Road (T#
10-28-2014 by Ord. No.     350) to Molly Pitcher      25
337]                       Highway (SR 0011)
Hykes Road (T# 351) [Added From Williamsport Pike
10-28-2014 by Ord. No.     (S.R. 3001) to Greenmount  35
337]                       Road (T# 350)
Jasper Drive [Added 9-12-  Entire length              25
2000 by Ord. No. 264]
Joy Drive                  Entire length              25
Kaufman Street             Entire length              25
Kimberly Drive             Entire length              25
Larry Drive                Entire length              25
Lee Drive                  Entire length              25
Lisa Drive                 Entire length              25
Locust Street              Entire length              25
Lorford Drive              Entire length              25
Lynn Drive                 Entire length              25
Maple Avenue               Entire length              25
Maryland Line Road         Entire length              25
McClanahan Road            Entire length              30
Melissa Drive              Entire length              25
Mountain View Street       Entire length              25
Nancy Drive                Entire length              25
Oak Road                   Entire length              25
Oak View Drive             Entire length              25
Orenda Drive               Entire length              25
Park Drive                 Entire length              25
Paulmark Avenue [Added 9-  Entire length              25
12-2000 by Ord. No. 264]
Pen Dixie Lane             Entire length              25
Pensinger Road (T-381)
[Added 3-10-1998 by Ord.   Entire length              35
No. 250]
Prospect Avenue            Entire length              25
Randy Drive                Entire length              25
Redwood Drive              Entire length              25
Reid Road                  Entire length              25
Ridge View Road            Entire length              25
Robert Drive               Entire length              25
Roger Drive                Entire length              25
Ruritan Drive              Entire length              25
Sandy Circle               Entire length              25
Skyline Drive              Entire length              25
Spangler Lane              Entire length              25
Talhelm Street             Entire length              25
Unnamed alley (State Line) East of Route 11 and South 15
                           of Leitersburg Road
Walnut Loop                Entire length              25
Walnut Street              Entire length              25
Weller Drive               Entire length              25
West Avenue (West View     Entire length              25
Estates)
West Avenue (State Line)   Entire length              25
West View Circle           Entire length              25
Willowdale Road            Entire length              30
Woodland Parkway           Entire length              25
 
 139-9 MAXIMUM SPEED LIMITS ESTABLISHED ON CERTAIN BRIDGES AND ELEVATED
STRUCTURES.
   Maximum speed limits are established, as follows, on certain bridges and
elevated structures, and it shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle
on any such bridge or elevated structure, at a higher speed than the maximum
prescribed for that bridge or elevated structure:
 
Bridge or Elevated Structure Location Maximum Speed Limit
(Reserved)                            
 
 139-10 MAXIMUM SPEED LIMITS ESTABLISHED FOR CERTAIN VEHICLES ON HAZARDOUS
GRADES.
   The following are declared to be hazardous grades, and, upon any such
hazardous grade, no person shall drive a vehicle, having a gross weight in
excess of that referred to for that grade, in the direction stated for that
grade, at a speed in excess of that established in this section for that grade,
and, if so stated for a particular grade, the driver of every such vehicle
shall stop the vehicle before proceeding downhill:
 
                                       Maximum Gross  Stop Required Before
Street     Between Direction of Travel Weight/Maximum Proceeding Downhill
                                       Speed Limit
(Reserved)                                          
 
 139-11 MAXIMUM SPEED LIMITS ESTABLISHED IN PARKS.
   A speed limit of 35 miles per hour is established on all streets and
roadways in the public parks maintained and operated by the Township of Antrim,
except in the following locations, where the lower maximums, as specified,
shall apply:
 
Park       Street Location Maximum Speed Limit
(Reserved)                
 
 139-12 TRAFFIC SIGNALS AT CERTAIN LOCATIONS.
   At the following locations, traffic signals as indicated below shall be
erected (or are ratified if previously erected), and traffic at those locations
shall be directed by those signals:
 
Location   Type of Signal
(Reserved)  
 
 139-13 INTERSECTIONS WHERE TURN PROHIBITED ON RED SIGNAL.
   The following are established as intersections where drivers of vehicles
headed in the direction or directions indicated are prohibited from making a
right turn (or a left turn from a one-way street into another one-way street)
on a steady red signal:
 
Street     Location Direction
(Reserved)          
 
 139-14 ONE-WAY STREETS ESTABLISHED.
   The following are established as one-way streets, and it shall be unlawful
for any person to drive a vehicle on any one-way street other than in the
direction established for traffic on that street:
 
Street     Location Direction of Travel
(Reserved)          
 
 139-15 ROTARY TRAFFIC ISLANDS ESTABLISHED.
   The following are designated as rotary traffic islands, and every vehicle
passing around a rotary traffic island shall be driven only to the right of the
island:
 
(Reserved)
 
 139-16 TURNING AT CERTAIN INTERSECTIONS PROHIBITED OR RESTRICTED.
   It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle, of the type indicated,
traveling upon the first-named street at any of the following intersections, in
the direction or directions indicated in each case, to make a left turn and/or
a right turn into the second-named street, as indicated, at any time when such
a turn is prohibited by this section:
 
Name of Street Direction of Travel Prohibited Turn Type of Vehicle
(Reserved)                                        
 
 139-17 RIGHT TURNS ONLY PERMITTED AT CERTAIN INTERSECTIONS.
   It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle, traveling upon the
first-named street at any of the following intersections, in the direction or
directions indicated in each case, to make other than a right turn, at any time
stated, both left turns and straight-across traffic being prohibited:
 
Name of Street Direction of Travel Days/Hours Right Turn On
(Reserved)                                   
 
 139-18 U-TURNS PROHIBITED AT CERTAIN LOCATIONS.
   It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle, traveling upon any of
the following portions of streets, in the direction or directions indicated for
that street, to make a U-turn:
 
Name of Street Direction of Travel Location
(Reserved)                         
 
 139-19 NO-PASSING ZONES ESTABLISHED.
   The following are established as no passing zones, and it shall be unlawful
for the driver of any vehicle to overtake or pass another vehicle or to drive
on the left side of the roadway in any no passing zone:
 
Name of Street Direction of Travel Location
(Reserved)                         
 
 139-20 THROUGH HIGHWAYS ESTABLISHED.
   The following highways are established as through highways, thus authorizing
stop or yield signs to be erected facing traffic approaching every intersection
with the through highway except for those intersections with traffic signals,
or with exceptions or modifications as indicated below. Every driver of a
vehicle approaching a stop or yield sign authorized by this section shall stop
the vehicle or yield right-of-way as required by §§ 3323(b) or 3323(c) of the
Vehicle Code, being 75 Pa. C.S. §§ 101 et seq., as the case may be, and shall
not proceed into or across the through highway until he or she has followed all
applicable requirements of that section of the law:
 
Highway    Between
(Reserved)  
 
 139-21 STOP INTERSECTIONS ESTABLISHED.
   The following intersections (in addition to intersections with the through
highways established by §
139-20) are established as stop intersections, and official stop signs shall be
erected (or are ratified if previously erected) in such a position as to face
traffic approaching the second-named street (the intersecting through street)
on the first-named street (the stop street) in the direction or directions
indicated for that intersection. Every driver of a vehicle approaching the
intersection on the first named or stop street, in the direction indicated in
each case, shall stop the vehicle as required by § 3323(b) of the Vehicle Code,
being 75 Pa. C.S. §§ 101 et seq., and shall not proceed into or across the
second-named or intersecting or through street until he or she has followed all
applicable requirements of that section of the law.
Intersecting or Stop Street Through Street Direction of Travel
Intersecting or Stop       Through Street             Direction of Travel
Street
Alley next to bank         East Avenue                Going toward the Ruritan
                                                      Club in State Line
Antrim Church Road         Zarger Road                Both
Antrim Lane                Antrim Church Road         East
Colonial Drive             Hillside Circle            Both
Corporal Rihl Lane [Added
12-11-2001 by Ord. No.     Bemisderfer Road           East
274]
Corporal Rihl Lane [Added
12-11-2001 by Ord. No.     Grindstone Hill Road       West
274]
Filer Road                 Grant Shook Road           East
Frederick Drive [Added 12- Grindstone Hill Road       West
11-2001 by Ord. No. 274]
Grindstone Hill Road       Buchanan Trail East (Pa.
[Added 12-11-2001 by Ord.  Route 16)                  North
No. 274]
Grindstone Hill Road
[Added 12-11-2001 by Ord.  Leitersburg Road (SR 2002) South
No. 274]
Jasper Drive [Added 9-12-  Paulmark Avenue            North
2000 by Ord. No. 265]
John Wayne Drive [Added
12-11-2001 by Ord. No.     Grindstone Hill Road       East
274]
Kauffman Street            Angle Road                 East
Locust Street              Clearview Avenue           Both
Locust Street              Cresap Avenue              East
Long Lane                  Phillipy Road              Both
McDowell Road              Ridge Road                 Both
McLanahan Road             Antrim Church Road         North
Mount View Drive           West Avenue                Both
Oak Road                   Redwood Drive              Both
Park Drive                 Mason Dixon Avenue         South
Phillipy Road              Long Lane                  Both
Prospect Avenue            Clearview Avenue           Both
Redwood Drive              Oak Road                   East
Redwood Drive              Oak Tree Drive             Both
Redwood Drive              Reid Road                  South
Reid Road                  Redwood Drive              Both
Reid Road                  Woodland Parkway           Both
Ridge Road                 McDowell Road              Both
Roberts Road               Roger Drive                North
Roger Drive                Weaver Road                East
Ruritan Road               Angle Road                 East
Scenic View Drive          Weaver Road                East
Tower Drive                Allison Drive              Both
Tower Drive                Franklin Court             Both
Walnut Street              Clearview Avenue           West
West Avenue                Mount View Drive           Both
Willowdale Road (T-422)                               South on Willowdale Road
[Added 1-27-1998 by Ord.   Fletcher Drive             (T-422)
No. 349]
Woodland Parkway           Reid Road                  South
 
 139-22 YIELD INTERSECTIONS ESTABLISHED.
   The following intersections (in addition to intersections with the through
highways established by §
139-20) are established as yield intersections, and official yield signs shall
be erected (or are ratified if previously erected) in such a position as to
face traffic approaching the second-named street (the through street) on the
first-named street (the yield street) in the direction or directions indicated
for that intersection. Every driver of a vehicle approaching the intersection
on the first-named or yield street, in the direction indicated in each case,
shall slow down or stop the vehicle as required by § 3323(c) of the Vehicle
Code, being 75 Pa. C.S. §§ 101 et seq., and then yield the right-of-way as
required by that subsection of the Vehicle Code.
 
Yield street                    Through street            Direction of Travel
John Wayne Drive where the 14-
foot right-hand-turn-only lane
intersects with Grindstone Hill Grindstone Hill Road      Southeast
Road [Added 12-11-2001 by Ord.
No. 274]
Kauffman Street                 Route 655 (Ruritan Drive) West
 
 139-23 VEHICLE WEIGHT LIMITS ESTABLISHED ON CERTAIN STREETS AND BRIDGES.
   A.   On the following bridges and streets or parts of streets, by the
authority granted by § 4902(a) of the Vehicle Code, being 75 Pa. C.S. §§ 101 et
seq., it shall be unlawful for any person or persons to drive any vehicle or
combination having a gross weight in excess of the maximum prescribed below for
that bridge or street or part of street, as the case may be:
 
Street or bridge         Between                    Maximum Gross Weight
                         Entire length between
Craig Road [Added 2-27-  Williamson Road (SR 3002)  10 tons (except for local
2001 by Ord. No. 269]    and Molly Pitcher Highway  deliveries)
                         (SR 0011)
Patten Bridge            Entire length              3 tons
Rabbit Road (T-342)      Buchanan Trail (Route 16)  30,000 pounds
                         and Weaver Road (T-341)
                         Entire length within       Ten (10) Tons (except for
Rabbit Road North [Added Antrim Township North of   emergency vehicles, School
8-13-2013 by Ord. No.    Buchanan Trail West (SR    buses, vehicles used by
327]                     0016)                      public utilities, and
                                                    agriculture vehicles
 
   B.   Permits and Security. The Board of Supervisors of the Township of
Antrim or their authorized representatives may issue permits for the movement
of motor vehicles or combinations with weights in excess of the restrictions
imposed for Rabbit Road North (T-342). Prior to the Township issuing such
permit, security in the form acceptable to the Township shall be provided to
the Township in an amount to cover the costs of anticipated or probable repairs
and restoration necessitated by the permitted movement of vehicles. [Amended 8-
13-2013 by Ord. No. 327]
   C.   Erection of Signs - The Township shall erect or cause to be erected and
maintained restriction signs designating the restrictions at the end of the
portion of road restricted as provided in this Article. In the case of a
restriction on a road which has not begun or ended at an intersection with an
unrestricted highway, the Township shall also place an advance informational
sign at the intersection nearest each end of the restricted portion of the road
which would allow drivers to avoid the restricted portion of road. [Amended 8-
13-2013 by Ord. No. 327]
   D.   Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be
prosecuted under §§ 4902(a) and 4902(g)(1) of the Vehicle Code. [Amended 8-13-
2013 by Ord. No. 327]
 139-24 RESTRICTIONS ON SIZE OF VEHICLES ON CERTAIN STREETS AND BRIDGES.
   A.   On the following bridges and streets or parts of streets, by authority
granted by § 4902(a) of the Vehicle Code, being 75 Pa. C.S. §§ 101 et seq., it
shall be unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle or combination in
violation of the size restrictions prescribed below for that bridge or street
or part of street:
 
Street or Bridge Between Restriction
(Reserved)               
 
   B.   Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be
prosecuted under §§ 4902(a) and 4902(g)(1) of the Vehicle Code.
 139-25 RESTRICTIONS AS TO WEIGHT AND SIZE OF VEHICLES ON CERTAIN STREETS AND
BRIDGES.
   A.   By reason of hazardous traffic conditions and other safety factors, by
the authority granted by § 4902(b) of the Vehicle Code, being 75 Pa. C.S. §§
101 et seq., it shall be unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle or
combination in violation of the restriction prescribed below for that bridge or
street or part of street.
 
Street or Bridge Between Restriction
(Reserved)               
 
   B.   Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be
prosecuted under §§ 4902(b) and 4902(g)(1) of the Vehicle Code.
 139-26 TRUCK TRAFFIC RESTRICTED ON CERTAIN STREETS.
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle other than a
passenger car on any of the following streets or parts of streets:
 
Street     Between
(Reserved)  
 
   B.   Nothing in this section shall prohibit any person from driving an
emergency vehicle on any of those streets or parts of streets, or from driving
on any of those streets or parts of streets a truck or other commercial vehicle
making local deliveries to or pickups from premises located along that street
or part of a street.
ARTICLE III PARKING
 139-27 VEHICLES TO BE PARKED WITHIN MARKED SPACES.
   Wherever a space is marked off on any street for the parking of an
individual vehicle, every vehicle parked there shall be parked wholly within
the lines bounding that space, and it shall be a violation of this chapter for
any person to park a vehicle or allow it to remain parked otherwise.
 139-28 ANGLE PARKING REQUIRED ON PORTIONS OF CERTAIN STREETS.
   A.   Only angle parking shall be permitted on the following portions of
streets:
 
Street     Side Between
(Reserved)      
 
   B.   On all streets where angle parking is required, every vehicle parked at
the angle shall be parked with its front nearest the curb.
 139-29 PARKING PROHIBITED AT ALL TIMES IN CERTAIN LOCATIONS.
   Parking shall be prohibited at all times in the following locations:
Street Side Location
Street                    Side                       Location
Antrim Church Road [Added                            From Route 16 to Zarger
1-14-2025 by Ord. No.     Both                       Road
366]
Antrim Commons Drive                                 From Rt. 11 West to the
[Added 1-13-2015 by Ord.  Both and around cul-de-sac Cul-de-sac
No. 340]
Armada Drive [Added 1-14- Both                       From Commerce Avenue to
2025 by Ord. No. 366]                                Antrim Commons Drive
Avalon Avenue [Added 1-                              From the Borough of
14-2025 by Ord. No. 366]  Both                       Greencastle Boundary Line
                                                     to Divinity Drive
Charlotte Court [Added 1- East Side and Both sides   From Rolling Hills Drive
14-2025 by Ord. No. 366]  around cul-de-sac          to and including cul-de-
                                                     sac
Commerce Avenue [Added 1- Both                       From Route 11 to and
14-2025 by Ord. No. 366]                             including cul-de-sac
Corporal Rihl Lane [Added                            From Grindstone Hill Road
12-11-2001 by Ord. No.    Both                       to Bemisderfer Road
274]
Cydney s Lane [Added 1-   Both                       From Lindale Avenue to
14-2025 by Ord. No. 366]                             Emily s Court
Divinity Drive [Added 1-  Both                       From Shannon Drive South
14-2025 by Ord. No. 366]                             to End of Street
                                                     From West access at
Emily's Court             Both                       Lindale Avenue around and
                                                     to East access to Lindale
                                                     Avenue
Frederick Drive [Added    Both and around the cul-   From Grindstone Hill Road
12-11-2001 by Ord. No.    de-sac                     to and including the cul-
274]                                                 de-sac
Greenmount Road [Added 1- Both                       From Hykes Road to Mason
14-2025 by Ord. No. 366]                             Dixon Road
Grindstone Hill Road                                 Pa. Route 16 to
[Added 12-11-2001 by Ord. Both                       Leitersburg Road
No. 274]
John Wayne Drive [Added                              From Route 16 heading
12-11-2001 by Ord. No.    Both                       southeast to Grindstone
274]                                                 Hill Road
Morgan Court [Added 1-14- South Side and both sides  From Lindale Avenue to and
2025 by Ord. No. 366]     around cul-de-sac          including cul-de-sac
Oakley Lane [Added 1-14-  North and West side        From Lindale Avenue to
2025 by Ord. No. 366]                                Rolling Hills Drive
Rolling Hills Drive                                  From the Lindale Avenue
[Added 1-14-2025 by Ord.  North                      and Raeanne Drive
No. 366]                                             intersection to Lindale
                                                     Avenue
Route 11 (LR 36) Molly    East                       Pensinger Road to Route I-
Pitcher Highway                                      81
Route 11 (LR 36) Molly    West                       From Mason Dixon Road to
Pitcher Highway                                      Locust Street
Route 11 (LR 36) Molly    West                       North access, Route I-81
Pitcher Highway                                      (exit 2)
Route 11 (LR 36) Molly    West                       South access, Route I-81
Pitcher Highway                                      (exit 2)
Route 16 (LR 224)         North                      From Antrim Church Road to
Buchanan Trail East                                  Route I-81 overpass
                                                     From 100 feet west of
Route 16 (LR 224)         South                      Westview Circle to 100
Buchanan Trail East                                  feet east of Westview
                                                     Circle
Route 16 (LR 224)                                    From Ridge Road to East
Buchanan Trail West       North                      entrance of Grove
                                                     Manufacturing Company
Route 16 (LR 224)                                    From east entrance of
Buchanan Trail West       South                      Grove Manufacturing
                                                     Company to Ridge Road
 
   Parking in any areas at the Antrim Township Community Park other than
designated parking spaces. Designated parking spaces are paved and
professionally striped white to create a parking space. [Added 7-28-2020 by
Ord. No. 357]
 139-30 PARKING PROHIBITED IN CERTAIN LOCATIONS CERTAIN DAYS AND HOURS.
   Parking shall be prohibited in the following locations at all times on the
days and between the hours indicated in this section, as follows:
 
Street     Side Location Days/Hours
(Reserved)              
 
 139-31 PARKING OF TRUCKS, BUSES AND CERTAIN OTHER VEHICLES PROHIBITED IN
CERTAIN LOCATIONS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to park, or to allow to remain parked,
on any of the following streets or parts of streets, any vehicle other than a
passenger car (which shall not include any bus, motor home or passenger car
attached to a trailer of any kind):
 
Street     Side Location
(Reserved)      
 
 139-32 PARKING TIME LIMITED IN CERTAIN LOCATIONS CERTAIN DAYS AND HOURS.
   No person shall park a vehicle, or allow it to remain parked, for longer
than the time indicated, in any of the following locations, at any time on the
days and between the hours indicated:
 
Street     Side Between Days/Hours Time limit
(Reserved)                        
 
 139-33 SPECIAL PURPOSE PARKING ZONES ESTABLISHED.
   The following are established as special purpose parking zones, and it shall
be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle or to allow it to remain parked,
in any such zone, except as specifically provided for that zone:
 
Street     Side Location Authorized Purpose of Vehicle
(Reserved)              
 
 139-34 STANDING OR PARKING ON ROADWAY FOR LOADING OR UNLOADING.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, stand or park a vehicle (other
than a pedalcycle) on the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the
edge or curb of any street, except that standing or parking for the purpose of
loading or unloading persons or property shall be permitted Monday through
Saturday, between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 11:30 a.m. and between the hours
of 1:30 p.m. and 4:00 p.m., and for no longer than necessary for the loading or
unloading.
 139-35 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
[Amended 1-14-2025 by Ord. No. 366]
   Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $50 and costs.
ARTICLE IV REMOVAL AND IMPOUNDMENT OF ILLEGALLY PARKED VEHICLES
[Adopted 1-14-2025 by Ord. No. 366]
 139-36 APPLICABILITY AND SCOPE.
   This Article is enacted under authority of § 6109(a-22) of the Vehicle Code,
being 75 Pa. C.S. §§ 101 et seq., and gives authority to the Township of Antrim
to remove and impound those vehicles which are parked in a tow-away zone and in
violation of parking regulations of this chapter. Vehicles which have been
abandoned (as defined by the Vehicle Code) or which are parked in such a manner
as to interfere with traffic or pose a hazard to others may be towed under the
provisions of the Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code.
 139-37 AUTHORITY TO REMOVE AND IMPOUND.
   The Township of Antrim shall have authority to remove and impound, or to
order the removal and impounding, of any vehicle parked overtime or otherwise
illegally, provided that the circumstances of its parking were within the
conditions stated in §
139-36 of this Chapter; provided that no such vehicle shall be removed or
impounded except in strict adherence to the provisions of this chapter, or the
provisions of the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code. The State Police, Sheriff
Department, Fire Chief, Township Administrator, Roadmaster, or other such
persons, employed by or subcontracted with the Township as designated by the
Township Administrator, are hereby authorized persons permitted to remove and
impound or order the removal and impoundment of illegally parked vehicles.
 139-38 DEFINITIONS.
AUTHORIZED PERSONS
State Police, Sheriff Department, Fire Chief, Township Administrator,
Roadmaster, or other such persons as designated by the Township Administrator,
regardless of employment at the Township, authorized to order the removal of
and impoundment of vehicles.
TOWING COMPANY
Any business engaged in the towing, removing or storing of motor vehicles at
the request of Antrim Township, including the towing company owner and its
employees.
TOWING LIST
The list of authorized towing companies maintained by the Township
Administrator.
TOWNSHIP
Antrim Township, Franklin County, Pennsylvania.
VEHICLE
For the purposes of this section, all automobiles, trucks, trailers and other
vehicles of any kind shall be referred to as vehicle(s).
WRECKER
A vehicle designed and used for removing and transporting motor vehicles. This
term shall also include a rollback truck, tow truck or other vehicle commonly
used to perform towing services.
 139-39 TOW-AWAY ZONES DESIGNATED.
   The following designated streets and/or parking lots are hereby established
as tow-away zones. Signs shall be posted to place the public on notice that
their vehicles may be towed for violation of the Township of Antrim parking
regulations:
Street Side Location
Street                     Side                      Location
Antrim Church Road         Both                      From Route 16 to Zarger
                                                     Road
Antrim Commons Drive                                 From Rt. 11 to and
[Added 1-13-2015 by Ord.   Both                      including cul-de-sac
No. 340]
Armada Drive               Both                      From Commerce Avenue to
                                                     Antrim Commons Drive
                                                     From the Borough of
Avalon Avenue              Both                      Greencastle Boundary Line
                                                     to Divinity Drive
                           East Side and Both sides  From Rolling Hills Drive
Charlotte Court            around cul-de-sac         to and including cul-de-
                                                     sac
Commerce Avenue            Both                      From Route 11 to and
                                                     including cul-de-sac
Corporal Rihl Lane [Added                            From Grindstone Hill Road
12-11-2001 by Ord. No.     Both                      to Bemisderfer Road
274]
Cydney s Lane              Both                      From Lindale Avenue to
                                                     Emily s Court
Divinity Drive             Both                      From Shannon Drive South
                                                     to End of Street
                                                     From West access at
Emily s Court              Both                      Lindale Avenue around and
                                                     to East access to Lindale
                                                     Avenue
Frederick Drive [Added 12- Both and around the cul-  From Grindstone Hill Road
11-2001 by Ord. No. 274]   de-sac                    to and including the cul-
                                                     de-sac
Greenmount Road            Both                      From Hykes Road to Mason
                                                     Dixon Road
Grindstone Hill Road                                 Pa. Route 16 to
[Added 12-11-2001 by Ord.  Both                      Leitersburg Road
No. 274]
John Wayne Drive [Added                              From Route 16 to
12-11-2001 by Ord. No.     Both                      Grindstone Hill Road
274]
Morgan Court               South Side and both sides From Lindale Avenue to and
                           around cul-de-sac         including cul-de-sac
Oakley Lane                North and West side       From Lindale Avenue to
                                                     Rolling Hills Drive
                                                     From the Lindale Avenue
Rolling Hills Drive        North                     and Raeanne Drive
                                                     intersection to Lindale
                                                     Avenue
Route 11 Molly Pitcher     East                      Pensinger Road to Route 1-
Highway                                              81 overpass
Route 11 Molly Pitcher     West                      From Mason Dixon Road to
Highway                                              Locust Street
Route 11 Molly Pitcher     West                      North access, Route 1-81
Highway                                              (exit 2)
Route 11 Molly Pitcher     West                      South access, Route 1-81
Highway                                              (exit 2)
Route 16 Buchanan Trail    North                     From Antrim Church Road to
East                                                 Route I-81 overpass
                                                     From 100 feet west of
Route 16 Buchanan Trail    South                     Westview Circle to 100
East                                                 feet east of Westview
                                                     Circle
Route 16 Buchanan Trail                              From Ridge Road to East
West                       North                     entrance of Grove
                                                     Manufacturing Company
Route 16 Buchanan Trail                              From east entrance of
West                       South                     Grove Manufacturing
                                                     Company to Ridge Road
 
 139-40 DESIGNATION OF APPROVED TOWING COMPANIES.
   Removal and impounding of vehicles under this chapter shall be done only by
approved towing companies. The Board of Supervisors shall designate from time
to time towing companies engaged in the business of towing vehicles, at the
request of the Township, in accordance with this Article.
   A.   Applications for authorization/designation. Applications for
authorization/designation shall be submitted to the Township Administrator upon
forms prepared and made available by the Township. The application form shall
be properly completed and signed. The Township Administrator shall review and
inspect the facility and towing equipment and all applications for compliance
with the terms of this section.
   B.   Authorization/designation. Authorization/designation shall be issued to
only towing companies that comply with the provisions of this section.
Authorization/designation shall not create a property right for the towing
company.
   C.   Final approval of a towing company being added to the authorized/
designated towing list will be granted by the Township Board of Supervisors
upon recommendation of the Township Administrator and/or his designee.
 139-41 MINIMUM QUALIFICATIONS FOR AN AUTHORIZED/DESIGNATED TOWING COMPANY.
   To be authorized/designated to tow vehicles at the request of the Township,
towing companies shall maintain the following:
   A.   At least one wrecker that is in safe mechanical condition and is
properly titled, registered, and inspected.
   B.   All wreckers shall be clearly marked with the towing company s name and
telephone number on each side of the vehicle.
   C.   Each towing company shall provide its employees with training on the
proper and safe cleanup of accident debris from the roadways. Each towing
company will also provide each employee, involved in towing, with training
regarding the safe and proper methods of towing disabled and/or damaged
vehicles. Each towing company will also ensure that each person operating a
piece of towing equipment for that company possesses a valid driver s license
and is properly licensed to operate the piece of equipment via their respective
licensing/operating privilege.
   D.   Established place of business and storage facility.
      (1)   The towing company shall be directly accessible 24 hours a day, by
no more than two phone numbers, which will be provided to the Township
Administrator.
      (2)   All towing companies and their respective storage facilities used
for impoundment of vehicles towed at the request of the Township shall be
located within the Township.
      (3)   The storage facility shall be capable of storing no less than five
(5) standard size vehicles.
      (4)   The storage facility shall be locked and secured to prevent general
access to the vehicles. The towing company shall be responsible for the
security of the stored vehicles and indemnify the Township of any liability or
claims of damage as a result of towing and/or storage.
      (5)   The towing company shall be regularly open for business a minimum
of 40 hours per week, Monday through Friday.
   E.   Insurance. Towing companies shall maintain minimum levels of insurance
and provide documentation as indicated herein and name Antrim Township as an
additional party insured.
      (1)   Two million dollars liability limit via primary or umbrella
liability coverage.
      (2)   Coverage shall be with an insurance carrier, approved to do
business in Pennsylvania.
      (3)   Provide copies of certificates of insurance showing garage
liability coverage, including garage keepers coverage on a primary basis.
      (4)   At any time that a towing company receives notification of
insurance cancellation the Township will be notified no less than 60 days prior
to the cancellation.
      (5)   Failure to maintain insurance in accordance with the above will
result in the immediate removal from the towing list. Reinstatement may not
occur without full reapplication and adherence to all regulations of this
Article.
 139-42 GENERAL REGULATIONS, TOWN ROTATION, AND PROHIBITED ACTS.
   A.   General Regulations.
      (1)   The towing company requested shall respond to the tow location
within 20 minutes of the request, unless there are circumstances, such as
adverse road conditions or traffic congestion, that are beyond the towing
company s control that would prohibit them from doing so.
      (2)   Nothing in this section is intended to permit or encourage the
towing company to violate any provision of the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code or to
operate a vehicle in an unsafe manner.
      (3)   Towing companies authorized/designated by the Township shall be
available to tow vehicles 24 hours a day, seven days a week.
      (4)   Towing company owners shall be responsible for the conduct of all
drivers and employees.
   B.   Towing rotation.
      (1)   The Township Administrator shall maintain a list of authorized
towing companies, which may be requested to tow vehicles in the Township on a
rotating basis. The Township Administrator shall determine the number of towing
companies to be included on the list and the priority in which they shall be
dispatched.
      (2)   Rotating basis means the towing company on the top of the list
shall be queued first to tow.
      (3)   If a towing company refuses, is not available, does not answer the
phone or can t meet the required response time, said towing company shall be
replaced by the next towing company designated on the priority list. Any towing
company that refuses a call or is unavailable three times withing a two-month
period shall be placed on review with the Township Administrator with the
possibility of removal from the priority list.
      (4)   This rotation may be waived when in an exceptional emergency,
removal of a vehicle is critical to public safety, as determined by the
Township Administrator or when the owner/operator of a vehicle specifically
requests a towing company who can respond in the required time frame, if
necessary.
   C.   Prohibited acts. It shall be unlawful for any towing company to:
      (1)   Subcontract towing services requested by the Township.
      (2)   Respond, tow or move a vehicle from or within public property
without the consent of the owner, operator, or without being summoned by the
Township.
      (3)   Arrive at the scene of any incident/accident without being
requested to do so by Authorized Persons, and/or the owner/operator of a
vehicle being towed.
      (4)   Remove a vehicle under the authority of this Article or the Vehicle
Code if, at the time of the intended removal, the owner or the person for the
time being in charge of the vehicle is present and expresses a willingness and
intention to remove the vehicle immediately.
 139-43 PAYMENT OF TOWING AND STORAGE CHARGES.
   The payment of towing and storage charges shall not relieve the owner or
driver of any vehicle from liability for any fine or penalty for the violation
of the provision of this chapter for which the vehicle was removed or
impounded.
 139-44 RECLAMATION COSTS.
   In order to reclaim his or her vehicle, the owner shall pay towing and
storage costs, plus a $25 fee, of which $10 shall be transferred to the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation by the garage to which the vehicle
was taken.
 139-45 RECORDS OF VEHICLES REMOVED AND IMPOUNDED.
   The Township of Antrim shall cause a record to be kept of all vehicles
impounded under this Article and shall be able at all reasonable times to
furnish the owners or the agents of the owners of those vehicles with
information as to the place of storage of the vehicle.
 139-46 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
   Any person who shall violate any provision of this Article shall, upon
conviction thereof in a summary proceeding, be sentenced to pay a fine of $100
together with all costs of disposing of the vehicle under provisions of the
Vehicle Code, 75 Pa. C.S.A. § 7301 et seq. (1977), as hereafter amended,
supplemented, modified or reenacted by the General Assembly of Pennsylvania.
 139-47 REPORTS AND DISPOSITION OF UNCLAIMED VEHICLES.
   If after a period of 15 days the vehicle in storage remains unclaimed, a
report shall be filed with PennDOT in accordance with § 7311 of the Vehicle
Code, by the person having legal custody of the vehicle.
ARTICLE V SNOW AND ICE EMERGENCY
[Amended 1-14-2025 by Ord. No. 366]
 139-48 DECLARATION OF SNOW AND ICE EMERGENCY.
   In order to facilitate the movement of traffic and to combat the hazards of
snow and ice on the snow emergency routes named in §
139-50 of this chapter, the Public Works Superintendent and/or the Township
Emergency Management Coordinator, in his or her discretion, may declare a snow
and ice emergency (designated in this chapter as a snow emergency ).
Information on the existence of a snow emergency may be given by the Township
of Antrim through radio, newspaper or other available media, and information on
the termination of the emergency may be given by use of the same media.
 139-49 PARKING PROHIBITED, DRIVING MOTOR VEHICLES RESTRICTED ON SNOW EMERGENCY
ROUTES DURING EMERGENCY.
   After any snow emergency is declared, it shall be unlawful at any time
during the continuance of the emergency for any person:
   A.   To park a motor vehicle or to allow that vehicle to remain parked
anywhere on any snow emergency route designated in §
139-50 of this chapter.
   B.   To drive any motor vehicle on any such snow emergency route, unless
that vehicle is equipped with snow tires or chains.
 139-50 SNOW EMERGENCY ROUTES DESIGNATED.
   The following are designated as snow emergency routes:
 
Street     Location
(Reserved)  
 
ARTICLE VI ROAD ABANDONMENT
[Amended 1-14-2025 by Ord. No. 366]
  139-51 I GRANT SHOOK ROAD.
[Added 9-22-1998 by Ord. No. 256]
   A.   Road abandonment of the old roadbed of Grant Shook Road (T-348).
All that land identified as Total Area of Old Roadbed to be Abandoned through
lands of John T. and Helen I. Shook, 0.120 acres or 5,232.298 sq. ft. and Total
Area of Old Roadbed to be Abandoned through lands of George M. and Mary Lou
Miller, 0.020 acres or 876.458 sq. ft. as shown on the Preliminary-Final Plat
of a Subdivision of Lands of the Board of Supervisors of Antrim Township and
Cedar Hill Cemetery Association and John T. and Helen I. Shook; prepared by
Shelley and Witter Surveyors, dated January 7, 1998, and recorded in Franklin
County Deed Book 288G, Page 726, is hereby vacated.
   B.   Possession and control of the abandoned roadbed shall revert to the
abutting property owners in accordance with the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
   C.   The old roadbed to be abandoned as shown on the aforementioned
preliminary/final plat shall not be rebuilt, maintained or kept clear of snow
by the Board of Supervisors of Antrim Township, and the sole responsibility for
rebuilding, repairing, maintaining and removing snow from said roadbed shall be
with the abutting property owners.
 139-51 II SNYDER ROAD.
[Added 9-22-2015 by Ord. No. 344]
   A.   All of Snyder Road, Township of Antrim at its current location running
from Coldsmith Road (T-430) to Guitner Road (L.R. 28033) as depicted on the
attached Exhibit A , is hereby vacated in accordance with Sections 2304, 2305
and 2311 of the Second Class Township Code of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania,
the Act of May 1, 1993, P.L. 103, Article XXIII, Sections 2304, 2305 and 2311,
as amended, 53 P.S. 67304, 67305 and 67311.
   B.   From and after the effective date hereof, all of Snyder Road shall be
vacated and abandoned and the possession and control of the rights of way for
Snyder Road shall revert to the abutting property owners in accordance with the
laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
   C.   From and after the effective date hereof, Snyder Road shall not be
rebuilt, repaired, maintained or kept clear of snow by the Board of Supervisors
of Antrim Township and the sole responsibility for rebuilding, repairing,
maintaining and removing snow from said road shall be with the abutting
property owners.
ARTICLE VII ENFORCEMENT
[Amended 1-14-2025 by Ord. No. 366]
 139-52 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
   Unless another penalty is expressly provided by the Vehicle Code, or except
as herein specified, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of
this chapter, or any supplement thereto, shall be liable to a penalty of $25,
plus costs of prosecution.
CHAPTER 140 CHAPTER 141: RESERVED
CHAPTER 142: WATER SYSTEM
   Article
   
I.   OPERATING AGREEMENT
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Antrim as
indicated in article histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
Section
   
142-1   Execution of agreement
   
142-2   Completion of purchase
   
142-3   Repealer
   
142-4   When effective
   
142-5   Severability
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers - See
Ch. 110.
Water supply - See
Ch. 143.
Water emergencies - See
Ch. 144.
Water service - See
Ch. A156, Appendix I.
ARTICLE I OPERATING AGREEMENT
[Adopted 11-25-2002 by Ord. No. 278]
 142-1 EXECUTION OF AGREEMENT
   The Antrim Township Board of Supervisors does hereby authorize the execution
of that certain water system operating agreement dated the 25th day of
November, 2002, labeled Exhibit A, attached hereto, and incorporated herein by
reference.
 142-2 COMPLETION OF PURCHASE.
   The Chairman or Vice Chairman and Secretary of the Board of Supervisors of
the Township are hereby authorized and directed to sign the water system
operating agreement dated the 25th day of November, 2002, and any other
documents necessary to complete the purchase of Lincoln Utilities, Inc. by
Authority, including but not limited to loan documents with regards to said
purchase.
 142-3 REPEALER.
   All ordinances and resolutions or parts thereof, insofar as the same are
inconsistent herewith, are hereby repealed.
 142-4 WHEN EFFECTIVE.
   This article shall become effective in accordance with law.
 142-5 SEVERABILITY.
   In the event any provision, section, sentence, clause or part of this
article shall be held to be invalid, such invalidity shall not affect or impair
any remaining provision, section, sentence, clause or part of this article, it
being the intent of this Township that the remainder of the article shall
remain in full force and effect.
CHAPTER 143: WATER SUPPLY
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Antrim 9-12-
2000 by Ord. No. 266. Amendments noted where applicable.]
Section
   
143-1   Definitions
   
143-2   Use of water system required
   
143-3   Connection requirements for proposed subdivisions or land development
   
143-4   Service connections
   
143-5   Rules and regulations governing service connections to public water
system
   
143-6   Costs
   
143-7   Enforcement
   
143-8   When effective
   
143-9   Severability
   
143-10   Declaration of purpose
   
143-11   Repealer
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers - See
Ch. 110.
Streets and sidewalks - See Ch. 122.
Subdivision and land development - See
Ch. 125.
 143-1 DEFINITIONS.
   Unless the context specifically and clearly indicates otherwise, the
meanings of terms and phrases used in this chapter shall be as follows:
AUTHORITY
Greencastle Area Franklin County Water Authority, a municipal authority of the
commonwealth, or any other municipal owner of a water system contracting with
the Township to provide water to Township residents, or any governmental body
operating a Township water system, or Antrim Township Municipal Authority or
any municipal authority operating a water system within the Township.
   [Amended 1-4-2003 by Ord. No. 281]
AUTHORITY S SERVICE LINE
The water service pipe and appurtenances extending from the main, including the
tee or tap in the main, the lateral pipe to a point at or near the property
line, the curb stop or service valve, and the curb box or valve box.
CUSTOMER S SERVICE LINE
That part of the water service pipe extending from the Authority s service line
to the premises, except the water meter.
COMMONWEALTH
The Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
DEVELOPER
Any person required to submit a subdivision or land development plan to the
Township of Antrim.
IMPROVED PROPERTY
Any property within the Township upon which there is erected a principal
building or structure intended for continuous or periodic habitation, occupancy
or use by human beings.
LATERAL
That part of the water system extending from a main to the curbline or, if
there shall be no curbline, to the property line or, if no such lateral shall
be provided, then lateral shall mean that portion of or place in a main which
is provided for connection of any customer service line.
MAIN
Any pipe or conduit constituting a part of the water system used or usable for
water distribution purposes.
OWNER
Any person, custodian, guardian, trustee, caretaker, executor or administrator
vested with ownership, legal or equitable, sole or partial, of any improved
property.
PERSON
Any individual, partnership, company, association, society, trust, corporation,
joint ownership, municipality, municipal authority or other group or entity.
PREMISES
The property, building or other site to which water service is furnished,
including:
   A.   A building under one roof, owned or leased by one person, occupied as
one residence or business;
   B.   Each combination of buildings owned or leased by one person, served by
one service line, and occupied by one family or business;
   C.   Each side of a double unit or each housing unit;
   D.   Each apartment, condominium, manufactured housing, mobile home, office
or suite of offices located in a building having several such apartments,
offices or suites of offices and using in common one or more means of entrance;
or
   E.   Such other situations as the Authority shall deem proper and advisable.
SERVICE CONNECTION
The introduction or alteration of a service line or lines from the Authority
main or lateral to the owner s premises.
SUBDIVIDER
Any person required to submit a subdivision or land development plan to the
Township of Antrim.
TOWNSHIP
Antrim Township, Franklin County, Pennsylvania, a municipal corporation of the
commonwealth, acting by and through its Board of Supervisors or, in appropriate
cases, acting by and through its authorized representatives.
WATER SERVICE
The provision by the Authority of water as a commodity, of readiness to serve
water for any purposes, and of any services related thereto.
WATER SYSTEM
All facilities, as of any particular time, owned and operated by the Authority
for supply, transmission and distribution of water to supply residents of the
Township.
 143-2 USE OF WATER SYSTEM REQUIRED.
   A.   The owner of any improved property, as defined in §
143-1, supra, abutting the water system and whose principal building is within
150 feet of the water system shall connect such improved property with such
main and shall use such water system, in such manner as the Authority may
require, within 90 days after notice to such owner from the Township or the
authority to make such connection; subject, however, to such limitations and
restrictions as shall be established herein or otherwise shall be established
by the Township or the Authority, from time to time.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any owner, lessee or occupier of any improved
property in Antrim Township with a service connection to employ any means of
cross-connecting any other water source to the public water system, including
service lines and house plumbing served by said services.
   C.   Any person, except as provided in Subsection (F) of this section, who
causes or allows any structure on an improved property to connect with, remain
connected with or otherwise use any private well or water system other than the
water system of the Authority shall be deemed and shall be declared to be
maintaining a nuisance, which nuisance the Township may abate in the manner
provided by law and subject to the enforcement provisions of this chapter.
   D.   The owner or owners of improved property required to be connected to
the Authority water system shall permit the Authority s designated inspector
full and complete access to all water system facilities in each building and in
and about all parts of the property for the purposes of inspecting said
facilities.
   E.   The notice by the Township or the Authority to make a connection to a
main, referred to in §
143-2(A) shall consist of a copy of this chapter, including any amendments and/
or supplements at the time in effect, or a summary thereof, and a statement
requiring the connection in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and
specifying that such connection shall be made within 90 days after the date
such notice is given or served. Such notice shall also state that failure to
connect within the 90 days shall result in the Board of Supervisors or their
agents entering upon the property and constructing the connection at the owner
s expense. Such notice may be given or served at any time after the appropriate
main or lateral is in place that can deliver water to the particular improved
property. Such notice shall be given to or served upon the owner by personal
service or by registered mail to his last known address, or by such other means
as shall be permitted by law.
   F.   Industries and farms which have their own supply of water for uses
other than human consumption may continue to use their own water for that
purpose but shall be required to use the water system to provide water for
human consumption.
 143-3 CONNECTION REQUIREMENTS FOR PROPOSED SUBDIVISIONS OR LAND DEVELOPMENT.
   A.   Where a water system is within 500 feet of, or where plans approved by
the Board of Supervisors provide for the installation of such water system
within 500 feet of, a proposed subdivision or land development, the developer
shall provide the subdivision or land development with a complete water main
supply system, together with fire hydrants to serve the subdivision or land
development in accordance with specifications provided by the Authority
providing water to the subdivision or land development to be connected to the
existing or proposed water main supply system. Upon proper cause shown, the
Supervisors, at an open meeting, may waive, modify, alter or suspend the
distance requirements of this subsection.
   B.   Following the construction of the water system, the subdivider shall
provide the Authority and the Township with record drawings (as-built plans),
prepared by an engineer or a surveyor, and bearing his seal, showing the size,
location and length of all lines. Record drawings shall be submitted as prints
and in electronic format compatible with Authority requirements.
   C.   Following completion of the water system by the developer and
inspection and approval by the Authority, the developer shall dedicate same to
the Authority.
 143-4 SERVICE CONNECTIONS.
   A.   No person shall uncover, shall connect with, shall make any opening
into or shall use, shall alter or shall disturb, in any manner, any main,
lateral or any other part of the water system without first obtaining a permit,
in writing, from the Authority.
   B.   Application for a permit required under §
143-4(A) shall be made by the owner of the improved property served or to be
served or by the duly authorized agent of such owner.
   C.   No person shall make or shall cause to be made a connection of any
improved property with a main until such person shall have fulfilled each of
the following conditions:
      (1)   Such person shall have notified the Authority of the desire and
intention to connect such improved property to a main;
      (2)   Such person shall have applied for and shall have obtained a permit
as required by §
143-4(A);
      (3)   Such person shall have given the appropriate representative of the
Authority at least 48 hours notice of the time when such connection will be
made so that the Authority may supervise and inspect or may cause to be
supervised and inspected the work of connection and necessary testing; and
      (4)   If applicable, such person shall have furnished satisfactory
evidence to the appropriate representative of the Authority that any tapping,
connection and/or customer facility fee that may be charged and imposed by the
Authority against the owner of each improved property who connects such
improved property to a main has been paid.
   D.   Except as otherwise provided in this §
143-4(D), each improved property shall be connected separately and
independently through a service connection. Grouping of more than one improved
property on one service connection shall not be permitted, except under special
circumstances and for good cause shown, but then only after special permission
of the Authority, in writing, shall have been secured and only subject to such
rules, regulations and conditions as may be prescribed by the Authority.
   E.   All costs and expenses of construction of a service connection and all
costs and expenses of connection of a service connection to a main shall be
borne by the owner of the improved property to be connected; and such owner
shall indemnify and shall save harmless the Township and the Authority from all
loss or damage that may be occasioned, directly or indirectly, as a result of
construction of a service connection or of connection of a service connection
to a main.
   F.   A service connection shall be connected to a lateral or to a main at
the place designated by the Authority. A smooth, neat joint shall be made and
the connection of a service connection shall be made secure and watertight.
   G.   If the owner of any improved property located within 150 feet of the
water system and abutting upon any street in which there is a main constituting
part of the water system after 90 days notice from the Township, in accordance
with §
143-2(A), shall fail to connect such improved property, as required, the
Township or Authority, may enter upon such improved property and may construct
such connection and may collect from such owner the costs and expenses thereof
in the manner permitted by law. The Township shall be entitled to file a
municipal lien for said construction within six months of the date of the
completion of the construction of said connection, the same to be subject in
all respects to the general law provided for the filing and recovery of
municipal liens. [Amended 1-14-2003 by Ord. No. 281]
 143-5 RULES AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING SERVICE CONNECTIONS TO PUBLIC WATER
SYSTEM.
   A.   No service connection shall be covered until it has been inspected and
approved by the Authority. If any part of a service connection is covered
before so being inspected and approved, it shall be uncovered for inspection at
the cost and expense of the owner of the improved property to be connected.
   B.   Every service connection of any improved property shall be maintained
in a sanitary and safe operating condition by the owner of such improved
property.
   C.   Every excavation for a service connection shall be guarded adequately
with barricades and lights to protect all persons from damage and injury. Any
street, sidewalk or other public property disturbed in the course of
installation of a service connection shall be restored, at the cost and expense
of the owner of such improved property being connected, in a manner
satisfactory to the Authority and the Township.
   D.   If any person shall fail or shall refuse, upon receipt of a notice of
the Township or the Authority, in writing, to remedy any unsatisfactory
conditions with respect to a service connection within 60 days of receipt of
such notice, the Township or the Authority may refuse to permit such person to
be served by the water system until such unsatisfactory condition shall have
been remedied to the satisfaction of the Township and of the Authority.
   E.   The Township and Authority reserve the right to adopt, by resolution,
from time to time, additional rules and regulations as it shall deem necessary
and proper relating to connections with the water system, which additional
rules and regulations, to the extent appropriate, and shall be construed as
part of this chapter.
 143-6 COSTS.
   A.   The Board of Supervisors and the Authority may impose and charge
capital charges, including connection fees, customer facilities fees and
tapping fees, to property owners who desire to or are required to connect to
the water system, as provided by Pennsylvania Acts 203 and 209 of 1990. The
amount, payment and collection of said capital charges shall be determined by
future resolutions passed by the Township or the Authority.
   B.   Whenever a water system or any part or extension thereof owned by the
Township or Authority has been constructed by the Township or Authority at the
expense of a private person or corporation or has been constructed by a private
person or corporation under the supervision of the Township or Authority at the
expense of the private person or corporation, the Township and the Authority
shall have the right to assess capital charges, including a reimbursement
component, and refund said reimbursement component to the person or corporation
who has paid for the construction of said water system or any part or extension
thereof. The amount of capital charges and reimbursement component shall be
determined by resolutions of the Township and the Authority.
   C.   All or part of the costs of construction of any water system
constructed may be charged upon the properties accommodated or benefitted
thereby pursuant to § 2601 et seq. of the Second Class Township Code (53 P.S.
67601 et seq.).
   D.   Water rentals for the water provided may be charged as provided by law.
 143-7 ENFORCEMENT.
   A.   This chapter shall be enforced by an action brought before a District
Justice in the same manner provided for summary offenses under the Pennsylvania
Rules of Criminal Procedure. Any person who shall violate this chapter shall be
liable, upon summary conviction for a first offense and upon summary conviction
for each subsequent offense, to a fine of not more than $1,000 or by
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days, together with costs of
prosecution in each case. Each day that a violation shall continue shall be
deemed and shall be taken to be a separate offense and shall be punishable as
such. Each section of this chapter shall also constitute a separate offense.
   B.   Fines and costs imposed under the enforcement provisions of this
chapter shall be enforceable and recoverable in the manner at the time provided
by applicable law and shall be payable to the Township.
   C.   The enforcement provisions in this section shall be in addition to
other enforcement provisions listed in this chapter and available by law,
including but not limited to the right to file an action in equity requiring
compliance with this chapter.
 143-8 WHEN EFFECTIVE.
   This chapter shall become effective as provided by law.
 143-9 SEVERABILITY.
   In the event any provision, section, sentence, clause or part of this
chapter shall be held to be invalid, such invalidity shall not affect or impair
any remaining provision, section, sentence, clause or part of this chapter, it
being the intent of the Township that such remainder shall be and shall remain
in full force and effect.
 143-10 DECLARATION OF PURPOSE.
   It is declared that enactment of this chapter is necessary for the
protection, benefit and preservation of the health, safety and welfare of
inhabitants of the Township.
 143-11 REPEALER.
   All ordinances or parts of ordinances and all resolutions or parts of
resolutions that are inconsistent with this chapter shall be and the same
expressly are repealed.
CHAPTER 144: WATER EMERGENCIES
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Antrim 1-14-
2003 by Ord. No. 280. Amendments noted where applicable.]
Section
   
144-1   Definitions
   
144-2   Purpose
   
144-3   Scope
   
144-4   Prohibition of nonessential uses
   
144-5   Pools used as emergency water storage reservoirs
   
144-6   Declaration of water supply emergency
   
144-7   Violations and penalties; enforcement
   
144-8   Effect of state restrictions
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers - See
Ch. 110.
Water supply - See
Ch. 143.
 144-1 DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated.
ARBORETUM
A place where trees, shrubs and plants are cultivated for scientific and
educational purposes.
BRACKISH WATER
Water containing more than 1,000 parts per million of dissolved salts.
EXCEPTION APPROVAL
Refers to written approval by the Township Administrator or his or her
designee.
FRESH WATER
Water withdrawn from a surface water or groundwater source, which has not been
reclaimed and which is not brackish. Fresh water does not include water
collected directly from precipitation in rain barrels or cisterns.
RECLAIMED WATER
Water from a nonpotable source, water from a surface water or groundwater
source which the Department of Environmental Protection determines is not used
for public or private drinking water supply and is not capable of being
rendered suitable for drinking water supply by standard and economically
feasible methods of treatment.
SUSQUEHANNA RIVER BASIN
The area of drainage into the Susquehanna River and its tributaries, including
Delaware Bay.
TOWNSHIP
The Township of Antrim, Franklin County, Pennsylvania, a municipal corporation
and Township of the Second Class.
TOWNSHIP OFFICIAL
The Township Administrator or his or her designee.
WASTEWATER
Water which has been previously used for industrial, municipal, domestic or
other purpose, and has not been returned to a surface water or groundwater
source subsequent to such use.
WATER
Any type of water, including fresh water, brackish water, wastewater, reclaimed
wastewater, lake water and/or stream water.
WATER SUPPLY EMERGENCY
A declaration by the Township Administrator that water levels in any essential
reserve facilities do not exceed 60% of capacity and that the restrictions
found in these regulations shall be implemented.
 144-2 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of these regulations is to prohibit nonessential water uses in
the Township in response to a water supply emergency within the boundaries of
the Township in order to conserve water, to balance demand with limited
available supplies and to assure that sufficient water is available to serve
essential health, safety and economic needs.
 144-3 SCOPE.
   These regulations shall apply to all water uses within the boundaries of the
Township regardless of the source of water and regardless of the economic
impact of their implementation.
 144-4 PROHIBITION OF NONESSENTIAL USES.
   The following water uses are declared nonessential and are prohibited within
the boundaries of the Township upon a declaration of a water supply emergency:
   A.   The use of any water for watering of lawns, except:
      (1)   Water, other than fresh water, supplied at the minimum rate
necessary to maintain grass tennis courts.
      (2)   Water used at the minimum rate necessary to establish and maintain
newly seeded and sodded grass areas situated on residential lots and grass
areas not exceeding 10,000 square feet situated on nonresidential lots when
applied between the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. to 10:00
p.m., provided that water is applied to the newly seeded or sodded areas by
means of a bucket, a can or hand-held hose equipped with an automatic-shutoff
nozzle.
      (3)   Water used, at the minimum rate necessary to establish and maintain
newly seeded or sodded grass areas exceeding 10,000 square feet situated on
nonresidential lots when applied between the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 10 a.m. and
7:00 p.m. to 10:00 p.m., provided that water is applied by any means designed
and operated to assure effective conservation of the water approved by the
appropriate Township official.
      (4)   One automatic lawn sprinkler per property, moved as required by the
property owner, and operated between the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m. and
7:00 p.m. to 10:00 p.m., shall be permitted. Use of soaker hoses is strictly
prohibited.
      (5)   All sprinkling operations shall be terminated when water from such
operations can be observed running in or along the street or roadway.
   B.   The use of fresh water for irrigation and watering of outdoor gardens,
landscaped areas, trees, shrubs or other outdoor plants, except:
      (1)   Fresh water used for uses permitted pursuant to Subsection (A)(2)
through (4), above.
      (2)   Fresh water used for agricultural irrigation for the production of
food and fiber or the maintenance of livestock and poultry, or the production
of nursery stock.
      (3)   Fresh water applied by means of hand-held containers (no hoses) for
irrigation of domestic vegetable and fruit gardens, to the extent that
alternate sources of water, other than fresh water, adequate to supply needs
are not reasonably available.
      (4)   Fresh water applied by means of a hand-held container or hand-held
hose equipped with an automatic-shutoff nozzle at the minimum rate necessary to
establish and maintain newly planted gardens, trees, shrubs or other newly
planted outdoor plants, but in all cases sources of water other than fresh
water should be used when and where available.
      (5)   Fresh water used by commercial nurseries at the minimum rate
necessary to maintain stock, only to the extent that sources of water other
than fresh water adequate to supply needs are not reasonably available.
      (6)   Fresh water used by arboretums and public gardens at the minimum
rate necessary to preserve specimens to the extent that sources of water other
than fresh water adequate to supply needs are not reasonably available.
      (7)   Fresh water used at the minimum rate necessary to implement
revegetation following earthmoving, where revegetation is required under an
approved erosion sedimentation control plan adopted under state law or
regulation, to the extent that sources of water other than fresh water adequate
to supply needs are not reasonably available. Revegetation shall comply with
all applicable best conservation management practices for revegetation
prescribed by the Township or by the County Conservation District.
   C.   The use of any water for washing paved surfaces such as streets, roads,
sidewalks, driveways, garages, parking areas, tennis courts and patios, except:
      (1)   Water used for prewashing in preparation of asphalt street or
driveway recoating and sealing.
      (2)   Water used at the minimum rate necessary for the maintenance of
tennis courts composed of clay or similar materials by means of a hand-held
hose equipped with an automatic shutoff nozzle.
   D.   The use of any water for ornamental purposes including fountains,
artificial waterfalls and reflecting pools.
   E.   The use of any water for washing or cleaning of mobile equipment
including, but not limited to, automobiles, trucks, trailers and boats except:
      (1)   Water used by commercial car washes equipped with facilities which
recycle at least 70% of their water.
      (2)   Water used for cleaning of construction, emergency, public
transportation or government vehicles when necessary to preserve the proper
functioning of the vehicle,
   F.   The use of water from a fire hydrant (including sprinkler caps) by a
municipality, contractor or any other person for any purpose, except:
      (1)   Fire fighting.
      (2)   Health protection purposes specifically approved by the Township
Administrator or his or her designee:
   G.   The use of fire hydrants by fire companies for testing fire apparatus
and for drills except as deemed necessary in the interest of public safety and
specifically approved by the Township Administrator or his or her designee.
   H.   The use of water for flushing sewers or hydrants except as specifically
found necessary and approved by the Township Administrator or his or her
designee in the interest of public health or safety.
   I.   The use of water for flushing and/or testing fixed fire protection
systems, except as specifically found necessary and approved by the Township
Administrator or his or her designee.
   J.   The use of any water to refill air-conditioning cooling towers after
draining, except:
      (1)   Refilling for startup at the beginning of the cooling season.
      (2)   Makeup of water during the cooling season.
      (3)   Refilling specifically approved by the Township Administrator or
his or her designee, provided that the system has been drained for health
protection or repair purposes,
   K.   The use of water to fill swimming pools, except:
      (1)   The use of water to fill public swimming pools and residential
swimming pools serving 25 or more dwelling units, provided that such pools have
filtration equipment allowing for continued use and recycling of the water over
the swimming season.
      (2)   The use of water to fill swimming pools operated by health-care
facilities used in patient care and rehabilitation.
      (3)   Water may be used to fill pools registered as emergency water
storage reservoirs.
 144-5 POOLS USED AS EMERGENCY WATER STORAGE RESERVOIRS.
   A.   A new or existing pool may be designated as an emergency water storage
reservoir upon registration with both the local fire company and the Township.
Registrations shall be filed and recorded on a form approved by the
Pennsylvania Emergency Management Agency.
   B.   After registration as an emergency water storage reservoir, the pool
may be filled only from such sources and at such times as specifically approved
in writing by the Department of Environmental Protection and, if applicable,
the operator of the public water supply system from which the water is
withdrawn.
   C.   The owner of any pool used as an emergency water storage reservoir
shall keep a certified manifest or certified record of all water used to fill
the pool. The manifest or record shall accurately record the quantity of water
used, the source of the water and the time when the water was withdrawn, and
shall contain the certification and signature of the owner of the pool and of
the person responsible for the source of water or for the transport and
provision of the water. The owner of the pool shall, on request, provide the
manifest or record to any authorized agent or officer of any public water
supply system, fire company, local government or state agency.
   D.   All pools used as emergency water storage reservoirs shall have
filtration equipment allowing for continued use and recycling of the water over
the swimming season.
   E.   In order to reduce evaporation and water losses to a minimum, all pools
designated as emergency water storage reservoirs shall be covered whenever not
in use for swimming, and all diving boards shall be removed and not used during
the period of the drought emergency.
   F.   Water stored in any emergency water storage reservoir shall be made
available on demand to any fire company or public water-supply system to
provide water for health and safety needs.
 144-6 DECLARATION OF WATER SUPPLY EMERGENCY.
   In order to maintain a minimum of 60% of capacity in Township reserve
facilities, to minimize the effect of any other water emergency, to assure the
conservation of water, and to assure that sufficient water is available to
serve essential health, safety and economic needs, the Township Administrator
or his or her designee, at his or her discretion, may declare a water supply
emergency whenever such a declaration will meet or assist in meeting the public
purposes recited in this section.
 144-7 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES; ENFORCEMENT.
   Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine not to
exceed $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to
imprisonment for a term not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation of
this chapter continues shall constitute a separate offense.
 144-8 EFFECT OF STATE RESTRICTIONS.
   In the event a drought emergency and/or water shortage emergency is declared
by the Governor of Pennsylvania or his or her designee in the Susquehanna River
Basin portion of Pennsylvania, all restrictions, penalties and enforcement
imposed by said declaration shall supersede the restrictions referred to in
this chapter in the event restrictions, penalties and enforcement are more
stringent than those imposed by this chapter.
CHAPTER 145 CHAPTER 149: RESERVED
CHAPTER 150: ZONING
   Article
      
I.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
II.   TERMINOLOGY
      
III.   ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS
      
IV.   AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT (A)
      
V.   LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (R-1)
      
VI.   MEDIUM DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (R-2)
      
VII.   COMMUNITY COMMERCIAL DISTRICT (CC)
      
VIII.   HIGHWAY COMMERCIAL DISTRICT (HC)
      
IX.   INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT (I)
      
X.   FLOOD HAZARD DISTRICT
      
XI.   SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS
      
XII.   NONCONFORMING USES AND BUILDINGS
      
XIII.   ZONING HEARING BOARD
      
XIV.   AMENDMENTS
      
XV.   ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Antrim 11-25-
2014 by Ord. No. 338. Amendments noted where applicable.]
Section
Article I: General Provisions
   
150-1   Objectives
   
150-2   Interpretation; conflicts with other provisions
Article II: Terminology
   
150-3   Word usage
   
150-4   Definitions
Article III: Establishment of Districts
   
150-5   List of districts
   
150-6   Zoning Map
   
150-7   District boundaries
   
150-8   General district regulations
Article IV: Agricultural District (A)
   
150-9   Purpose
   
150-10   Permitted uses
   
150-11   Conditional uses
   
150-12   Minimum area regulations for the Agricultural (A) District
Article V: Low Density Residential District (R-1)
   
150-13   Purpose
   
150-14   Permitted uses
   
150-15   Conditional uses
   
150-16   Minimum area regulations for the Low Density District (R-1)
Article VI: Medium Density Residential District (R-2)
   
150-17   Purpose
   
150-18   Permitted uses
   
150-19   Conditional uses
   
150-20   Minimum Area Regulations
Article VII: Community Commercial District (CC)
   
150-21   Purpose
   
150-22   Permitted uses
   
150-23   Conditional uses
   
150-24   Minimum area regulations for the Community Commercial District (CC)
Article VIII: Highway Commercial District (HC)
   
150-25   Purpose
   
150-26   Permitted uses
   
150-27   Highway Commercial conditional uses
   
150-28   Minimum area regulations for Highway Commercial District (HC)
Article IX: Industrial District (I)
   
150-29   Purpose
   
150-30   Permitted uses
   
150-31   Conditional uses
   
150-32   Minimum area regulations for the Industrial District (I)
Article X: Flood Hazard District
   
150-33   Statutory Authorization
   
150-34   Purpose
   
150-35   Administration
   
150-36   Establishment of Flood Hazard District boundaries
   
150-37   Applicability of District regulations
   
150-38   Determination of the one-hundred-year-flood elevation
   
150-39   Alterations and improvements to watercourses
   
150-40   Changes and disputes in identification of area
   
150-41   Prohibited uses
   
150-42   Application procedures and requirements
   
150-43   Required permits
   
150-44   General regulations
   
150-45   Design and construction standards
   
150-46   Special requirements for mobile homes
   
150-47   Special Requirements for Recreational Vehicles
   
150-48   Existing structures in identified floodplain areas
   
150-49   Variances
   
150-50   Appeals from decision of Zoning Officer
   
150-51   Municipal liability
   
150-52   Warning and Disclaimer of Liability
Article XI: Supplementary Regulations
   
150-53   Exemptions
   
150-54   Buildings Housing Animals
   
150-55   Accessory building regulations
   
150-56   Accessory Dwelling Units (ADUs)
   
150-57   Height requirements
   
150-58   Yard and lot regulations
   
150-59   Private outdoor swimming pools
   
150-60   Storage of recreational vehicles, camping trailers, boats and
dismantled or non-operable vehicles
   
150-61   Rural enterprise
   
150-62   Customary home occupations and No-impact Home-based Business
   
150-63   Homeowners associations
   
150-64   Signs
   
150-65   Temporary mobile home permit
Article XII: Nonconforming Uses and Buildings
   
150-66   Definitions and use provisions
   
150-67   Expansion and/or change of nonconforming lots, uses, or structures
   
150-68   Discontinuance
   
150-69   Repairs and maintenance
   
150-70   Registration of nonconforming use
   
150-71   Mineral extraction
Article XIII: Zoning Hearing Board
   
150-72   Creation; membership regulations
   
150-73   Hearings
   
150-74   Jurisdiction
   
150-75   Variance
   
150-76   Parties appellant before the Board
   
150-77   Time limitations
   
150-78   Stay of proceedings
   
150-79   Conditional uses
Article XIV: Amendments
   
150-80   Enactment of Zoning Ordinance amendments
   
150-81   Procedure for Township curative amendments
   
150-82   Procedure for landowner curative amendments
Article XV: Administration and Enforcement
   
150-83   Appointment and powers of Zoning Officer
   
150-84   Permits
   
150-85   Fees
   
150-86   Enforcement notice
   
150-87   Causes of action
   
150-88   Violations and penalties
ARTICLE I GENERAL PROVISIONS
 150-1 OBJECTIVES.
   There is hereby established a Comprehensive Zoning Plan for the Township,
which plan is set forth in the text and map that constitutes this chapter. Said
plan is adopted in the interest of protecting and promoting the public health,
safety, morals and general welfare, and shall be deemed to include the
following related and specific community development objectives, among others
as may be stated in the Antrim Township Comprehensive Plan:
   A.   To guide and regulate the orderly growth, development and redevelopment
of the Township, in accordance with a Comprehensive Plan of long-term
objectives, principles and standing deemed beneficial to the interest and
welfare of the people.
   B.   To protect the establishment, character, and the social and economical
well-being of both private and public property.
   C.   To promote, in the public interest, the utilization of land for the
purposes for which it is most appropriate, and to provide maximum protection of
residential areas.
   D.   To encourage economic development in appropriate areas.
   E.   To encourage agricultural operations in appropriate areas.
   F.   To secure safety from floods, water pollution, and other dangers, and
to provide adequate light, air, and convenience of access.
   G.   To encourage and facilitate the provision of adequate and efficient
public facilities, service, and utilities.
   H.   To lessen and, where possible, to prevent traffic congestion on public
streets and highways so as to promote efficient and safe circulation of
vehicles and pedestrians.
   I.   To encourage historic preservation.
   J.   To conserve the value of buildings and to enhance the value of land
throughout the Township.
   K.   To preserve rural qualities of open lands.
 150-2 INTERPRETATION; CONFLICTS WITH OTHER PROVISIONS.
   In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter
shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the
public health, safety, comfort, convenience, and general welfare. Except where
specifically provided to the contrary, it is not intended by this chapter to
repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way to impair or interfere with any rules,
regulations or permits previously adopted or issued or which shall be adopted
or issued pursuant to law relating to the use of buildings, structures, shelter
or premises; nor is it intended by this chapter, to interfere with or abrogate
or annul any easements, covenants or other agreements between parties;
provided, however, that where this chapter imposes a greater restriction upon
the use of a building or premises, or requires larger restrictions upon the use
of a building or premises, or requires larger spaces than that imposed or
required by any other statute, ordinance, rule, regulation or permit, or by any
easement or agreement, the provisions of this chapter shall control.
ARTICLE II TERMINOLOGY
 150-3 WORD USAGE.
   Words used in the present tense include the future tense. The singular
includes the plural. The word person includes an individual, a corporation, a
partnership and incorporated association or any other similar entity. The word
lot includes the words plot or parcel. The term shall is always mandatory. The
word used or occupied as applied to any land or building shall be construed to
include the words intended, arranged or designed to be used or occupied.
 150-4 DEFINITIONS.
ACCESSORY BUILDING or STRUCTURE
A building subordinate to and detached from the main building and located on
the same lot with such principal use or structure.
ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT
A dwelling either attached or detached from the principal dwelling or accessory
structure providing a room or rooms used for living and sleeping purposes and
having a kitchen and bathroom(s) arranged for occupancy by one family.
ACCESSORY USE
A use customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the main
building and located on the same lot with such principal use or main building.
ADULT MATERIALS
Adult materials shall include, but not be limited to, any literature, books,
magazines, pamphlets, newspapers, papers, comic books, drawings, articles,
computer or other images, motion pictures, mechanical devices, instruments,
clothing or any other writings, materials or accessories that are distinguished
or characterized by their emphasis on matter-depicted, described or related to
specified sexual acts or specified anatomical areas as defined herein, or an
establishment with a segment or section exclusively devoted to the sale, lease,
gift, trade, display of such materials or of any drug paraphernalia.
ADULT-ORIENTED BUSINESS
Use of a building, structure or property, or part thereof, for a business that
has adult materials in a section or segment devoted to such materials or as
substantial or significant portion of its stock-in-trade for the purposes of
sale, lease, trade, gift or display of such adult materials. For the purposes
of this chapter, adult-oriented businesses shall also mean and include any
massage parlor, nightclub, bar, tavern, restaurant, eating and drinking
establishment, arcade, theater, motel, hotel, or any other establishment that
regularly features, for economic gain or other consideration, entertainment in
any form that is characterized by nudity or the depiction or display of sexual
activities.
AGRICULTURALLY RELATED OPERATION
A principal use that may, or may not, be located upon a farm, at which goods
and services are provided in support of local farming operations. Sawmills and
similar uses shall be considered agriculturally related.
AGRICULTURE
The raising of crops, horticulture, gardening, silviculture, and animal
husbandry.
ALLEYS
A thoroughfare other than a side street which affords only a secondary means of
access to abutting property and not intended for general traffic circulation.
ALTERATIONS
As applied to a building or structure, a change or rearrangement in the
structural parts or in the existing facilities, or an enlargement, whether by
extending on a side or by increasing height, or the moving from one location or
position to another.
ALTERATIONS, STRUCTURAL
Any change in the supporting members of a building, such as bearing walls,
columns, beams or girders.
AMUSEMENT BUSINESS
An amusement enterprise offering entertainment, recreation, or games of skill
to the general public for a fee or charge.
ANIMAL HOSPITAL
A building used for the treatment, housing or boarding of animals by a licensed
veterinarian.
APARTMENT
A dwelling unit within a multiple dwelling. This classification includes
apartment houses, apartment hotels, bachelor apartments, studio apartments and
kitchenette apartments.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT
Every application, whether preliminary, tentative or final, required to be
filed and approved prior to start of construction or development, including but
not limited to an application for a building permit, for the approval of a
subdivision plat or plan or for the approval of a development plan.
APPROVED STREET TREE LIST
A list of trees approved initially by resolution of the Antrim Township Board
of Supervisors and may be modified by resolution of the Board.
ARCHEOLOGICAL PROPERTY
A property that has any artifacts, remains, objects or any other evidence of
historic or anthropological value located on the property, whether found above
or below the surface of the earth.
AREA, BUILDING
The total of areas taken on a horizontal plane at the main grade level of the
principal building and all accessory buildings, exclusive of uncovered porches,
terraces and steps.
BASE FLOOD
A flood that has a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given
year (also called the 100 year flood ).
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE)
The elevation shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for Zones AE, AH,
A1-30 that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that
has a 1-percent or greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given
year.
BASEMENT
[Amended 11-10-2015 by Ord. No. 345]
   A.   The floor of a building partly or entirely below ground level with a
minimum height of six feet eight inches (6 -8 ).
   B.   (definition only applies to the Flood Hazard regulations in
Article X) any area of the building having its floor below ground level on all
sides.
BED-AND-BREAKFAST
An owner-occupied single-family detached dwelling where not more than six
bedrooms are rented to overnight guests on a daily basis for periods not
exceeding one week.
BLOCK
An area bounded by streets.
BOARD
Any body granted jurisdiction under a land use ordinance or under this chapter
to render final adjudications.
BOARDING HOUSE
A building, other than a hotel or motel, where, for compensation and
arrangement, meals or lodging and meals are provided for five or more persons
but not exceeding 10 persons.
BUFFER ZONE
A yard covered with vegetation and intended to provide an area of separation
between different districts or uses.
BUILDING
   A.   Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls and intended
for the shelter, housing or enclosure of persons, animals or chattels, and,
including covered porches or bay windows and chimneys.
   B.   A combination of materials to form a structure having walls and a roof.
Included shall be all mobile homes and trailers to be used for human habitation
BUILDING, HEIGHT OF
The vertical distance measured from the lowest door threshold to the highest
point of the roof.
BUSINESS SERVICE
The act of conducting business focused on providing a service to others such as
banks, credit unions, loan companies, and other financial institutions, real
estate and insurance agencies, utility offices, government, business and
professional offices.
CAMPING GROUND
A parcel of land used by campers for seasonal, recreational or other temporary
living purposes, in buildings of a movable, temporary or seasonal nature.
CAMPING TRAILER
A portable dwelling not designed for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
CARPORT
A covered space, open on at least two sides, for the storage of one or more
vehicles.
CENTRALIZED WATER SYSTEM
Public water or a single well servicing two or more units.
COMMERCIAL RECREATION
Commercial establishment engaged in providing indoor and/or outdoor amusement.
The activities may include, but are not limited to, sports clubs, amusement
centers, batting cages, miniature golf, go-kart tracks, physical fitness
centers, skateboard centers and racquetball facilities.
COMMON OPEN SPACE
A parcel or parcels of land or an area of water, or a combination of land and
water, within a development site and designed and intended for the use or
enjoyment of residents of a development, not including streets, off-street
parking areas, and areas set aside for public facilities.
CONSERVATION EASEMENT
An area of land or water designated as being protected from development in
perpetuity.
CONSERVATION EASEMENT AGREEMENT
A legally drafted and recorded agreement between a landowner and the Township,
in which the owner agrees to place certain restrictions over all or portions of
his/her land in perpetuity to retain it in a predominantly natural, scenic,
agricultural or other open space condition. Except for the specific
restrictions contained in the easement document, the owner retains all other
rights in the property. The easement stays with the land and is therefore
legally binding on present and future owners.
CONSERVATION PRACTICES
The preservation of primary conservation areas and buildings or lands of
historical significance.
CONSTRUCTION
The construction, reconstruction, renovation, repair, extension, expansion,
alteration or relocation of a building or structure, including the placement of
mobile homes.
CONSUMER FIREWORKS
Includes combustible or explosive composition or any substances intended to
produce visible and/or audible effects by combustion and which is suitable for
use by the public that complies with the construction, performance, composition
and labeling requirements promulgated by the Consumer Products Safety
Commission in 16 CFR (relating to commercial practices) or any successor
regulation and which complies with the provisions for consumer fireworks as
defined in the American Pyrotechnics Association (APA) Standard (87-1), or any
successor standard. The term does not include such devices as ground and
handheld sparkling devices, novelties and toy caps in APA Standard 87-1, the
sale, possession and use of which shall be permitted at all times throughout
this Township.
CUSTOMARY HOME OCCUPATION
Commonly permitted or accepted business operating from a residential property
as a secondary use that does not negatively impact the surrounding area. The
exterior appearance of the structure or premises is constructed and maintained
as a residential structure.
DECISION
Final adjudication of a board or other body granted jurisdiction under any land
use ordinance or this chapter to do so, either by reason of the grant of
exclusive jurisdiction or by reason of appeals from determinations. All
decisions shall be appealable to the Court of Common Pleas of the county and
judicial district wherein the Township lies.
DETERMINATION
Final action by an officer, body or agency charged with the administration of
any land use ordinance or applications thereunder, except the following:
   A.   The Board of Supervisors.
   B.   The Zoning Hearing Board.
   C.   The Planning Commission, only if and to the extent the Planning
Commission is charged with the final decision on preliminary or final plans
under the subdivision and land development or planned residential development
ordinances. Determinations shall be appealable only to the boards designated as
having jurisdiction for such appeal.
DEVELOPER
Any landowner, agent of such landowner or tenant with permission of such
landowner, who makes or causes to be made a subdivision of land or land
development.
DEVELOPMENT
   A.   The disturbance of 5,000 sq. ft. or more of land resulting in any man-
made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to
buildings or other structures, the placement of mobile homes, streets and other
paving, utilities, filling, grading, excavation, mining, dredging or drilling
operation, changes in the contour of the land and removal or destruction of
topsoil, trees or other vegetative cover of the land.
   B.   (definition only applies to the Flood Hazard regulations in
Article X) any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including
but not limited to the construction, reconstruction, renovation, repair,
expansion, or alteration of buildings or other structures; the placement of
manufactured homes; streets, and other paving; utilities; filling, grading and
excavation; mining; dredging; drilling operations; storage of equipment or
materials; and the subdivision of land.
DEVELOPMENT PLAN
The provisions for development, including a planned residential development, a
plat of subdivision, all covenants relating to use, location and bulk of
buildings and other structures, intensity of use and density of development,
streets, ways and parking facilities, common open space and public facilities.
The phrase provisions of development plan when used in this chapter shall mean
the written and graphic materials referred to in this definition.
DISMANTLED AND NON-OPERABLE VEHICLE
A vehicle which does not display the current Pennsylvania State Inspection
Certification or is manifestly incapable of being locomotive in its existing
condition.
DISPLAY FIREWORKS
Large fireworks designed primarily to produce visible or audible effects by
combustion, deflagration, or detonation. This term includes, but is not limited
to, salutes containing more than two grains (130 milligrams) of explosive
materials, aerial shells containing more than 40 grams of pyrotechnic
compositions, and other display pieces which exceed the limits of explosive
materials for classification as consumer fireworks. Display fireworks are
classified as fireworks UN0333, UN0334 or UN0335 by the U.S. Department of
Transportation at 49 CFR 172.101. This term also includes fused set pieces
containing components which together exceed 50 milligrams of salute powder.
DRIVEWAY
A surface, other than a street, which provides vehicular access from a street
to a lot.
DWELLING
A building or structure designed for living quarters for one or more families,
including homes which are supported either by a foundation or by blocks or
jacks or are otherwise permanently attached to the land, but not including
hotels, rooming houses or other accommodations used for transient occupancy.
DWELLING UNITS
One or more rooms used for living and sleeping purposes and having a kitchen
with fixed cooking facilities arranged for occupancy by one family or a single
person.
DWELLING, MULTIFAMILY
A building used by more than one family living independently of each other and
doing their own cooking, including apartment houses, or condominiums.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY, ATTACHED (TOWNHOUSE)
A dwelling used by one family having two party walls in common with other
buildings (such as row house or townhouses) except for end units.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY, DETACHED (HOUSE)
A dwelling used by one family, having only one dwelling unit and having two
side yards.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY, SEMIDETACHED (DOUBLE DUPLEX)
A dwelling used by one family, having one side yard and one party wall in
common with another dwelling unit
EASEMENT, UTILITY
A right-of-way granted for limited use of land for public or quasipublic
purpose.
ESSENTIAL SERVICES
The erection, construction, alteration or maintenance, by public utilities or
municipal or other governmental agencies or private corporations under contract
to a municipality, of gas, electrical, telephone, steam or water transmission
or distribution systems, and sewer and solid waste disposal systems, including
buildings, enclosures, wells, pumping stations, poles, mains, drains, sewers,
pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic light
signals, hydrants, sanitary landfills, incinerator waste disposal areas, and
other similar equipment and accessories and services in connection therewith,
reasonably necessary for the furnishing of adequate service by such public
utilities or municipal or other governmental agencies or private corporations
under contract to a municipality, including firehouses of fire companies and
emergency services under agreement with the municipality or for the public
health or safety or general welfare.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME OR PARK OR SUBDIVISION
A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be
affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain
management regulations adopted by a community.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION
The preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including
the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final
site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
FAMILY
One or more persons who live in one dwelling unit and maintain a common
household. A family may consist of a single person or of two or more persons,
whether or not related by blood, marriage or adoption. It may also include
domestic servants and gratuitous guests, but not occupants of a club, fraternal
lodging or boarding houses.
FEMA
The Federal Emergency Management Agency, successor to the United States
Department of Housing and Urban Development, Federal Insurance Administration.
FIREWORKS
Includes either consumer or display fireworks.
FLOOD
A general, but temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of
normally dry land areas from the overflow of streams, rivers or other waters of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
FLOOD HAZARD AREA
The one-hundred-year floodplain and that maximum area of land that is likely to
be flooded by a one-hundred-year flood, as shown on the floodplain maps
provided by FEMA.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP
The official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has
delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones
applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY
The official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency that
includes flood profiles, the Flood Insurance Rate Map, the Flood Boundary and
Floodway Map, and the water surface elevation of the base flood.
FLOODPLAIN AREA
A relatively flat or low land area which is subject to partial or complete
inundation from an adjoining or nearby stream, river or watercourse; and/or any
area subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation of surface waters from any
source.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
The operation of a program or activities which may consist of both corrective
and preventative measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited
to such things as emergency preparedness for floods, flood control works and
floodplain management regulations.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS
This chapter, subdivision and land development regulations, building codes,
health regulations, special purpose ordinances, and other applications of the
police power. The term describes such state or local regulations in any
combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage
prevention and reduction.
FLOOD PROOFING
Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes or
adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate
or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their
contents.
FLOODWAY
The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that
must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively
increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot.
FREEBOARD
A margin of safety, expressed in feet above the one-hundred-year-flood
elevation.
GOVERNING BODY
The Board of Supervisors of Antrim Township, Franklin County, Pennsylvania.
GREEN DESIGNS
Preserving primary conservation areas and incorporating green space through
landscaping and courtyards to generate an aesthetic and environmentally
conscious atmosphere.
GREEN SPACE
An area growing plants of any type, which include but are not limited to grass,
trees, flowers, etc.
GROSS RESIDENTIAL DENSITY
The number of dwelling units per acre computed by dividing the total site area,
excluding public rights-of-way, into the total number of proposed dwelling
units.
GROUND FLOOR
The floor of a building nearest the mean grade of the front of the building.
HEALTH CLUBS, SPAS AND SIMILAR ESTABLISHMENTS
Anyplace, located either indoors or outdoors, engaged in any activities, the
predominant purpose of which is exercise, fitness, health maintenance,
improvement or rehabilitation, health or nutrition education or weight control.
HEAVY MANUFACTURING
The use of raw materials to fabricate an end product.
HISTORICAL PROPERTY
A building, structure, object, district, place, site or area significant in the
history, architecture, maritime heritage or archaeology of the Township of
Antrim, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or the United States of America.
HISTORICALLY SIGNIFICANT SITE OR STRUCTURE
   A.   Any site or structure in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Department of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;
   B.   Certified or preliminary determination by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as
a registered historic district;
   C.   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary
of the Interior; or
   D.   Any other historic site or structure that is eligible for inclusion in
a federal, state or local registry of historic sites or structures.
   E.   Any historic site or structure that the Township deems necessary for
preservation.
IMPERVIOUS AREA
A surface that prevents the percolation into the ground (examples include but
are not limited to stone/gravel materials, pavement, concrete, buildings,
etc.).
LAND DEVELOPMENT
Any of the following activities:
   A.   The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts or
parcels of land for any purpose involving:
      (1)   A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings,
whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single nonresidential building
on a lot or lots regardless of the number of occupants or tenure.
      (2)   The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially or
cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or prospective occupants by
means of or for the purpose of streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums,
building groups or other features.
   B.   A subdivision of land.
   C.   Development in accordance with this chapter and the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, Act of 1968 and as reenacted and amended.
   D.   Paving for commercial or industrial use.
   E.   Paving of more than 12,000 square feet for residential use. Paving over
concrete or bituminous surfaces which are already existing shall be excluded
from Subsections (C) and (D) above and this Subsection (E).
   F.   Any alteration of the existing topography on a single nonresidential
lot, tract or parcel of land that alters the drainage characteristics of an
adjoining land parcel(s) or publicly held right-of-way by increasing the rate
of surface water runoff by more than 10%.
   G.   Any nonresidential development of land.
   H.   Interior changes that create any additional improvements as required by
the Code, including but not limited to: additional parking, increased sewer/
water flows, etc.
   I.   Land development does not include development which involves:
      (1)   The conversion of an existing single-family detached dwelling or
single-family semidetached dwelling into not more than three residential units,
unless such units are intended to be a condominium.
      (2)   The addition of an accessory building, including farm buildings, on
a lot or lots subordinate to an existing principal building.
      (3)   The addition or conversion of buildings or rides within the
confines of an enterprise which would be considered an amusement park. For the
purposes of this subsection, an amusement park is defined as a tract or area
used principally as a location for permanent amusement structures or rides.
This exclusion shall not apply to newly acquired acreage by an amusement park
until initial plans for the expanded area have been approved by the proper
authorities.
LANDFILL
Includes municipal waste and residual waste landfills.
LANDOWNER
The legal or beneficial owner or owners of land, including the holder of an
option or contract to purchase (whether or not such option or contract is
subject to any conditions), or a lessee if he or she is authorized under the
lease to exercise the rights of the landowner or other person having a
proprietary interest in land.
LIGHT MANUFACTURING
Use of prepared materials to create a product through processing, fabricating,
assembling or disassembling.
LINE OF SIGHT
A visually unobstructed distance of four hundred twenty five (425) feet from a
point measured 10 back from the edge of the intersecting cartway at an
elevation of three and one half (3 1/2) feet above the road surface to a point
in the center of the cartway of oncoming traffic at an elevation of three and
one half (3 1/2) feet above the cartway surface.
LOT
A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat or otherwise
as permitted by law and to be used, developed or built upon as a unit.
LOT AREA
The area contained within the property lines of a lot as shown on a subdivision
plan, excluding space within any public right-of-way.
LOT LINES
The lines bounding a lot as defined herein.
LOT OF RECORD
A lot which has been recorded in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of
Franklin County, Pennsylvania.
LOT, CORNER
A lot at the junction of and abutting two or more intersecting streets or
private roads.
LOT, DEPTH OF
The average horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines.
LOT, INTERIOR
A lot other than a corner lot.
LOT, MINIMUM WIDTH
The minimum lot distance measured from one side property line to the opposite
side property line along the required front building setback line.
LOT, PANHANDLE
A polygonal shaped lot with the appearance of a frying pan or flag and staff in
which the handle is most often used as the frontage on a public street. The
handle shall be not less than 25 feet in width and the lot shall meet the other
requirements as set forth in §
150-8(E) of this chapter, and other requirements as set forth in the ordinances
of the Township.
LOWEST FLOOR
The lowest floor of the lowest fully enclosed area (including basement). An
unfinished, flood resistant partially enclosed area, used solely for parking of
vehicles, building access, and incidental storage, in an area other than a
basement area is not considered the lowest floor of a building, provided that
such space is not designed and built so that the structure is in violation of
the applicable non-elevation design requirements of this ordinance.
MANUFACTURED HOME
A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a
permanent chassis, and is designed for use with or without a permanent
foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term does not include
park trailers, travel trailers, recreational or other similar vehicles.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION
A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured
home lots for rent or sale.
MINI-WAREHOUSING/SELF-STORAGE
Principal or accessory storage space for rent or lease. Activities other than
rental of storage units and pickup and deposit of storage may be allowed on the
mini-warehouse or storage facility premises after approval of a Zoning Permit.
MINOR REPAIR
The replacement of existing work with equivalent materials for the purpose of
its routine maintenance and upkeep, but not including the cutting away of any
wall, partition or portion thereof, the removal or cutting of any structural
beam or bearing support, or the removal or change of any required means of
egress, or rearrangement of parts of a structure affecting the exit way
requirements; nor shall minor repairs include addition to, alteration of,
replacement or relocation of any standpipe, water supply, sewer, drainage,
drain leader, gas, soil, waste, vent or similar piping, electrical wiring or
mechanical or other work affecting public health or general safety.
MOBILE HOME
A transportable, single-family dwelling intended for permanent occupancy,
contained in one unit or in two or more units designed to be joined into one
integral unit capable of again being separated for repeated towing, which
arrives at a site complete and ready for occupancy except for minor and
incidental unpacking and assembly operations, and constructed so that it may be
used without a permanent foundation. The term does not include park trailers,
travel trailers, recreational or other similar vehicles.
MOBILE HOME LOT
A parcel of land in a mobile home park, improved with the necessary utility
connections and other appurtenances necessary for the erection thereon of a
single mobile home.
MOBILE HOME PARK
A parcel or contiguous parcels of land which has been so designated and
improved that it contains two or more mobile home lots for the placement
thereon of mobile homes.
MULTIPLE-USE BUILDING
A single building occupied or intended to be occupied by more than one
permitted principal use.
MUNICIPAL AUTHORITY
A body politic and corporate created pursuant to the Municipality Authorities
Act, being 53 Pa. C.S. §§ 5601 et seq.
MUNICIPALITY
The Township of Antrim, Franklin County, Pennsylvania.
NEW CONSTRUCTION
Structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after April 24,
1981 and includes any subsequent improvements thereto.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION
A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more mobile home
lots for rent or sale for which the construction of facilities for servicing
the lot on which the mobile home is to be affixed (including at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, either final site grading, or the pouring of
concrete pads, and the construction of streets) is complete on or after the
effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by the Township
Board of Supervisors.
NO IMPACT HOME BASED BUSINESS
A business or commercial activity administered or conducted as an accessory use
which is clearly secondary to the use as a residential dwelling and which
involves no customer, client or patient traffic, whether vehicular or
pedestrian, pick up, delivery or removal functions to or from the premises, in
excess of those normally associated with residential use. The business or
commercial activity must satisfy the following requirements:
   A.   The business activity shall be compatible with the residential use of
the property and surrounding residential uses.
   B.   The business shall employ no employees other than family members
residing in the dwelling.
   C.   There shall be no display or sale of retail goods and no stockpiling or
inventory of a substantial nature.
   D.   There shall be no outside appearance of a business use, including, but
not limited to, parking, signs or lights.
   E.   The business activity may not use any equipment or process which
creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electrical or electronic
interference, including interference with radio or television reception which
is detectable in the neighborhood.
   F.   The business activity may not generate any solid waste or sewage
discharge, in volume or type, which is not normally associated with residential
use into the neighborhood.
   G.   The business activity shall be conducted only within the dwelling and
may not occupy more than 25% of the habitable floor area.
   H.   The business may not involve any illegal activity.
NONCONFORMING LOT
A lot the area or dimension of which was lawful prior to the adoption or
amendment of this chapter, but which fails to conform to the requirements of
the zoning district in which it is located by reason of such adoption or
amendment.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE
   A.   A structure or part of a structure manifestly not designed to comply
with the use or extent of use provisions of the chapter or amendment heretofore
or hereafter enacted, where such structure lawfully existed prior to the
enactment of this chapter or amendment or prior to the application of this
chapter or amendment to its location by reason of annexation. Such
nonconforming structures include, but are not limited to, nonconforming signs.
   B.   A structure or part of a structure that does not comply with the
minimum area regulations set forth in the chapter or amendment heretofore or
hereafter enacted, where such structure lawfully existed prior to the enactment
of this chapter or amendment or prior to the application of this chapter or
amendment.
NONCONFORMING USE
A use, whether of land or of structure, which does not comply with the
applicable use provisions in this chapter or amendment heretofore or hereafter
enacted, where such use was lawfully in existence prior to the enactment of
this chapter or amendment, or prior to the application of this chapter or
amendment to its location by reason of annexation.
NUDITY
Nudity means the showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area,
buttocks or anus, any part of the nipple or any part of a female breast below a
point immediately above the top of the areola with less than a fully opaque
covering.
OBSTRUCTION
Any structure or assembly of materials, including fill above or below the
surface of the land or water, and any activity which might impede, retard or
change flood flows. The planting, cultivation and harvesting of field and
orchard crops or the grazing of livestock, including the maintenance of
necessary appurtenant, agricultural fencing, shall not be considered an
obstruction under this definition and shall not be subject to regulation under
this section.
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD
The highest level of flooding that, on the average, is likely to occur every
100 years, that is that has a 1% chance of occurring each year.
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOODPLAIN
The one-hundred-year floodway and that maximum area of land that is likely to
be flooded by a one-hundred-year flood as shown on the floodplain maps provided
by FEMA to the Township.
OPEN SPACE
The unoccupied space open to the sky on the same lot with the building, not
including parking lots. Parking lots shall not be permitted in required open
space.
PARKING SPACE
The space within a building, or on a lot or parking lot, for the parking or
storage of one automobile.
PERSON
As used herein, refers to any natural person, any partnership, any corporation
and/or association.
PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT
An area of land, controlled by a landowner, to be developed as a single entity
for a number of dwelling units, or combination of residential and
nonresidential uses, the development plan for which does not correspond in lot
size, bulk, type of dwelling or use, density or intensity, lot coverage and
required open space to the regulations established in any one district created,
from time to time, under the provisions of this chapter.
PLANNING COMMISSION
The Planning Commission of Antrim Township.
POLLUTION
The contamination of any air, soil or water of the Township such as will create
or is likely to create a nuisance or to render such air, soil, or water
harmful, detrimental or injurious to public health, safety or welfare or to
domestic, municipal, industrial, agricultural, recreational or other legitimate
beneficial uses or to livestock, wild animals, birds, fish or to other aquatic
life, including but not limited to such contamination by alteration of the
physical, chemical or biological properties of such air, soil or water or
change in temperature, taste, color or odor thereof or the discharge of any
noxious liquid, gas, radioactive material, solid or other substances into such
air, soil or water.
PRIMARY CONSERVATION AREA
Land defined as floodplain, wetland and/or having a slope greater than 25%.
PRIME AGRICULTURAL SOILS
Soils classified as prime agricultural soils in Plat Number 8 of the
Comprehensive Plan for Antrim and Greencastle, dated April 14, 1992, and
approved June 1 and June 9, 1992.
PROFESSIONAL OFFICE
A room or rooms used for the carrying on of a profession recognized by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania which generally operates on an appointment basis
and generates low traffic. Professional office includes the office of a
physician, attorney, dentist, accountant or engineer and the like.
PUBLIC
Owned, operated or controlled by a government agency (federal, state or local).
PUBLIC GROUNDS
Includes:
   A.   Parks, playgrounds, trails, paths and other recreational areas and
other public areas.
   B.   Sites for schools, sewage treatment, refuse disposal and other publicly
owned or operated facilities.
   C.   Publicly owned or operated scenic and historic sites.
PUBLIC HEARING
A formal meeting held pursuant to public notice by the Board of Supervisors or
Planning Commission, intended to inform and obtain public comment, prior to
taking action in accordance with this chapter.
PUBLIC MEETING
A forum held pursuant to notice under the Act of July 3, 1986, (P.L. 388, No.
84), known as the Sunshine Act, 65 P.S. § 271 et seq.
PUBLIC NOTICE
Notice published once a week for two consecutive weeks in a newspaper of
general circulation in the Township. Such notice shall state the time and place
of the hearing and the particular nature of the matter to be considered at the
hearing. The first publication shall not be more than 30 days and the second
publication shall not be less than seven days from the date of the hearing.
PUBLIC PARK
A recreational facility open to the public at no charge or a recreational
facility or area owned by a public entity such as a municipality or state.
RECREATIONAL FACILITIES
A business engaged in providing a place with activities for the purpose of
enjoyment, pastime, retreat, athletics, or restorative commune with nature.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE
A vehicle which is
   A.   built on a single chassis;
   B.   designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty
truck,
   C.   not designed for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living
quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION
The one-hundred-year-flood elevation plus a freeboard safety factor of one and
one-half (1 1/2) feet.
REPAIR SERVICE
The business of fixing items such as clocks, appliances, computers and the
like.
RESOURCE RECOVERY FACILITY
Provides for the extraction and utilization of materials or energy from
municipal wastes that are generated off-site, including but not limited to a
facility that mechanically extracts materials from municipal wastes, a
combustion facility that converts the organic fraction of municipal wastes to
usable energy and any chemical or biological process that converts municipal
wastes into a fuel product. The term also includes any facility for the
combustion of municipal wastes that are generated off-site, whether or not the
facility is operated to recover energy. The term does not include:
   A.   Any composting facility.
   B.   Methane gas extraction from a municipal waste landfill.
   C.   Any separation and collection center, drop-off point or collection
center for recycling or any source separation or collection center for
composting leaf waste.
RURAL ENTERPRISE
Businesses permitted as accessory uses on a property used primarily as an
agricultural operation.
SALVAGE YARD
A lot, land or structure, or part thereof, used for the collecting, storage and
sale of waste paper, rags, scrap metal or discarded material, or for the
collecting, dismantling, storage and salvaging of machinery or vehicles not in
running condition, and for the sale of parts thereof.
SCREENING
A well-maintained fence, wall, hedge or vegetative material at least five feet
in height and of a density to conceal from the view of adjoining properties,
the structures and uses of the premises on which the screening is required to
be located.
SERVICE PROVIDER
The business of providing a service such as barber shops, beauty salons,
photographic studios, dry cleaning, tailor and the like.
SHOPPING CENTER
A group of stores planned and designed to function as a unit for the lot on
which it is located with off-street parking provided as an integral part of the
unit.
SIGN
Any permanent or temporary structure or part thereof or any device attached,
painted or represented, directly or indirectly, on a structure or other surface
that displays or includes any letter, word, insignia, flag, or representation
used as or which is in the nature of an advertisement announcement, visual
communication, direction, or which is designed to attract the eye or bring the
subject to the attention of the public.
SIGN, ABANDONED
A sign erected on, or related to, the use of a property which becomes vacant
and unoccupied for a period six (6) months or more, or any sign which relates
to a time, event, or purpose which is past.
SIGN, AREA OF
The square footage to the outermost edges of the surface which displays a
message or identifies the product, activity and/or apprising the public of the
location of such enterprise. When individual letters are mounted it shall be
the square footage of each letter added together.
SIGN, BILLBOARD
An advertising sign, structure or symbol erected and maintained by an
individual or corporation upon which space there is displayed by means of
painting, posting or other method, advertising copy describing a wide variety
of products or services which are not necessarily made, produced, assembled,
stored or sold from the lot or premises upon which the advertisement is
displayed. Any freestanding sign over fifty (50) square feet shall be
considered a billboard and shall comply with the Billboard regulations.
SIGN, CANOPY OR AWNING
Any sign that is part of or attached to an awning, canopy, or other fabric,
plastic, or structural protective cover over a door, entrance, window, or
outdoor service area.
SIGN, DOUBLE FACED
A sign which displays a message, information or advertising on both faces of
the sign.
SIGN, FREESTANDING
A sign supported by structures or supports that are placed on, or anchored in,
the ground and that are independent from any building or other structure.
SIGN, GROUND
A sign, other than a freestanding sign, placed directly on ground without
supports or pylons, independent from any building.
SIGN, ILLUMINATED
A sign which has characters, letters, figures, designs, or outlines illuminated
by direct or indirect electric lighting or luminous device as part of the sign.
SIGN, POLITICAL
Any temporary sign pertaining to political views, an individual seeking
election or appointment to a public office, or a forthcoming public election or
referendum.
SIGN, PROJECTING
A sign affixed to a wall or other vertical building surface in such a manner
that its leading edge extends more than six (6) inches beyond the surface of
such wall or building.
SIGN, REAL ESTATE
A sign pertaining to the sale, lease, or rental of the property on which it is
located.
SIGN, TEMPORARY
A sign intended for short-term use, such as a promotional sign, including signs
pertaining to business events, political issues, an individual seeking public
office, or a forthcoming public election.
SIGN, WALL
A sign parallel to a wall or other vertical building surface. Wall signs shall
not extend beyond the edge of any wall or other surface to which they are
mounted or painted and shall project no more than six (6) inches from its
surface, otherwise they shall be defined as a projecting sign.
SIGN, WINDOW
A temporary or permanent sign which is oriented to the public right of way and
is located on the inside or outside of a window.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA)
Means an area in the floodplain subject to a 1 percent or greater chance of
flooding in any given year. It is shown on the FIRM as Zone A, AO, A1, A30, AE,
A99, or, AH.
START OF CONSTRUCTION
Includes substantial improvement and other proposed new development and means
the date the Permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction,
repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other
improvement was within 180 days from the date of the permit. The actual start
means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a
site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the
construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the
placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does
not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does
it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include
excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of
temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of
accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or
not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start
of construction means the first, alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or
other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the
external dimensions of the building.
STORY
That portion of any building included between the surface of any floor and the
surface of the next floor above it, or if there be no floor above it, then the
space between such floor and the ceiling next above it.
STORY, HALF
A story under a gable, hip or gambrel roof, the wall plates of which at least
two opposite exterior walls are not over two feet above the finished floor of
such story.
STREET
A street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway, freeway, parkway, lane, alley,
viaduct and any other ways used or intended to be used by vehicular traffic or
pedestrians whether public or private.
STRUCTURE
   A.   Any man-made object having an ascertainable stationary location on or
in land or water, whether or not affixed to the land.
   B.   (definition only applies to the Flood Hazard regulations in Article X)
- a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank that is
principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home.
SUBSTANTIAL ADDITIONS TO MOBILE HOME PARKS
Any repair, reconstruction or improvement of an existing mobile home park or
mobile home subdivision, where such repair, reconstruction or improvement of
the streets, utilities and pads will equal or exceed 50% of the value of the
streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement is
started.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE
Damage from any cause sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring
the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty (50)
percent or more of the market value of the structure before the damage
occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENTS
Any repair, reconstruction or improvement of a structure, the cost of which
equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure either before the
improvement or repair is started, or, if the structure has been damaged and is
being restored, before the damage occurred. For the purposes of this
definition, substantial improvement is considered to occur when the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building
commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of
the structure. The term does not, however, include either any project for
improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health,
sanitary or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure
safe living conditions, or any alteration to a structure listed on the National
Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places.
SUPPORTIVE LOW IMPACT COMMERCIAL USES
Commercial uses integrated into a residential area that serve the needs of the
immediate neighborhood while not significantly impacting the residential
character of the neighborhood where located nor drawing significant traffic or
growth from outside the immediate neighborhood.
TOWNSHIP
The Township of Antrim, Franklin County, Pennsylvania.
USE
The specific purpose for which land or a building is designed, arranged,
intended or for which it is or may be occupied or maintained. The term
permitted use or its equivalent shall not be deemed to include any
nonconforming use.
VARIANCE
Relief granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and Articles VI and
IX of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S. § 10601 et seq.
and § 10901 et seq.
VIOLATION
This definition is for the purpose of the Flood Plain Regulations only. The
failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the
community s flood plain management regulations. A structure or other
development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other
evidence of compliance required in 44 CFR 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3),
(e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to be in violation until such time as
that documentation is provided.
WETLANDS
An area of land and/or water meeting one or more of the definitions of wetland
under federal and/or Pennsylvania law and/or regulations.
YARD
An unoccupied space, other than a court, open to the sky, on the same lot with
a building or structure.
YARD, FRONT
The yard on which the house fronts on the public or private road right-of-way
and shall coincide with the address. There shall only be one front yard per
parcel.
YARD, REAR
The opposite of the front yard, and every lot shall have a rear yard. There
shall only be one rear yard per parcel.
YARD, SIDE
Any yard or yards other than the front yard or rear yard.
ARTICLE III ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS
 150-5 LIST OF DISTRICTS.
   The Township is hereby divided into the classes of districts listed below:
(A) Agricultural District
(R-1) Low Density Residential District
(R-2) Medium Density Residential District
(CC) Community Commercial District
(HC) Highway Commercial District
(I) Industrial District
(FH) Flood Hazard District
 150-6 ZONING MAP.
   The boundaries of said districts are hereby established as shown on the
Antrim Township Zoning Map, which accompanies and which, with all explanatory
matter thereon, is hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter. An official
copy of said map, indicating the latest amendments, shall be kept up-to-date
for the use and benefit of the public and shall be so displayed at the Antrim
Township Municipal Building.
 150-7 DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.
   In determining boundaries of districts shown on the Zoning Map, the
following rules shall apply:
   A.   Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately following the
center lines of streets, highways, watercourses or railroad rights-of-way of
such lines extended, such center lines shall be construed to be such
boundaries.
   B.   Where such boundaries are indicated as approximately following the
property lines of parks or other publicly owned lands, such lines shall be
construed to be such boundaries.
   C.   Unless otherwise shown, all district boundaries running parallel to
streets shall be construed to be eight hundred (800) feet back from the rights-
of-way of said streets.
   D.   In all cases where a Zoning district boundary divides a lot in one
ownership, the Zoning District boundary shall be estimated and each district
shall apply to that portion of the lot. In all cases where a district boundary
line is located not farther than 15 feet away from a lot line of record, such
boundary lines shall be construed to coincide with such lot lines.
   E.   In all cases where dimensions are not shown on the Zoning Map, the
location of boundaries shown on the map shall be determined by the use of the
scale appearing hereon.
   F.   In case of uncertainty as to the true location of a district boundary
line in a particular instance, the determination thereof shall be made by the
Zoning Officer. An appeal may be taken to the Zoning Hearing Board, as provided
in Article XIII herein.
   G.   The limits of a Flood Hazard District boundary shall be determined by
the requirements listed in
Article X of this chapter.
 150-8 GENERAL DISTRICT REGULATIONS.
   Following the effective date of this chapter and except as hereinafter
provided:
   A.   No structure shall be erected, moved, altered, rebuilt or enlarged, nor
shall any land or building be used, designed or arranged to be used for any
purpose or in any manner except in conformity with all regulations,
requirements and restrictions specified in this chapter for the district in
which such structure or land is located.
   B.   No lot shall be formed from part of a lot already occupied by a
structure unless such structure, all yards and open spaces connected therewith
and the remaining lot comply with all requirements prescribed by this chapter
for the district in which said lot is located. No land use permit shall be
issued for the erection of a structure on any new lot thus created unless such
structure and lot comply with all provisions of this chapter.
   C.   A residential lot, parcel, or tract shall only have one principal
dwelling.
   D.   Nothing contained in this chapter shall require any change in the
plans, construction or designated use of a building complying with local laws
in force prior to this chapter, if the following is found to exist:
      (1)   A building/land use permit shall have been duly issued prior to the
date of first publication of notice of public hearing on this chapter.
      (2)   The entire building shall have been constructed in accordance with
such plans as have been filed within one year from the effective date of this
chapter.
   E.   Lots.
      (1)   All lots shall have a minimum frontage on a public street or on a
proposed public street of 85% of the required lot width as set forth in the
minimum area regulations of this chapter. Lots fronting on private streets
shall meet the required lot width as set forth in the minimum area regulations.
      (2)   A lot commonly referred to as a panhandle lot shall be deemed to
satisfy the frontage requirements if said lot meets the following criteria:
         (a)   Frontage on a public or private street: twenty-five (25) feet
minimum.
         (b)   A width beyond the twenty-five (25) foot frontage shall be equal
to or greater than the minimum lot width requirements as set forth in the
minimum area regulations of this chapter.
         (c)   If the proposed use of a panhandle lot is residential, only one
single family detached house shall be permitted for each panhandle lot.
         (d)   Lot size, excluding the panhandle area, shall meet all remaining
minimum area requirements as set forth in the minimum area regulations of this
chapter. The panhandle area is that portion of the lot which does not meet the
minimum lot width and lot depth requirements as set forth in the minimum area
regulations of this chapter.
         (e)   There shall be no more than one panhandle lot for every five (5)
acres of land.
         (f)   All panhandle lots shall meet the other requirements of this
chapter and any other Township ordinance.
   F.   Private Roads. Private roads shall be permitted when appropriately
planned for on a subdivision or land development plan. The plan shall be clear
that the road is intended to be private and shall comply with the following:
      (1)   Roads shall be reviewed by the Township to ensure compliance with
Article IV of Chapter 125 Subdivision and Land Development of the Code.
      (2)   Road signs shall be installed and maintained prior to the issuance
of the first land use permit for the development.
      (3)   Road shall be improved to a dust free condition.
      (4)   Signs shall be to Penn Dot standards.
      (5)   The Road shall have a name approved by the Franklin County Planning
Commission, Franklin County 911 Center, and Antrim Township.
      (6)   Lots will be addressed off of the private road by the Township.
      (7)   No more than three (3) dwelling units may be accessed off of a
single private road.
      (8)   Private roads shall directly access a public road.
      (9)   A maintenance agreement shall be submitted to the Township for a
legal review and incorporated into the deeds for each lot. The maintenance
agreement shall include at a minimum:
         (a)   Clear identification of each property owner s responsibility for
maintenance of the roadway.
         (b)   Maintenance requirements of signage.
         (c)   Language indemnifying the Township of all costs, liability,
maintenance, and services of such road or road right of way. The Township shall
not be held responsible in any manner for the private road or road right of
way.
   G.   Uses not permitted or specifically defined in any of the established
districts by this chapter shall be a conditional use. These uses shall be a
conditional use only in the district that they resemble the like uses and shall
be in accordance with all ordinances, rules, regulations, etc. of the Township
and other applicable state or federal laws. Any questionable uses will be
determined by the Board of Supervisors upon which district that the use best
fits.
ARTICLE IV AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT (A)
 150-9 PURPOSE.
   The Agricultural District (A) is comprised of areas of highly productive
soils and where agricultural activity remains strong. The purpose of this
district is to encourage continuous farming operations and allow for businesses
that support or are essential for farming. Low density residential uses are
allowed even though the primary use is intended to remain agricultural.
Conservation practices shall be incorporated into all developments to preserve
resources and the essential character of the area. All uses other than
agricultural uses should expect associated by-products, including the smell of
farm animals and the manure they produce, chemical sprays, slow-moving
agricultural machinery on local roads, etc.
 150-10 PERMITTED USES.
   A.   The following uses shall be permitted in the Agricultural District:
      (1)   Accessory buildings in accordance with §
150-55 Accessory Building Regulations .
      (2)   Accessory dwelling units in accordance with §
150-56.
      (3)   Agricultural and agriculturally related operations in accordance
with all Federal, State, and local regulations.
      (4)   Bed and Breakfasts.
      (5)   Carpentry/woodworking shops.
      (6)   Cemeteries.
      (7)   Churches or similar places of worship.
      (8)   Dwellings, Single family detached.
      (9)   Forest and wildlife preserves.
      (10)   Hunting/fishing/riding clubs.
      (11)   Individual mobile homes.
      (12)   Lodges and fraternal houses.
      (13)   Public utilities.
      (14)   Rural enterprises in accordance with §
150-61.
      (15)   Veterinary office or animal hospitals.
   B.   The following permitted uses shall provide a fifty (50) foot buffer
zone for side and rear yards when adjacent to a residential zoning district:
      (1)   Farm equipment sales facilities.
      (2)   Federal, state, and local government offices and accessory uses
etc.
      (3)   Lumber mills.
      (4)   Public Parks.
      (5)   Sand pits, gravel pits, peat bogs, removal of topsoil and
excavation etc. in accordance with the following conditions:
         (a)   An individual, corporation or otherwise, engaged in or proposing
to engage in the business of surface mining shall be properly licensed by the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection to engage in such business.
         (b)   Production, processing, excavation, sedimentation ponds and
stockpiling shall not be conducted closer than two-hundred (200) feet to any
street or property line.
         (c)   All extraction operations located within five-hundred (500) feet
of any residence shall be conducted between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 7:00
p.m.
         (d)   Screening shall be required as defined in this chapter.
         (e)   Before a building permit is granted, a plan for rehabilitation,
showing both existing and proposed final contours, shall be submitted and
approved by the Township.
         (f)   Before a site reclamation plan approval is granted, the owner or
his or her agent shall execute a certified check payable to the Township of a
bond sufficient in the opinion of the Township to secure the rehabilitation of
the site in accordance with the approved site plan.
 150-11 CONDITIONAL USES.
   A.   Conditional uses in the Agricultural District shall be as follows:
      (1)   Airports:
         (a)   Shall comply with all State and Federal regulations.
         (b)   There shall be no flight obstructions such as towers, chimneys
or other tall structures or natural obstructions outside of the airport and
located within the proposed approach zones.
         (c)   The glide path shall be a plane surface laid out in accordance
with the operating characteristics of the aircraft for which the airport is
designed. The first 500 feet of the glide path shall be wholly within the
airport property.
      (2)   Campgrounds or recreational vehicle camps subject to the following
conditions:
         (a)   There shall be a minimum of two (2) points of ingress and
egress.
         (b)   All camps shall have a sewage disposal system and water supply
approved by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
         (c)   Common open space. All campgrounds shall provide not less than
twenty percent (20%) of the total land area for usable open space purposes.
Usable open space shall be so located as to be free of traffic hazards and
should, where the topography permits, be centrally located and easily
accessible to all campers.
         (d)   Park density. The park density shall not exceed fifteen (15)
individual lots per gross acre.
         (e)   Setback. No trailer, tent, building, etc., shall be located
closer than fifteen (15) feet to the park s exterior lot line.
         (f)   No camp site shall be permitted to have direct access to a
public street.
         (g)   All camps and campgrounds shall comply with all applicable
regulations of the commonwealth including, but not limited to, regulations
covering food service, water supply, sewage disposal, bathing places, vector
control, toilet facilities, sanitary stations, and garbage disposal.
      (3)   Commercial Communication transmitting and receiving facilities and
towers subject to the following conditions.
         (a)   Antennae and accessory equipment shall not exceed a maximum
height of thirty-five (35) feet above the top of a structure upon which it is
located.
         (b)   Antennae and accessory equipment shall be located/placed on
existing structures.
         (c)   Antennae and accessory equipment shall not be located on any
residential structure.
         (d)   The applicant shall be required to submit to the Township
evidence of the need for the communications tower and that all alternatives
have been exhausted. Applicants are required to prove the need by providing
evidence that existing towers can not accommodate this added use due to
structural capacity, interference, or locational needs.
         (e)   All facilities shall be constructed in accordance with all State
and Federal regulations.
         (f)   Communications towers may not be located on a lot that is listed
on a historic register or in an officially designated state or federal historic
district.
         (g)   Facilities shall be removed within one (1) year from
decommissioning. Upon written notice from the Township the facilities shall be
removed. Failure to do so gives the Township the right to enter the property
and remove such facilities at the expense of the property owner, including any
and all legal costs incurred by the Township.
         (h)   A security fence and gate, of approved design, of not less than
eight (8) feet high, including barbed wire at the top, shall completely enclose
the communications tower and anchor locations of guy wire (if used). The gate
shall be kept locked at all times.
         (i)   A minimum of one (1) parking space shall be required. Parking
spaces shall be surfaced with a durable and dust free surface.
         (j)   Access shall be provided to the communications tower and
communications equipment building by means of a public street or easement of a
minimum of twenty (20) feet in width and shall be improved to a dust free
surface of a minimum width of twelve (12) feet.
         (k)   The applicant shall submit a copy of its current Federal
Communications Commission license: the name, address and emergency telephone
number for the operator of the communications tower; and a certificate of
insurance evidencing general liability coverage in the minimum amount of one
million dollars ($1,000,000) per occurrence and property damage coverage in the
amount of one million dollars ($1,000,000) per occurrence covering the
communications tower and communications antennas.
         (l)   No communications tower shall be located closer than five-
hundred (500) feet from a school, any residential structure or from any,
playground, ball field or other area used for active recreation.
         (m)   Setbacks shall be no less than the total tower height from
adjacent property lines and public road right-of-way lines. Such distance shall
be in a straight line from the communications tower to the appropriate line.
         (n)   All such sites shall be properly maintained with grass mowed to
a maximum height of eight (8) inches and shrubbery properly tended.
         (o)   In the event that the property is currently cultivated or in
pasture, it may continue to be used for agricultural purposes.
         (p)   Financial Security in an amount deemed satisfactory by the Board
to ensure no disturbances or interferences are generated as a result of such
facility.
      (4)   Mobile Home Parks in accordance with
Chapter 125.
      (5)   Municipal waste landfills and residual waste landfills.
         (a)   General. Landfills must be conducted and maintained in such a
manner as to ensure the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Antrim
Township.
         (b)   Location of landfills within the Township.
            [1]   Landfills shall not be located in an area with soils
classified by the Soil Conservation Service as prime agricultural soils.
            [2]   A landfill shall not be located on property which has any
creek, stream, run or any other free-flowing body of water within one-hundred
(100) feet of the boundary lines of said landfill, nor shall any such creek,
stream, run or free-flowing body of water run through any land upon which it is
proposed to locate a landfill. Temporary water runoff such as that present in
swales after a rainstorm shall not be considered a creek, stream, run or any
other free-flowing body of water for the purpose of this section.
            [3]   No part of the landfill shall be established within five-
hundred (500) feet of any occupied dwelling.
            [4]   No landfill shall be established within three-hundred (300)
feet of any building that is currently being occupied by people for periods in
excess of five (5) hours per day.
            [5]   No landfill shall be established within one-hundred (100)
feet of a public right-of-way. Where the right-of-way is bounded on both sides
by a landfill under a single ownership, the landfill shall be set back one-
hundred (100) feet on each side of the right-of-way.
            [6]   No part of a landfill shall be established within one-
thousand five-hundred (1,500) feet of a water supply for domestic use.
         (c)   Buffer zones; fencing; planting.
            [1]   Buffer zone. There shall be a two hundred (200) foot buffer
zone between the landfill and the adjoining properties.
            [2]   Plantings. Trees and/or shrubs shall be planted to screen the
landfill from view and from adjacent rights-of-way. The plantings must consist
of evergreen trees and shrubs designed and planted so as to completely screen
the landfill from view and create a solid screen six (6) feet in height. The
planting shall be located between the right-of-way line and the fencing
required by Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) rules and regulations,
leaving ample area so as not to obstruct or encroach upon the right-of-way line
when plantings are sufficiently grown, and leaving sufficient area and space
for vehicles to pass between adult plantings and fencing.
            [3]   Fencing. Fencing shall be as required by DEP rules and
regulations.
         (d)   Hours of operation and dirt and debris from trucks.
            [1]   The landfill shall be opened and dumping and depositing
therein shall be permitted only from 7:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m., Monday through
Friday, and 7:00 a.m. to 11:00 a.m., Saturdays. However, on Saturday
immediately following a week within which a national holiday occurs, the
landfill shall be allowed to remain open from 7:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. on that
Saturday. The following are national holidays: Christmas, New Year s Day,
Easter, Thanksgiving, Fourth of July, Memorial Day, Martin Luther King Day,
President s Day and Labor Day.
            [2]   In order to prevent trucks departing the landfill from
depositing dirt and debris on public roads, all access roads shall be paved
with macadam 1,000 feet from the point the access road intersects with the
public roads, or, in the alternative, all trucks leaving the landfill shall be
washed prior to departing. The truck shall be washed in such a manner to
prevent debris and dirt from being deposited on public roads.
         (e)   Conditional use landfill application approval required.
            [1]   No person shall start, maintain, continue to maintain or
expand, whether for commercial purposes or otherwise, any landfill within
Antrim Township unless such landfill has an approved conditional use landfill
application from the Board of Supervisors of Antrim Township. Application for
such conditional use approval shall be made to the Board of Supervisors of
Antrim Township and shall be in writing, under oath, and in the form prescribed
by the Board of Supervisors.
            [2]   Said application shall contain the following information:
name of the applicant and address for the past 5 years, the location of the
premises upon which the landfill is to be conducted, and the name of the owner
or owners of said property, if other than the applicant.
            [3]   Upon any subsequent applications, the applicant must provide
a statement that during the preceding term of his or her conditional use
approval he or she complied with and maintained the premises in full compliance
with the provisions of this section.
            [4]   Each application shall describe the premises upon which the
landfill is to be established, specifying therein setback lines, structures
erected thereon, any premises to be so used, and the book and page number
identifying the deed of record as recorded by the Franklin County Recorder of
Deeds.
            [5]   If the applicant is a partnership or association, the
applicant shall furnish the information required in Subsections (A)(5)(e)[1]
and [2] above for every member of the association or partnership. If the
applicant is a corporation, the applicant shall furnish the information
requested in Subsections (A)(5)(e)[1] and [2] above for each officer and
director thereof.
            [6]   The application shall be signed by the applicant if an
individual; by all members if the applicant is a partnership or association;
and by the president, secretary and chairman of the board if the applicant is a
corporation.
            [7]   A physical plan of the landfill drawn to scale shall be
submitted with the application, including the following:
               [a]   Tract metes and bounds upon which the landfill is to be
maintained, the area presently in use as a landfill and the area for which a
permit has been granted by the Department of Environmental Protection under the
Solid Waste Management Act, as amended.
               [b]   All streams, creeks, runs or other free-flowing bodies of
water within 500 feet of any present landfill, all property lines within two-
hundred (200) feet of the landfill, all buildings within four-hundred (400)
feet of the landfill, all rights-of-way within two-hundred (200) feet of the
landfill and all water supplies for domestic use within two-thousand (2,000)
feet of the landfill.
               [c]   Proposed planting locations designed in compliance with
Subsection (A)(5)(c)[2].
               [d]   Soil embankments for noise, dust and visual barriers and
heights of soil mounds, including proposed soil erosion and sedimentation
control which has been favorably reviewed by the Soil Conservation Service.
               [e]   Stormwater management provisions.
               [f]   Interior road patterns identifying their relation to yard
operation and points of ingress and egress onto state and Township roads.
               [g]   Source of water, if plans show use of water, and location
of all monitoring wells.
            [8]   The applicant shall also submit to the Township a site plan
showing the appearance of the site following termination of any landfill
activity. Such plan must show:
               [a]   Final grading contours.
               [b]   Planned ultimate use and ownership, if known, of the site
after termination of the landfill.
            [9]   A separate application is required for each landfill.
            [10]   Applications.
               [a]   The application, with the required fees, deposits, written
approvals, comments and/or recommendations, as well as other documents or
evidence that may be required by any federal, state or local board or agency,
shall be submitted to Antrim Township at the Antrim Township Municipal Building
during regular business hours, at least fifteen (15) business days prior to the
next scheduled meeting of the Antrim Township Board of Supervisors at which
said application is to be reviewed.
               [b]   The application shall have attached to the application
form, in addition to these afore referenced approvals, comments and
recommendations of Antrim Township Planning Commission, Antrim Township Zoning
Officer, Antrim Township Solicitor, Antrim Township Administrator and the
Franklin County Planning Commission.
               [c]   The comments and recommendations required in Subsections
(A)(5)(e)[10][a] and [b] above, shall be obtained at the expense of the
applicant and shall be submitted as required under Subsection (A)(5)(e)[10][a]
and [b].
            [11]   Every prospective landfill shall pay an application fee and
an application renewal fee in an amount as set forth from time to time by
resolution of the Board of Supervisors. Said fees are to defray Township costs
of administrating this section.
            [12]   Approvals shall be issued for a term of one calendar year.
            [13]   The landfill may be inspected and reviewed at any time
during the one-year term of the initial approval of the application. A failure
to comply with this section can result in said approval being revoked by Antrim
Township.
            [14]   The Board of Supervisors of Antrim Township, upon receipt of
an application timely filed, shall review said application at its next
regularly scheduled meeting. After an examination of the application, the Board
of Supervisors will consider the suitability of the proposed premises for the
purpose, the character of the property adjacent thereto, the effect of the
proposed use on the surrounding properties, the environment, as well as the
health, welfare and safety of the citizens of the Township. Upon approval of
the application, the Board of Supervisors of Antrim Township shall stamp the
application approved. The name of the landfill owner and address of the
premises approved for use as a landfill shall be designated upon said approval.
Said approval shall be at all times conspicuously displayed and posted upon the
premises. Said approval issued by the Board of Supervisors is not transferable
or assignable.
         (f)   Escape of municipal and residual waste. The landfill shall
prevent any municipal and residual waste, including the residue of said waste,
from blowing, leaking or otherwise escaping from the landfill onto any public
or private property in Antrim Township. In the event of a violation of this
section, in addition to any other penalties provided herein, the licensee shall
remove and/or clean any such refuse within twenty-four (24) hours unless
prevented from doing so in an emergency caused by adverse weather conditions.
If the licensee shall be prevented from cleanup within twenty-four (24) hours
by adverse weather conditions, licensee shall have twenty-four (24) hours after
the weather condition is clear to correct the problem.
         (g)   Insurance required.
            [1]   The landfill shall provide liability insurance in the amount
of ten-million dollars ($10,000,000) for claims of liability against the
Township, the Board of Supervisors, their employees, agents or representatives.
However, the Board of Supervisors may require the amount of the liability
insurance to be increased in order to prevent adverse effect upon public health
and safety or public welfare and the environment while the landfill is active
and after closure.
            [2]   Any cancellation of the landfill owner s insurance, either in
part or in total, shall be just cause for revocation of the approval issued
under this section.
         (h)   Daily operation/responsibility. The landfill shall be
responsible for the cleanup and policing of all areas and adjacent properties
to which any materials are spread by natural or artificial means from said
municipal waste landfill site.
         (i)   Inspection access.
            [1]   The Township or its designated agent shall have the right to
enter the landfill site for the purpose of monitoring compliance with this
section without notice during normal operational hours and shall have the right
to inspect during nonoperating hours upon twenty-four (24) hours advance notice
to the landfill.
            [2]   Pursuant to the Municipal Waste Planning, Recycling and Waste
Reduction Act, 53 P.S. 4000.101 et seq., certain employees of Antrim Township
have been certified as municipal inspectors to ensure that municipal waste
landfills are in compliance with the Solid Waste Management Act, 35 P.S.
6018.101 et seq. Said employees are appointed and authorized to enforce the
Solid Waste Management Act and the Waste Reduction Act and regulations
promulgated pursuant to said acts on behalf of Antrim Township.
         (j)   Enforcement. This section shall be enforced by action brought
before a District Justice in the same manner provided for the enforcement of
summary offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure. Any person
who violates or permits the violation of this article shall, upon conviction in
a summary proceeding, be punishable by a fine of not more than one-thousand
($1,000) or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding ninety (90) days. Each day
or portion thereof that such violation continues, or is permitted to continue,
shall constitute a separate offense. Each section of this article that is
violated shall also constitute a separate offense.
         (k)   Nuisance. In addition to the enforcement remedies as set forth
in Article XV of this chapter, the Board of Supervisors of Antrim Township
hereby declares any accumulation of municipal or residual waste in violation of
this section to be a nuisance, and the Board of Supervisors shall give written
notice to the owner or owners of land upon which said waste is deposited in
violation of this section to remove or cause to be removed such waste or to
abate such nuisance, and upon failure of such owner or owners to remove such
waste or to abate such nuisance and a twenty-day period after such notice to
remove or abate the same, the Board of Supervisors may cause said land to be
entered upon and said waste removed and/or said nuisance abated and may collect
the costs of such removal and/or abatement from the owner or owners of said
land.
         (l)   Applicability of other laws. If this section is in conflict with
the Solid Waste Management Act, as amended, the Municipal Waste Planning,
Recycling and Waste Reduction Act, or the regulations promulgated pursuant to
said acts, then the section or act imposing the most stringent requirement
shall apply.
         (m)   Definitions.
            [1]   The definitions contained in the Solid Waste Management Act,
35 P.S. 6018.101 et seq., the Municipal Waste Planning, Recycling and Waste
Reduction Act, 53 P.S. 4000.101 et seq., and regulations promulgated pursuant
to those acts, are applicable to this section.
            [2]   In this section the singular shall include the plural and the
masculine shall include the feminine and neuter.
      (6)   Prisons, detention centers, jails and correctional institutions
provided that such facilities are located a minimum of one-thousand (1,000)
feet from any adjoining zoning district boundary, schools, daycare centers,
nursing homes, hospitals, geriatric centers and residential uses.
      (7)   Public schools, private schools, and daycare centers.
      (8)   Recreational facilities and recreational organizations subject to
the following conditions:
         (a)   All exterior lighting shall be shielded from adjacent
properties.
         (b)   Along all property lines adjacent to a residential use,
screening shall be provided as defined in this chapter.
 150-12 MINIMUM AREA REGULATIONS FOR THE AGRICULTURAL (A) DISTRICT.
Lot size (sq. ft.)      80,000
Lot width (feet)        150
Lot Depth (feet)        200
Front yard (feet)       25
Side Yard (feet)        12
Rear yard (feet)        25
Maximum Height          35
Maximum impervious area 50%
    New residential subdivisions and developments shall provide a setback of
one-hundred (100) feet along property lines adjacent to existing farms and
farmland.
ARTICLE V LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (R-1)
 150-13 PURPOSE.
   The Low Density Residential (R-1) district allows for low density
residential development and other minimal supportive uses. The purpose is to
create a rural community atmosphere in areas not supported by public utilities.
Conservation practices shall be incorporated into all developments to preserve
resources and the essential character of the area.
 150-14 PERMITTED USES.
   A.   The following uses shall be permitted in the Low Density Residential
District:
      (1)   Accessory buildings in accordance with §
150-55 Accessory Building Regulations .
      (2)   Accessory dwelling units in accordance with §
150-56.
      (3)   Accessory uses incidental to the principal use.
      (4)   Agriculture.
      (5)   Bed and Breakfasts.
      (6)   Cemeteries.
      (7)   Churches or similar places of worship.
      (8)   Dwelling, Single family detached.
      (9)   Dwelling, Single family semidetached.
      (10)   Federal, state, and local government offices and accessory uses.
      (11)   Forest and wildlife preserve.
      (12)   Individual mobile homes.
      (13)   Lodges and fraternal houses.
      (14)   Public Parks.
      (15)   Public utilities.
      (16)   Rural enterprises in accordance with §
150-61.
 150-15 CONDITIONAL USES.
   A.   Conditional uses in the Low Density Residential District shall be as
follows:
      (1)   Agriculturally related operations in accordance with all Federal,
State, and local regulations.
      (2)   Campgrounds or recreational vehicle camps subject to the following
conditions.
         (a)   There shall be a minimum of two (2) points of ingress and
egress.
         (b)   All camps shall have a sewage disposal system and water supply
approved by the State Department of Environmental Protection.
         (c)   Common open space. All campgrounds shall provide not less than
twenty percent (20%) of the total land area for usable open space purposes.
Usable open space shall be so located as to be free of traffic hazards and
should, where the topography permits, be centrally located and easily
accessible to all campers.
         (d)   Park density. The park density shall not exceed fifteen (15)
individual lots per gross acre.
         (e)   Setback. No trailer, tent, building, etc., shall be located
closer than fifteen (15) feet to the park s exterior lot line.
         (f)   No camp site shall be permitted to have direct access to a
public street.
         (g)   All camps and campgrounds shall comply with all applicable
regulations of the commonwealth including, but not limited to, regulations
covering food service, water supply, sewage disposal, bathing places, vector
control, toilet facilities, sanitary stations, and garbage disposal.
      (3)   Communication transmitting and receiving facilities, and towers
subject to the following conditions:
         (a)   Antennae and accessory equipment shall not exceed a maximum
height of thirty-five (35) feet above the top of a structure upon which it is
located.
         (b)   Antennae and accessory equipment shall be located/placed on
existing structures.
         (c)   Antennae and accessory shall not be located on any residential
structure.
         (d)   The applicant shall be required to submit to the Township
evidence of the need for the communications tower and that all alternatives
have been exhausted. Applicants are required to prove need by providing
evidence that existing towers cannot accommodate this added use due to
structural capacity, interference, or locational needs.
         (e)   All facilities shall be constructed in accordance with all State
and Federal regulations.
         (f)   Communications towers may not be located on a lot that is listed
on a historic register or in an officially designated state or federal historic
district.
         (g)   Facilities shall be removed within one year from
decommissioning. Upon written notice from the Township the facilities shall be
removed. Failure to do so gives the Township the right to enter the property
and remove such facilities at the expense of the property owner, including any
and all legal costs incurred by the Township.
         (h)   A security fence and gate, of approved design, of not less than
eight feet, including barbed wire at the top, shall completely enclose the
communications tower and anchor locations of guy wire (if used). The gate shall
be kept locked at all times.
         (i)   A minimum of one parking space shall be required. Parking spaces
shall be surfaced with a durable and dust free surface.
         (j)   Access shall be provided to the communications tower and
communications equipment building by means of a public street or easement of a
minimum of twenty (20) feet in width and shall be improved to a dust free
surface of a minimum width of twelve (12) feet.
         (k)   The applicant shall submit a copy of its current Federal
Communications Commission license: the name, address and emergency telephone
number for the operator of the communications tower; and a certificate of
insurance evidencing general liability coverage in the minimum amount of one-
million dollars ($1,000,000) per occurrence and property damage coverage in the
amount one-million dollars ($1,000,000) per occurrence covering the
communications tower and communications antennas.
         (l)   No communications tower shall be located closer than five-
hundred (500) feet from a school, any residential structure or from any,
playground, ball field or other area used for active recreation.
         (m)   Setbacks shall be no less than the total tower height from
adjacent property lines and public road right-of-way lines. Such distance shall
be in a straight line from the communications tower to the appropriate line.
         (n)   All such sites shall be properly maintained with grass mowed to
a maximum height of eight (8) inches and shrubbery properly tended.
         (o)   In the event that the property is currently cultivated or in
pasture, it may continue to be used for agricultural purposes.
         (p)   Financial Security in an amount deemed satisfactory by the Board
to ensure no disturbances or interferences are generated as a result of such
facility.
      (4)   Public schools, private schools, day care centers, nursing homes,
personal care establishments, hospitals, and geriatric centers.
      (5)   Recreational facilities and recreational organizations.
         (a)   All exterior lighting shall be shielded from adjacent
properties.
         (b)   Along all property lines adjacent to a residential use,
screening shall be provided as defined in this chapter.
 150-16 MINIMUM AREA REGULATIONS FOR THE LOW DENSITY DISTRICT (R-1).
 On lot sewer Central sewer
                   On lot sewer Central sewer
Lot size (sq. ft.) 30,000       15,000
Lot width (feet)   100          100
Lot Depth (feet)   150          150
Front yard (feet)  25           25
Side Yard (feet)   12           12
Rear yard (feet)   25           25
Maximum Height     35           35
     New residential subdivisions and developments shall provide a setback of
one-hundred (100) feet along property lines adjacent to existing farms and
farmland.
ARTICLE VI MEDIUM DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (R-2)
 150-17 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the Medium Density Residential (R-2) district is to allow for
higher densities of residential uses and other supportive low impact commercial
uses on smaller lot sizes that are supported by public utilities. Developments
shall interconnect with other developments and neighboring properties to ensure
safe ingress and egress in the event of an emergency. Conservation practices
shall be incorporated into all developments to preserve resources and the
essential character of the area.
 150-18 PERMITTED USES.
   A.   The following uses shall be permitted in the Medium Density Residential
District:
      (1)   Accessory buildings in accordance with §
150-55 Accessory Building Regulations .
      (2)   Accessory dwelling units in accordance with §
150-56.
      (3)   Agriculture.
      (4)   Bed and breakfast.
      (5)   Boarding, lodging or rooming houses.
      (6)   Cemeteries.
      (7)   Churches or similar places of worship.
      (8)   Conversions of existing single family detached dwellings to single
family semidetached dwellings.
      (9)   Dwelling, Single family Attached (townhouses).
      (10)   Dwelling, Single family detached.
      (11)   Dwelling Single family semidetached.
      (12)   Dwelling, Multifamily.
      (13)   Federal, state, and local government offices and accessory uses
etc.
      (14)   Funeral Homes and Parlors.
      (15)   Individual mobile homes.
      (16)   Lodges and fraternal houses.
      (17)   Public Parks
      (18)   Public schools, private schools, and daycare centers.
      (19)   Public utilities.
      (20)   Rural enterprises in accordance with §
150-61.
 150-19 CONDITIONAL USES.
   A.   Conditional uses in the Medium Density Residential District shall be as
follows:
      (1)   Agriculturally related operations in accordance with all Federal,
State, and local regulations.
      (2)   Recreational facilities and recreational organizations.
         (a)   All exterior lighting shall be shielded from adjacent
properties.
         (b)   Along all property lines adjacent to a residential use,
screening shall be provided as defined in this chapter.
      (3)   Residential care establishments, including but not limited to group
homes and personal care establishments.
      (4)   Supportive low impact commercial uses
         (a)   Uses shall be designed to allow and encourage non-motor vehicle
and pedestrian traffic access from the surrounding neighborhood.
         (b)   Uses shall incorporate design and architectural elements and
landscaping consistent with the character of the immediate neighborhood.
         (c)   Uses shall comply with minimum area regulations of the Community
Commercial Zoning District.
 150-20 MINIMUM AREA REGULATIONS.
 On lot sewer Central sewer Attached dwelling residences (Townhouses) (central
                            sewer required)
                                              Attached dwelling residences
                   On lot sewer Central sewer (Townhouses) (central sewer
                                              required)
Lot size (sq. ft.) 20,000       10,000        2,500
Lot width (feet)   100          60            20
Lot Depth (feet)   100          100            
Front yard (feet)  25           25            25
Side Yard (feet)   12           12            12
Rear yard (feet)   25           25            25
Maximum Height     45           45            45
    New residential subdivisions and developments shall provide a setback of
one-hundred (100) feet along property lines adjacent to existing farms and
farmland.
ARTICLE VII COMMUNITY COMMERCIAL DISTRICT (CC)
 150-21 PURPOSE.
   The Community Commercial (CC) district is comprised of medium density
residential, light commercial uses, retail business, service-oriented
businesses, personal service, and professional services. The purpose of this
district is to create employment, promote uses oriented towards pedestrian
customers, and create the interconnection of nonresidential establishments to
reduce congestion on the main roads. This district promotes adaptive reuse of
existing buildings. It is encouraged to mix commercial and residential uses to
create a suitable economic base to support both the residential and economic
market. Development shall include conservation practices through green designs
and promote a healthy, safe environment where residential and commercial uses
comingle. Designs are encouraged to create an aesthetic shopping and working
environment.
 150-22 PERMITTED USES.
   A.   The following uses shall be permitted in the Community Commercial
District:
      (1)   Accessory buildings in accordance with §
150-55 Accessory Building Regulations .
      (2)   Accessory dwelling units in accordance with §
150-56.
      (3)   Accessory uses incidental to the principle use.
      (4)   Agricultural and agriculturally related operations in accordance
with all Federal, State, and local regulations.
      (5)   Bed and Breakfasts.
      (6)   Boarding, lodging or rooming houses.
      (7)   Business services.
      (8)   Carpentry/woodworking shops.
      (9)   Cemeteries.
      (10)   Church or similar places of worship.
      (11)   Dwelling, Attached (townhouses).
      (12)   Dwelling, Single family detached.
      (13)   Dwelling, Single family semidetached.
      (14)   Dwelling, Multifamily.
      (15)   Federal, state, and local government offices and accessory uses
etc.
      (16)   Funeral Homes and Parlors.
      (17)   Health clubs, health spas and other or similar establishments.
      (18)   Hotels and Motels.
      (19)   Individual mobile homes.
      (20)   Lodges and fraternal houses.
      (21)   Mini warehousing and self storage establishments.
      (22)   Multiple use buildings.
      (23)   Professional offices.
      (24)   Public Parks.
      (25)   Public utilities.
      (26)   Repair services.
      (27)   Restaurants.
      (28)   Retail businesses.
      (29)   Rural enterprises in accordance with §
150-61.
      (30)   Service providers.
      (31)   Theaters.
      (32)   Veterinary office or animal hospitals.
   B.   The following uses shall be permitted in the Community Commercial
District with greater minimum area regulations:
      (1)   Accessory Buildings in accordance with §
150-24(A)
      (2)   Automotive, trailer and recreational vehicle sales and service.
      (3)   Convention Center.
      (4)   Farm equipment sales facilities.
      (5)   Mobile Home Parks.
      (6)   Public schools, private schools, daycare centers, geriatric
centers, nursing homes, personal care establishments, hospitals, boarding homes
and similar institutions.
      (7)   Recreational facilities and recreational organizations.
      (8)   Shopping centers in accordance with the following provisions:
         (a)   Access. There shall be a minimum of two (2) separate points of
ingress and egress and no access points shall be located within two-hundred
(200) feet of intersecting streets, unless such points are located directly at
an intersection.
         (b)   Management. A shopping center shall be under unified management
which shall clearly establish centralized responsibility for the operation and
maintenance of the project including all common areas.
         (c)   Signs. There shall be only one (1) freestanding sign per road
frontage or access in compliance with the applicable provisions of this
chapter. Such freestanding sign shall be exempt from size limitations and the
location and detail shall be shown on the land development plan
         (d)   Circulation. Traffic circulation within a shopping center
project shall be designed to minimize pedestrian and vehicular mixing and
congestion. Circulation shall be provided along the outer perimeters and along
store entrances to serve as an internal road separate from the main roadway.
This road shall be owned and maintained by the shopping center.
         (e)   All access to outparcels shall use the internal roadway.
         (f)   Maintenance agreements shall be required and shall be reviewed
and approved by the Township solicitor before site approval.
 150-23 CONDITIONAL USES.
[Repealed 4-25-2023 by Ord. No. 364]
(Reserved)
 150-24 MINIMUM AREA REGULATIONS FOR THE COMMUNITY COMMERCIAL DISTRICT (CC).
   A.
  Min. Area Regulation for uses §  Min. Area Regulations for uses §
 150-22(A)                         150-22(B) and §
                                    150-23 Cond. Uses
           Min. Area Regulation for uses §  Min. Area Regulations for uses §
          150-22(A)                         150-22(B) and §
                                             150-23 Cond. Uses
Lot size   10,000                            40,000
(sq. ft.)
Lot width  75                                150
(feet)
Lot Depth  100                               150
(feet)
Front yard 25                                25
(feet)
Side Yard  12                                25
(feet)
Rear yard  25                                40
(feet)
Maximum    45                                45
Height
Maximum
impervious 75%                               75%
area
 
   B.   Residential uses shall meet the minimum area regulations of the R-
2 Zoning District.
   C.   New residential subdivisions and developments shall provide a setback
of one-hundred (100) feet along property lines adjacent to existing farms and
farmland.
ARTICLE VIII HIGHWAY COMMERCIAL DISTRICT (HC)
 150-25 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the Highway Commercial District (HC) is to provide light
manufacturing, retail shopping, service facilities, and other uses supported by
highway traffic to create employment opportunities as well as attract local and
regional consumers and to serve the needs of the general community. Green
designs shall be used to create an aesthetic shopping and working environment.
 150-26 PERMITTED USES.
   A.   The following uses shall be permitted in the Highway Commercial
District:
      (1)   Accessory buildings in accordance with §
150-55 Accessory Building Regulations .
      (2)   Accessory uses incidental to the principle use.
      (3)   Business service.
      (4)   Churches or similar places of worship.
      (5)   Funeral Homes and Parlors.
      (6)   Lodges and fraternal houses.
      (7)   Mini warehousing and self storage establishments.
      (8)   Professional offices.
      (9)   Public Utilities.
      (10)   Service providers.
      (11)   Veterinary office or animal hospitals.
   B.   The following uses shall be permitted in the Highway Commercial
District with greater minimum area regulations:
      (1)   Accessory uses incidental to the principle use in accordance with
the minimum area regulations listed in §
150-28.
      (2)   Agricultural and Agriculturally related operations in accordance
with all Federal, State, and local regulations.
      (3)   Automotive, trailer and recreational vehicle sales and service.
      (4)   Carpentry/Woodworking shops.
      (5)   Farm equipment sales facilities.
      (6)   Federal, state, and local government offices and accessory uses
etc.
      (7)   Health clubs, health spas, and other similar establishments.
      (8)   Hotels and Motels.
      (9)   Laundry, dry cleaning and/or clothes pressing plant.
      (10)   Light manufacturing.
      (11)   Multiple use buildings.
      (12)   Recreational facilities and recreational organizations.
      (13)   Repair services.
      (14)   Restaurants.
      (15)   Retail businesses.
      (16)   Rural enterprises in accordance with §
150-61.
      (17)   Theaters.
      (18)   Warehousing and Distribution Center. [Added 4-14-2020 by Ord. No.
355]
      (19)   Wholesale business facilities. [Amended 4-14-2020 by Ord. No. 355]
   C.   The following uses shall be permitted in the Highway Commercial
District with greater minimum area regulations:
      (1)   Accessory buildings in accordance with the minimum area regulations
listed in §
150-28.
      (2)   Accessory uses incidental to the principle use.
      (3)   Building material storage, lumber yards, and lumber mills.
      (4)   Convention Center.
      (5)   Food manufacturing and processing.
      (6)   Public schools, private schools, daycare centers, geriatric
centers, nursing homes, personal care establishments, hospitals, and similar
institutions.
      (7)   Shopping centers in accordance with the following provisions:
         (a)   Access. There shall be a minimum of two (2) separate points of
ingress and egress and no access points shall be located within two hundred
(200) feet of intersecting streets, unless such points are located directly at
an intersection.
         (b)   Management. A shopping center shall be under unified management
which shall clearly establish centralized responsibility for the operation and
maintenance of the project including all common areas.
         (c)   Signs. There shall be only one (1) freestanding sign per road
frontage or access in compliance with the applicable provisions of this
chapter. Such freestanding sign shall be exempt from size limitations and the
location and detail shall be shown on the land development plan
         (d)   Circulation. Traffic circulation within a shopping center
project shall be designed to minimize pedestrian and vehicular mixing and
congestion. Circulation shall be provided along the outer perimeters and along
store entrances to serve as an internal road separate from the main roadway.
This road shall be owned and maintained by the shopping center.
         (e)   All access to outparcels shall use the internal roadway.
         (f)   Maintenance agreements shall be required and shall be reviewed
and approved by the Township solicitor before site approval.
 150-27 HIGHWAY COMMERCIAL CONDITIONAL USES.
   A.   Conditional uses in the Highway Commercial District shall be as
follows.
      (1)   Adult businesses.
         (a)   Adult businesses must be conducted and maintained in such a
manner as to ensure the health, safety and welfare of the citizens and their
property in Antrim Township.
         (b)   General regulations.
            [1]   No adult-oriented business shall be located within one-
thousand (1,000) feet of any of the following land uses, as measured from the
nearest point of both properties.
               [a]   Churches.
               [b]   Schools (public or private).
               [c]   Child-care/day-care facility.
               [d]   Residence.
               [e]   Park.
               [f]   Playground.
               [g]   Community center.
               [h]   Library.
               [i]   Museum.
               [j]   Camp.
               [k]   Amusement park.
               [l]   Ball field.
               [m]   Any other area where minors congregate.
            [2]   No adult-oriented business shall be located on a parcel of
land that is adjacent to an interstate or Grindstone Hill Road from S.R. 0016
south to Exit 3 of Interstate 81.
            [3]   No adult-oriented business shall be located within two-
thousand (2,000) feet of another adult business.
            [4]   Permit required. No adult business shall be commenced or
continued without a conditional use permit being obtained from the Township
pursuant to this chapter.
            [5]   Signs and displays. No exterior display or interior display
which is visible from outside the business shall be made to identify or portray
the type of activity which occurs at an adult-oriented business, excepting for
one approved ground sign not to exceed a surface area of thirty-six (36) square
feet for both sides combined. Such sign shall be subject to all other
limitations applicable to signs. It shall not incorporate any obscene material,
sexual messages, or any sexual or obscene innuendos, or any pictures, but shall
be otherwise unlimited as to message. All entrances to an adult business shall
be clearly and legibly posted by a notice indicating that minors are prohibited
from entering the premises.
            [6]   Nonconforming buildings or lots. No nonconforming building or
lot shall be used for an adult-oriented business. No other existing building,
lot or use shall be added to, enlarged, expanded in size or program or
converted for purposes of conducting an adult-oriented business unless
application to do so has been made pursuant to this section.
            [7]   All exterior areas of the adult business, including
buildings, landscaping and parking areas, shall be kept free of trash and
debris and maintained in a clean and orderly manner at all times.
            [8]   Hours of operation shall not be from 2:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m.
and such businesses must be closed on Sundays and all federal observed
holidays.
            [9]   Each adult business shall conform to all applicable laws and
regulations with regards to federal, state and local laws.
         (c)   Prohibited activities. Because they are known to present severe
health risks (including spread of sexually transmitted diseases), encourage
prostitution, increase sexual assaults and attract criminal activity, the
following activities shall not be permitted in any adult-oriented business
within Antrim Township:
            [1]   Adult business shall not sell or display obscene matter, as
that term is defined by the PA Crimes Code or its successors, and may not
exhibit harmful matter, as that term is defined by the PA Crimes Code or its
successors, to minors.
            [2]   No adult business shall be operated in any manner that
permits the observation of any persons or material depicting, describing or
related to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas inside the
premises from any public way or from any location outside the building or area
of such establishment. This provision shall apply to any display, decoration,
sign, show window or other opening.
               [a]   Specified sexual activities:
                  1.   Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals,
pubic region, buttocks, anus (or) female breast.
                  2.   Sex acts, normal or deviant, actual or simulated,
including intercourse, oral copulation or sodomy.
                  3.   Acts of human masturbation, actual or simulated.
                  4.   Excretory function as part of or in connection with any
of the activities set forth above.
               [b]   Specified anatomical areas:
                  1.   Less than completely and opaquely covered human
genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breast below a point immediately
above the top of the areola.
                  2.   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even
if completely and opaquely covered.
               [c]   No loudspeakers or sound equipment shall be used by an
adult business for the amplification of sound to a level audible beyond the
walls of the building in which the business is located.
               [d]   Public appearance by a person knowingly or intentionally
engaged in sexual intercourse, deviant sexual conduct or the fondling of the
genitals of himself or another person, or the fondling of female breasts.
               [e]   The knowing and intentional public appearance of a person
in a state of nudity.
         (d)   Adult businesses must meet the following minimum criteria:
            [1]   Minimum front yard setback of three hundred (300) feet.
            [2]   Minimum side and rear yard of one-hundred (100) feet.
            [3]   Screening shall be provided along all property lines that are
not adjacent to a public road, which shall be three (3) rows of evergreens, six
(6) feet in height, and staggered so as to not see through them. The screening
must be maintained by the property owners, and trees that do not survive must
be replaced as soon as they show signs of dying.
            [4]   Meet any other condition set forth by the Board of
Supervisors which is reasonable and that provides for the health, safety, and
well-being of the public in general.
      (2)   Commercial Communication transmitting and receiving facilities not
including towers.
         (a)   Antennae and accessory equipment shall not exceed a maximum
height of thirty-five (35) feet above the top of a structure upon which it is
located.
         (b)   Antennae and accessory equipment shall be located/placed on
existing structures.
         (c)   Antennae and accessory shall not be located on any residential
structure
         (d)   The applicant shall be required to submit to the Township
evidence of the need for antennae and that all alternatives have been
exhausted. Applicants are required to prove need by providing evidence that
existing antennae cannot accommodate this added use due to structural capacity,
interference, or locational needs.
         (e)   All facilities shall be constructed in accordance with all State
and Federal regulations.
         (f)   Facilities shall be removed within one year from
decommissioning. Upon written notice from the Township the facilities shall be
removed. Failure to do so gives the Township the right to enter the property
and remove such facilities at the expense of the property owner, including any
and all legal costs incurred by the Township.
         (g)   The applicant shall submit a copy of its current Federal
Communications Commission license: the name, address and emergency telephone
number for the operator of the communications tower; and a certificate of
insurance evidencing general liability coverage in the minimum amount of one-
million dollars ($1,000,000) per occurrence and property damage coverage in the
amount of one-million dollars ($1,000,000) per occurrence covering the
communications tower and communications antennas.
         (h)   Financial Security in an amount deemed satisfactory by the Board
to ensure no disturbances or interferences are generated as a result of such
facility.
      (3)   Fireworks sales.
         (a)   Fireworks sales and storage establishments must be conducted and
maintained in such a manner as to ensure the health, safety and welfare of the
citizens and their property in Antrim Township and any other neighboring
municipality.
         (b)   General regulations.
            [1]   Fireworks sales and/or storage facilities shall supply
adequate fire suppression by either a fire hydrant if on public water, or a
water tower or similar water storage device to supply the sprinkler system at
full flow with a minimum of one (1) hour of water.
            [2]   All front, side and rear yards shall be fifty (50) feet.
            [3]   No fireworks sales and/or storage facility shall be located
within two-hundred-fifty (250) feet, measured from the property line, from
another fireworks sales or storage facility s property line.
            [4]   Nonconforming buildings or lots. No nonconforming building or
lot shall be used for a fireworks-oriented business. No nonconforming
buildings, lots or uses shall be added to, enlarged, expanded in size or
program or converted for purposes of conducting any fireworks sales and/or
storage business unless application to the Zoning Hearing Board to do so has
been made pursuant to this section.
            [5]   Each fireworks sales and storage business shall conform to
all applicable laws and regulations with regards to federal, state and local
laws. If any of these regulations conflict then the most stringent requirement
shall apply.
            [6]   Meet any other condition set forth by the Board of
Supervisors which is reasonable and that provides for the health, safety, and
well-being of the public in general.
         (c)   It shall be prohibited to sell display fireworks within the
municipal boundaries of Antrim Township.
      (4)   Research facilities.
         (a)   Provide a detailed description of the type of research being
conducted and any potential public health concern.
         (b)   Provide a list of materials, chemicals, biological agents etc.
to be used or stored on site.
         (c)   Any modification to the type of research being conducted shall
require a re-submittal of subsection (a) and (b) for determination by the Board
of Supervisors as to the need for a public hearing.
      (5)   Resource recovery facilities and transfer stations excluding
salvage yards.
         (a)   General.
            [1]   Resource recovery facilities and transfer stations shall be
conducted and maintained in such a manner as to ensure the health, safety and
welfare of the citizens of Antrim Township.
            [2]   All operations shall be conducted inside a building.
            [3]   Resource recovery facilities and transfer stations shall
comply with all State, Federal, and local regulations.
            [4]   Fencing. Fencing shall be required in accordance with DEP
rules and regulations.
         (b)   Location of resource recovery facilities and transfer stations
within the Township shall:
            [1]   not be located in an area with soils classified by the Soil
Conservation Service as prime agricultural soils.
            [2]   not be located on property which has any creek, stream, run
or any other free-flowing body of water within one-hundred (100) feet of the
boundary lines of said facility or station, nor shall any such creek, stream,
run or free-flowing body of water run through any land upon which it is
proposed to locate a resource recovery facility or transfer station. Temporary
water runoff such as that present in swales after a rainstorm shall not be
considered a creek, stream, run or any other free-flowing body of water for the
purpose of this section.
            [3]   not be established within one-hundred (100) feet of a
property line.
            [4]   not be established within one-hundred (100) feet of a public
right-of-way. Where the right-of-way is bounded on both sides by a resource
recovery facility or transfer station under a single ownership, the facility or
station shall be set back one-hundred (100) feet on each side of the right-of-
way.
            [5]   not be established within one-thousand-five-hundred (1,500)
feet of a water supply for domestic use.
         (c)   A physical plan drawn to scale of the resource recovery facility
or transfer station shall be submitted along with the application, including
the following:
            [1]   Tract metes and bounds upon which the facility or station is
to be maintained, the area presently in use as a facility or station and the
area for which a permit has been granted by the Department of Environmental
Protection.
            [2]   All streams, creeks, runs or other free-flowing bodies of
water within five-hundred (500) feet of all property lines, all properties
within two-hundred (200) feet of the facility or station, all buildings within
two-hundred (200) feet of the station or facility, all rights-of-way within
two-hundred (200) feet of the facility or station and all water supplies for
domestic use within five-hundred (500) feet of the facility or station.
            [3]   Proposed planting locations.
            [4]   Soil embankments for noise, dust and visual barriers and
heights of soil mounds, including proposed soil erosion and sedimentation
control which has been favorably reviewed by the Soil Conservation Service.
            [5]   Stormwater management provisions.
            [6]   Interior road patterns and points of ingress and egress onto
state and Township roads.
            [7]   Source of water, if plans show use of water, and location of
all monitoring wells.
      (6)   Truck stops.
         (a)   The applicant for a truck stop shall provide a detailed written
description of the proposed use in each of the following topics:
            [1]   The nature of the on-site activities and operations, the
types of materials stored, the frequency of distribution and restocking, the
duration period of storage of materials and the methods for disposal of any
surplus or damaged materials.
            [2]   The general scale of the operation in terms of its market
area, specific floor space requirements for each activity, the total number of
employees on each shift and an overall needed site size.
            [3]   Any environmental impacts that are likely to be generated
(e.g., noise, smoke, dust, litter, glare, vibration, electrical disturbance,
wastewater, stormwater, solid waste, etc.) and specific measures employed to
mitigate or eliminate any negative impacts.
            [4]   Expected traffic impacts (number of total vehicle trips per
day, peak hour trips, breakdown of trips by vehicle size, trip distribution,
effects on existing volumes of nearby corridors and intersections serving
traffic generated by the proposed use) and any measures or improvements that
will be used to assure an acceptable level of service.
         (b)   Screening. Screening shall be provided along the entire property
line adjacent to residential uses.
         (c)   Property shall not abut a residential district.
         (d)   No parking, buildings, or drive areas shall be within three-
hundred (300) feet of a residential dwelling.
         (e)   Access to a local street, as defined by this chapter, shall not
be permitted.
         (f)   Ingress, egress and internal traffic circulation shall be
designed to ensure safety and minimize congestion and accommodate pedestrian
traffic.
 150-28 MINIMUM AREA REGULATIONS FOR HIGHWAY COMMERCIAL DISTRICT (HC).
 Min. Area Regulations for §  Min. Area Regulations for §  Min. Area Regulations for §
 150-26(A)                     150-26(B)                     150-26(C) and §
                                                             150-27 Cond. Uses
           Min. Area Regulations for §  Min. Area Regulations for §  Min. Area Regulations for §
           150-26(A)                     150-26(B)                     150-26(C) and §
                                                                       150-27 Cond. Uses
Lot size   10,000                        20,000                        40,000
(sq. ft.)
Lot width  75                            100                           150
(feet)
Lot Depth  100                           100                           150
(feet)
Front yard 25                            25                            25
(feet)
Side Yard  12                            12                            25
(feet)
Rear yard  25                            25                            40
(feet)
Maximum    40                            50                            50
Height
Maximum
impervious 75%                           75%                           75%
area
 
ARTICLE IX INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT (I)
 150-29 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the Industrial District (I) is to provide employment by
allowing clustered industrial development in appropriate areas and to provide
sites for industrial uses by minimizing the hazards and nuisances created by
the operation of industry. Emphasis shall be put on creating safe traffic
patterns separating employees from the industrial deliveries or shipments.
Green designs shall be used to create an aesthetic environment.
 150-30 PERMITTED USES.
   A.   The following uses shall be permitted in the Industrial District:
      (1)   Accessory Buildings in accordance with §
150-55 Accessory Building Regulations .
      (2)   Accessory uses incidental to the principle use.
      (3)   Agricultural and Agriculturally related operations in accordance
with all Federal, State, and local regulations.
      (4)   Automotive, trailer and recreational vehicle sales and service.
      (5)   Building materials storage, lumberyards, and lumber mills.
      (6)   Federal, state, and local government offices and accessory uses
etc.
      (7)   Laundry, dry cleaning and or clothes pressing plant.
      (8)   Light manufacturing.
      (9)   Mini warehousing and self storage establishments.
      (10)   Multiple use buildings.
      (11)   Public utilities.
      (12)   Repair Services.
      (13)   Research facilities.
      (14)   Rural Enterprise in accordance with §
150-61.
      (15)   Warehousing and Distribution Center. [Added 4-14-2020 by Ord. No.
355]
      (16)   Wholesale business facilities. [Amended 4-14-2020 by Ord. No. 355]
   B.   The following uses shall be permitted in the Industrial District with
greater minimum area regulations:
      (1)   Accessory Buildings in accordance with the minimum area regulations
listed in §
150-32.
      (2)   Food manufacturing and processing. [Amended 4-14-2020 by Ord. No.
355]
      (3)   Heavy Manufacturing. [Amended 4-14-2020 by Ord. No. 355]
      (4)   Resource recovery facilities and transfer stations. [Amended 4-14-
2020 by Ord. No. 355]
      (5)   Truck stops. [Amended 4-14-2020 by Ord. No. 355]
 150-31 CONDITIONAL USES.
   A.   Conditional uses in the Industrial District shall be as follows:
      (1)   Commercial Communication transmitting and receiving facilities not
including towers.
         (a)   Antennae and accessory equipment shall not exceed a maximum
height of thirty-five (35) feet above the top of a structure upon which it is
located.
         (b)   Antennae and accessory equipment shall be located/placed on
existing structures.
         (c)   Antennae and accessory shall not be located on any residential
structure
         (d)   The applicant shall be required to submit to the Township
evidence of the need for antennae and that all alternatives have been
exhausted. Applicants are required to prove need by providing evidence that
existing antennae cannot accommodate this added use due to structural capacity,
interference, or locational needs.
         (e)   All facilities shall be constructed in accordance with all State
and Federal regulations.
         (f)   Facilities shall be removed within one (1) year from
decommissioning. Upon written notice from the Township the facilities shall be
removed. Failure to do so gives the Township the right to enter the property
and remove such facilities at the expense of the property owner, including any
and all legal costs incurred by the Township.
         (g)   The applicant shall submit a copy of its current Federal
Communications Commission license: the name, address and emergency telephone
number for the operator of the communications tower; and a certificate of
insurance evidencing general liability coverage in the minimum amount of one-
million dollars ($1,000,000) per occurrence and property damage coverage in the
amount of one-million dollars ($1,000,000) per occurrence covering the
communications tower and communications antennas.
         (h)   Financial Security in an amount deemed satisfactory by the Board
to ensure no disturbances or interferences are generated as a result of such
facility.
      (2)   Salvage yards in accordance with
Chapter 84.
 150-32 MINIMUM AREA REGULATIONS FOR THE INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT (I).
 Min. area Regulations for §  Min. area regulations for §
 150-30(A)                     150-30(B) and §
                               150-31 Conditional Uses.
                   Min. area Regulations for §  Min. area regulations for §
                   150-30(A)                     150-30(B) and §
                                                 150-31 Conditional Uses.
Lot size (sq. ft.) 40,000                        80,000
Lot width (feet)   150                           200
Lot Depth (feet)   150                           200
Front yard (feet)  25                            25
Side Yard (feet)   12                            12
Rear yard (feet)   25                            25
Maximum Height     50                            50
Maximum impervious 75%                           75%
area
 
ARTICLE X FLOOD HAZARD DISTRICT
 150-33 STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.
   The Legislature of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania has, by the passage of
the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act of 1978, delegated the
responsibility to local governmental units to adopt floodplain management
regulations to promote public health, safety, and the general welfare of its
citizenry. Therefore, the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Antrim,
Franklin County, Pennsylvania, does hereby order as follows.
 150-34 PURPOSE.
   This district superimposes a zoning district on a district underlying it on
the Antrim Township Zoning Map by establishing an additional set of standards
and criteria which should be considered minimum requirements consistent within
the district itself. Furthermore, the intent of this district is to:
   A.   Promote the general health, welfare and safety of the community.
   B.   Encourage the utilization of appropriate construction practices in
order to prevent or minimize flood damage in the future.
   C.   Minimize danger to public health by protecting water supply and natural
drainage.
   D.   Reduce financial burdens imposed on the community, its governmental
units and its residents by preventing excessive development in areas subject to
flooding.
   E.   Preserve the natural characteristics of designated flood-prone areas by
preventing rapid water runoff to contribute to downstream flooding and by
providing areas for groundwater absorption for maintenance of the surface water
supply.
 150-35 ADMINISTRATION.
   A.   Designation of the Floodplain Administrator.
   The Zoning Officer is hereby appointed to administer and enforce
Article X and is referred to herein as the Floodplain Administrator.
   B.   Duties and Responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator.
      (1)   The Floodplain Administrator shall issue a Land Use Permit only
after it has been determined that the proposed work to be undertaken will be in
conformance with the requirements of Article X and all other applicable codes
and ordinances.
      (2)   Prior to the issuance of any Land Use Permit, the Floodplain
Administrator shall review the application for the permit to determine if all
other necessary government permits required by state and federal laws have been
obtained, such as those required by the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (Act
1966-537, as amended); the Pennsylvania Dam Safety and Encroachments Act (Act
1978-325, as amended); the Pennsylvania Clean Streams Act (Act 1937-394, as
amended); and the U.S. Clean Water Act, Section 404, 33 U.S.C. 1344. No permit
shall be issued until this determination has been made.
      (3)   During the construction period, the Floodplain Administrator or
other authorized official shall inspect the premises to determine that the work
is progressing in compliance with the information provided on the Land Use
Permit application and with all applicable municipal laws and ordinances. He/
she shall make as many inspections during and upon completion of the work as
are necessary.
      (4)   In the discharge of his/her duties, the Floodplain Administrator
shall have the authority to enter any building, structure, premises or
development in the identified floodplain area, upon presentation of proper
credentials, at any reasonable hour to enforce the provisions of
Article X.
      (5)   In the event the Floodplain Administrator discovers that the work
does not comply with the Land Use Permit application or any applicable laws and
ordinances, or that there has been a false statement or misrepresentation by
any applicant, the Floodplain Administrator shall revoke the Land Use Permit
and report such fact to the Board of Supervisors for whatever action it
considers necessary.
      (6)   The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain all records associated
with the requirements of Article X including, but not limited to, permitting,
inspection and enforcement.
      (7)   The Floodplain Administrator shall consider the requirements of the
34 PA Code and the 2006 IBC and the 2006 IRC or latest revisions thereof.
 150-36 ESTABLISHMENT OF FLOOD HAZARD DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.
   The identified floodplain area shall be any areas of the Township of Antrim,
classified as special flood hazard areas (SFHAs) in the Flood Insurance Study
(FIS) and the accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs) dated January 18,
2012 and issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), or the most
recent revision thereof. Including all digital data developed as part of the
Flood Insurance Study.
   The above referenced FIS and FIRMs, and any subsequent revisions and
amendments are hereby adopted by the Township of Antrim and declared to be a
part of
Article X.
 150-37 APPLICABILITY OF DISTRICT REGULATIONS.
   A.   This district shall serve as an overlay to the existing underlying
districts as shown on the Official Zoning Map, and the provisions for the Flood
Hazard District shall serve as a supplement to those underlying districts.
   B.   Where there exists any conflict between the provisions of this Flood
Hazard District and any underlying district, the more restrictive provision
shall apply.
   C.   
Article X supersedes any other conflicting provisions which may be in effect in
identified floodplain areas. However, any other code provisions shall remain in
full force and effect to the extent that those provisions are more restrictive.
If there is any conflict between any of the provisions of
Article X, the more restrictive shall apply.
 150-38 DETERMINATION OF THE ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR-FLOOD ELEVATION.
   A.   The A Area/District shall be those areas identified as an A Zone on the
FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA and for which no one hundred (100)
year flood elevations have been provided. For the purpose of this section, the
one-hundred-year-flood elevation shall be used as the basis for regulation.
When available, information from federal, state and other acceptable sources
shall be used to determine the one-hundred-year elevation, as well as a
floodway area, if possible. When no other information is available, the one-
hundred-year-flood elevation shall be determined by using a point on the
boundary of the identified floodplain area which is nearest the construction
site in question.
   B.   In lieu of the above, the Board of Supervisors may require the
applicant to determine the elevation with hydrologic and hydraulic engineering
techniques. Hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be undertaken only by
professional engineers or others of demonstrated qualifications, who shall
certify that the technical methods used correctly reflect currently accepted
technical concepts. Studies, analyses, computations, etc. shall be submitted in
sufficient detail to allow a thorough technical review by the Township
Engineer.
 150-39 ALTERATIONS AND IMPROVEMENTS TO WATERCOURSES.
   No encroachment, alteration or improvement of any kind shall be made to any
watercourse unless it can be shown that the activity will not reduce or impede
the flood carrying capacity of the watercourse in any way. No encroachment,
alteration or improvement of any kind shall be made to any watercourse until
all adjacent municipalities which may be affected by such action have been
notified by the Township and until all required permits and approvals have been
first obtained from the Department of Environmental Protection, Bureau of Dams
and Waterway Management. Also, notification shall be sent to FEMA.
 150-40 CHANGES AND DISPUTES IN IDENTIFICATION OF AREA.
   The identified floodplain area may be revised or modified by the Board of
Supervisors where studies or data provided by a qualified agency or person
document the need for such a revision. Additionally, as soon as practicable,
but not later than six (6) months after the date such information becomes
available, a community shall notify the FEMA of the changes by submitting
technical or scientific data. Prior to any such change, approval shall be
obtained from FEMA. Should any dispute concerning any identified floodplain
boundary arise, initial determination shall be made by the Township Planning
Commission and any party aggrieved by this decision may appeal to the Board of
Supervisors. The burden of proof shall be on the appellant.
 150-41 PROHIBITED USES.
   A.   The commencement of any of the following activities; or the
construction, enlargement or expansion of any structure used or intended to be
used for any of the following activities is prohibited:
      (1)   Hospitals.
      (2)   Nursing homes.
      (3)   Jails or prisons.
      (4)   A new mobile home park or mobile home subdivision, or substantial
improvements to an existing mobile home park or mobile home subdivision.
   B.   Development which may endanger human life. Any new or substantially
improved structure which will be used for the production or storage of any of
the following dangerous materials or substances or which will be used for any
activity requiring the maintenance of a supply (more than 100 pounds or 12
gallons or other comparable amount and any amount of radioactive substances and
a maximum of 550 gallons of petroleum products) of any of the following
dangerous materials or substances on the premises shall be prohibited:
Acetone
Ammonia
Benzene
Calcium carbide
Carbon disulfide
Celluloid
Chlorine
Hydrochloric acid
Hydrocyanic acid
Magnesium
Nitric acid and oxides of nitrogen
Pesticides (including insecticides, fungicides and rodenticides)
Petroleum products (gasoline, fuel oil, etc.)
Phosphorus
Potassium
Radioactive substances, insofar as such substances are not otherwise regulated
Sodium
Sulfur and sulfur products
 150-42 APPLICATION PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS.
   A.   If any proposed construction or development is located entirely or
partially within any identified floodplain area, applicants for Land Use and/or
building permits and/or subdivision and land development applications shall
provide all the necessary information in sufficient detail and clarity to
enable the Floodplain Administrator to determine that:
      (1)   All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage and conform to the requirements of Article X and all other applicable
codes and ordinances.
      (2)   All utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and
water systems, are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood
damage.
      (3)   Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood
hazards.
      (4)   Structures will be anchored to prevent floatation, collapse, or
lateral movement.
      (5)   Building materials are flood-resistant.
      (6)   Appropriate practices that minimize flood damage have been used.
      (7)   Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning
equipment, and other service facilities have been designed and/or located to
prevent water entry or accumulation.
   B.   Applicants shall file the following minimum information plus other
pertinent information may be required by the Floodplain Administrator to make
the above determination:
      (1)   A complete application form.
      (2)   A plan of the entire site, clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of
one inch being equal to 100 feet or less, showing the following:
         (a)   North arrow, scale and date.
         (b)   Topographic contour lines.
         (c)   All property and lot lines, including dimensions, and the size
of the site expressed in acres or square feet.
         (d)   The location of all existing and proposed buildings, structures
and other improvements, including the location of any existing or proposed
subdivision and land development.
         (e)   The location of all existing streets, drives, and other access
ways; and
         (f)   The location of any existing bodies of water or watercourses,
identified floodplain areas and, if available, information pertaining to the
floodway, the flow of water, including direction and velocities.
      (3)   Plans of all proposed buildings, structures and other improvements,
drawn at a suitable scale, showing the following:
         (a)   The proposed lowest floor elevation based upon North American
Vertical Datum of 1988.
         (b)   The elevation of the one-hundred-year flood.
         (c)   The elevation of the base flood;
         (d)   If available, information concerning flood depths, pressures,
velocities, impact and uplift forces and other factors associated with the one-
hundred-year flood.
         (e)   Detailed information concerning any proposed flood proofing
measures.
         (f)   Supplemental information as may be necessary under 34 PA Code,
the 2006 IBC or the 2006 IRC.
      (4)   The following data and documentation:
         (a)   A document, certified by a registered professional engineer,
which states that the proposed construction or development has been adequately
designed to withstand, pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces
associated with the base flood elevation. Such statement shall include a
description of the type and extent of flood proofing measures which have been
incorporated into the design of the structure and/or development.
         (b)   Detailed information needed to determine compliance with
Article X, to include:
            [1]   Amount, location and purpose of any material or substances
referred heretofore which are intended to be used, produced, stored or
otherwise maintained on site.
            [2]   Description of safeguards incorporated into the design of the
proposed structure to prevent leaks or spills of any polluting or dangerous
substance or material during the base flood.
         (c)   The appropriate component of the Department of Environmental
Protection s Planning Module for Land Development.
         (d)   Where any excavation or grading is proposed, a plan meeting the
requirements of the Department of Environmental Protection to implement and
maintain erosion and sedimentation control.
         (e)   If available, information concerning flood depths, pressures,
velocities, impact and uplift forces and other factors associated with a base
flood elevation; and
         (f)   Detailed information concerning any proposed flood proofing
measures and corresponding elevations.
         (g)   Documentation, certified by a registered professional engineer
or architect, to show that the cumulative effect of any proposed development
within a Special Floodplain Area when combined with all other existing and
anticipated development, will not increase the base flood elevation more than
one (1) foot at any point.
         (h)   Detailed information needed to determine compliance with §
150-44:
            [1]   the amount, location and purpose of any materials or
substances which are intended to be used, produced, stored or otherwise
maintained on site.
            [2]   a description of the safeguards incorporated into the design
of the proposed structure to prevent leaks or spills of the dangerous materials
or substances during a base flood.
               [a]   The appropriate component of the Department of
Environmental Protection s Planning Module for Land Development.
               [b]   Where any excavation or grading is proposed, a plan
meeting the requirements of the Department of Environmental Protection, to
implement and maintain erosion and sedimentation control.
      (5)   Applications for Permits shall be accompanied by a fee, payable to
the municipality as set forth by Resolution of the Board of Supervisors.
 150-43 REQUIRED PERMITS.
   A.   Land Use and/or Building permits shall be required before any
construction or development is undertaken within any area of the Township and
affected by this district. Such application shall contain the following:
      (1)   Name and address of applicant.
      (2)   Name and address of owner of land on which proposed construction is
to occur.
      (3)   Name and address of contractor.
      (4)   Site location including address.
      (5)   Listing of other permits required.
      (6)   Brief description of proposed work and estimated cost, including a
breakout of flood-related cost and the market value of the building before the
flood damage occurred where appropriate.
      (7)   A plan of the site showing the exact size and location of the
proposed construction as well as any existing buildings or structures.
   B.   Prior to the issuance of any Land Use and/or Building permit, the
Zoning Officer shall review the application for permit to determine if all
other necessary government permits required by state and federal laws have been
obtained, such as those required by the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (Act
1966-537, as amended); the Pennsylvania Dam Safety and Encroachment Act (Act
1978-325, as amended); and the U.S. Clean Water Act, Section 404, 33 U.S.C.
Subsection 1334. No application shall be accepted by the Zoning Officer until
this determination has been made.
 150-44 GENERAL REGULATIONS.
   A.   In the identified floodplain area, the development and/or use of land
shall be permitted, provided that the development and/or use complies with the
restrictions and requirements of Article X and all other applicable codes and
ordinances in force in the Township.
   B.   Within any floodway area, no new construction or development shall be
permitted that would cause any increase in the one-hundred-year-flood
elevation.
   C.   Within Zones without a designated floodway, new development shall not
be permitted unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of all the
past and projected development will not increase the BFE by more than 1 foot.
   D.   Within any identified floodplain area, no new construction or
development shall be located within the area measured 50 feet landward from the
top-of-bank of any watercourse unless a permit is obtained from the Department
of Environmental Protection, Bureau of Dams and Waterways Management.
   E.   All subdivision proposals and development proposals containing at least
50 lots or at least 5 acres, whichever is the lesser, in flood hazard areas
where base flood elevation data are not available, shall be supported by
hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses that determine base flood
elevations and floodway information. The analyses shall be prepared by a
licensed professional engineer in a format required by FEMA for a Conditional
Letter of Map Revision or Letter of Map Revision. Submittal requirements and
processing fees shall be the responsibility of the applicant.
   F.   Within any identified floodplain area, the elevation of the lowest
floor (including basement) of any new or substantially improved residential
structure shall be 1 1/2 feet or more above the one-hundred-year-flood
elevation.
   G.   The elevation of any new or substantially improved nonresidential
structure within any identified flood plain area (including basement) shall be
1 1/2 feet or more above the one-hundred-year flood elevation, or part thereof,
having a lowest floor (including basement) which is not elevated to at least 1
1/2 feet or more above the one-hundred-year-flood elevation shall be flood
proofed in a completely or essentially dry manner in accordance with the W1 and
W2 space classification standards contained in the publication entitled Flood-
Proofing Regulations published by the United States Army Corps of Engineers
(June 1972) or with some other equivalent standard. All plans and
specifications for such flood proofing shall be accompanied by a statement
certified by a registered professional engineer or architect which states that
the proposed design and methods of construction are in conformance with the
above-related standards.
   H.   Enclosed areas below the lowest floor (including basement) are
prohibited.
 150-45 DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.
   The following minimum standards shall apply for all construction and
development within any identified floodplain area:
   A.   Fill. If fill is used, it shall:
      (1)   Extend laterally at least 15 feet beyond the building line from all
points.
      (2)   Consist of soil or small rock materials only; sanitary landfills
shall not be permitted.
      (3)   Be compacted to provide the necessary permeability and resistance
to erosion, scouring or settling.
      (4)   Be no steeper than one vertical to two feet horizontal, unless
substantiated data justifying steeper slopes is submitted to the Township
Engineer for review and approved by the Board of Supervisors.
      (5)   Be used to the extent to which it does not adversely affect
properties.
   B.   Drainage facilities. Storm drainage facilities shall be designed to
convey the flow of stormwater runoff in a safe and efficient manner. The system
shall ensure proper drainage along streets and provide positive drainage away
from buildings. The system shall also be designed to prevent the discharge of
excess runoff onto adjacent properties.
   C.   Water and sanitary sewer facilities and systems.
      (1)   All new or replacement water and sanitary sewer facilities and
systems shall be located, designed and constructed to minimize or eliminate
flood damages and the infiltration of floodwaters.
      (2)   Sanitary sewer facilities and systems shall be designed to prevent
the discharge of untreated sewage into floodwaters.
      (3)   No part of any on-site sewage system shall be located within any
identified floodplain area except in strict compliance with all state and local
regulations for such systems. If any such system is permitted, it shall be
located so as to avoid impairment to it or contamination from it during a
flood.
   D.   Other utilities. All other utilities, such as gas lines, electrical and
telephone systems, shall be located, elevated (where possible) and constructed
to minimize the chance of impairment during a flood.
   E.   Streets. The finished elevation of all new streets shall be no more
than one foot below the regulatory flood elevation.
   F.   Storage. All materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive or, in
times of flooding, could be injurious to human, animal or plant life, and not
listed in §
150-41(B), Development which may endanger human life, shall be stored at or
above the regulatory flood elevation and/or flood proofed to the maximum extent
possible.
   G.   Placement of buildings and structures. All buildings and structures
shall be designed, located and constructed so as to offer the minimum effect
upon the flow and height of floodwater.
   H.   Anchoring.
      (1)   All buildings and structures shall be firmly anchored in accordance
with accepted engineering practices to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral
movement.
      (2)   All air ducts, large pipes, storage tanks and other similar objects
or components located below the regulatory flood elevation shall be securely
anchored or fixed to prevent flotation.
   I.   Floors, walls and ceilings.
      (1)   Wood flooring used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be installed to accommodate a lateral expansion of the flooring, perpendicular
to the flooring grain, without causing structural damage to the buildings.
      (2)   Plywood used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be of
a marine or water-resistant variety.
      (3)   Walls and ceilings at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be designed and constructed of materials that are water-resistant and will
withstand inundation.
      (4)   Windows, doors and other components at or below the regulatory
flood elevation shall be made of metal or other water-resistant material.
   J.   Paints and adhesives.
      (1)   Paints and other finishes used at or below the regulatory flood
elevation shall be of a marine or water-resistant quality.
      (2)   Adhesives used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be
of a marine or water-resistant variety.
      (3)   All wooden components (doors, trim, cabinets, etc.) shall be
finished with a marine or other water-resistant paint or other finishing
material.
   K.   Electrical components.
      (1)   Electrical distribution panels shall be at least three feet above
the one-hundred-year-flood elevation.
      (2)   Separate electrical circuits shall serve lower levels and shall be
dropped from above.
   L.   Equipment. Water heaters, furnaces, air-conditioning and ventilation
units and other mechanical or utility equipment or apparatus shall not be
located below the regulatory flood elevation.
   M.   Fuel supply systems. All gas and oil supply systems shall be designed
to prevent the infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from
the systems into floodwaters. Additional provisions shall be made for the
drainage of these systems in the event that floodwater infiltration occurs.
 150-46 SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS FOR MOBILE HOMES.
   A.   Within any identified floodplain area, all mobile homes and any
additions thereto shall be prohibited within the area measured 50 feet landward
from the top-of-bank of any watercourse.
   B.   Where permitted within any identified floodplain area, all mobile homes
and additions thereto shall be:
      (1)   Placed on a permanent foundation.
      (2)   Elevated so that the lowest floor of the mobile home is 1 1/2 feet
or more above the elevation of the one-hundred-year flood.
      (3)   Anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement.
 150-47 SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS FOR RECREATIONAL VEHICLES.
   A.   Recreational vehicles in Zones A1-30, AH and AE must either
      (1)   be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days,
      (2)   be fully licensed and ready for highway use, or
      (3)   meet the permit requirements for mobile homes in §
150-46.
 150-48 EXISTING STRUCTURES IN IDENTIFIED FLOODPLAIN AREAS.
   Any structure existing prior to the enactment of
Article X, as amended, may continue to remain, provided that:
   A.   Any modification, alteration, reconstruction or improvement of any kind
to an existing structure, to an extent or amount of 50% or more of its market
value, shall constitute a substantial improvement and shall be undertaken only
in full compliance with the provisions of this district.
   B.   Any modification, alteration, reconstruction or improvement of any kind
to an existing structure, to an extent or amount of less than 50% of its market
value, shall be elevated and/or flood proofed to the greatest extent possible.
   C.   No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be allowed
within any floodway area that would cause any increase in the elevation of the
one-hundred-year flood.
 150-49 VARIANCES.
   If compliance with any of the requirements of
Article X would result in exceptional hardship to a prospective builder,
developer or property owner, the Zoning Hearing Board may, upon request to the
Zoning Hearing Board, grant relief from the strict application of the
requirements of Article X. Requests for a variance shall be made according to
this chapter and the following procedure:
   A.   If granted, a variance shall involve only the least modification
necessary to provide relief.
   B.   In granting any variance, the Zoning Hearing Board shall attach
whatever reasonable conditions and safeguards it considers necessary in order
to protect the public health, safety and welfare and to achieve the objectives
of this chapter.
   C.   Whenever a variance is granted, the Zoning Hearing Board shall notify
the applicant, in writing, that:
      (1)   The granting of the variance may result in increased premium rates
for flood insurance.
      (2)   Such variance may increase the risks to life and property.
   D.   In reviewing any request for a variance, the Zoning Hearing Board shall
consider, at a minimum, the following:
      (1)   That there is good and sufficient cause.
      (2)   That failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional
hardship to the applicant.
      (3)   That the granting of the variance will:
         (a)   Neither result in an unacceptable or prohibited increase in
flood heights, additional threats to public safety or extraordinary public
expense;
         (b)   Nor create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimize the public or
conflict with any other applicable state or local ordinances and regulations.
   E.   A complete record of all variance requests and related actions shall be
maintained by the Zoning Hearing Board.
   F.   No variance shall be granted for any construction, development, use or
activity within any floodway area that would cause any increase in the one-
hundred-year flood.
   G.   No variance shall be granted for the uses or activities prohibited in §
150-41.
   H.   Notwithstanding any of the above, however, all structures shall be
designed and constructed so as to have the capability of resisting the one-
hundred-year flood.
   I.   The Zoning Hearing Board may, upon request from an applicant, consider
the possibility of modifying the freeboard requirements of 1 1/2 feet above the
one-hundred-year-flood elevation, provided that the applicant can demonstrate
and the Zoning Hearing Board can determine that:
      (1)   There are unique physical circumstances, such as exceptional
topographical or other existing natural or man-made conditions, peculiar to the
property.
      (2)   Because of such physical circumstances and conditions, the proposed
substantial improvement cannot be reasonably designed and constructed in
compliance with the provisions of the applicable requirements and that a
reduction is therefore necessary.
      (3)   Failure to grant the request will result in exceptional hardship to
the applicant.
      (4)   Approval of the request will not result in increased flood heights
within any designated floodway.
      (5)   Approval of the request will not result in any additional threat to
the public health and safety or result in any extraordinary public expense or
create any nuisance.
      (6)   Approval of the request will not result in any conflict with any
other applicable laws or regulations.
   J.   In approving a request for a reduction in the required freeboard, the
Zoning Hearing Board shall:
      (1)   Authorize the least reduction necessary to provide relief.
      (2)   Make notification.
         (a)   Notify the applicant, in writing, that approval of the request
will:
            [1]   Result in increased premium rates for flood insurance.
            [2]   Increase risks to the structure, its contents and occupants.
         (b)   Such notification shall be included with the Township records.
      (3)   Maintain a complete record of all requests which have been approved
authorizing reductions in freeboard.
      (4)   Report all such requests which have been approved in its annual
report to the Pennsylvania Department of Community and Economic Development and
FEMA.
 150-50 APPEALS FROM DECISION OF ZONING OFFICER.
   In addition to the procedures for appeals as contained in this chapter, in
any appeal pertaining to the boundaries of this district resulting from claims
that the district has become incorrect because of changes either natural or
man-made, the burden of proof shall be on the appellant. Such proof shall be
based on a detailed report using either the Log Pearsons III Method, the
Twenty-Four-Hour Evaluation Hydrograph or other commonly accepted methods of
determining runoff.
 150-51 MUNICIPAL LIABILITY.
   The granting of a Land Use and/or building or zoning permit or the approval
of a subdivision or land development plan in this district shall not constitute
a representation, guaranty or warranty of any kind by the Township, or any of
its officials or employees, of the practicability or safety of any structure,
use or development, and shall not create liability or cause of action against
such public body, official or employee for any damage that may result pursuant
thereto.
 150-52 WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   The degree of flood protection sought by the provisions of Article X is
considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on acceptable
engineering methods of study. Larger floods may occur or flood heights may be
increased by man-made or natural causes, such as ice jams and bridge openings
restricted by debris.
Article X does not imply that areas outside any identified floodplain areas, or
that land uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood
damages.
   
Article X shall not create liability on the part of the Township of Antrim or
any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance
on Article X or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
ARTICLE XI SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS
 150-53 EXEMPTIONS.
   A.   Public utilities are permitted in all zoning districts as a permitted
use. Public utilities shall not be required to comply with the minimum area
regulations as set forth of the Code of the Township of Antrim Pennsylvania.
   B.   Historical and/or archeological properties are permitted in all zoning
districts as a permitted use. Historical and/or archeological properties shall
not be required to comply with the minimum area regulations of this Chapter.
 150-54 BUILDINGS HOUSING ANIMALS
   A.   A one-hundred (100) foot setback shall apply to buildings that house
more animals or is greater in size than the number listed in the chart below.
Type of Animal Animals per building Building Sq. Ft.
Type of Animal                            Animals per building Building Sq. Ft.
Swine (hogs and pigs)                     25                   500
Cattle (cows, steers, heifers, calves,    50                   2000
and bulls)
Sheep and goats                           50                   600
Emus, Ostriches, Alpacas, Llamas          50                   900
Horses (ponies, mules, and donkeys)       25                   2500
Fowl (chickens, turkeys, ducks, and other 100                  400
birds)
Dogs and Cats                             20                   320
 
 150-55 ACCESSORY BUILDING REGULATIONS.
   A.   Accessory buildings shall comply with the following regulations:
      (1)   Accessory buildings to a residential use shall have a minimum
setback of five (5) feet from any side or rear lot line.
      (2)   Accessory buildings to principal uses other than residential shall
not be located closer than ten (10) feet to any side or rear property line.
      (3)   The setbacks for accessory buildings that are adjacent to public,
private or proposed road rights-of-way shall be the same as the setbacks listed
in the minimum area regulations for front yard setbacks of each applicable
zoning district.
   B.   When an accessory structure is attached to the principal building it
shall comply in all respects with the requirements of this chapter applicable
to the principal building.
   C.   An accessory structure shall conform to the height regulations for
principal buildings.
 150-56 ACCESSORY DWELLING UNITS (ADUS)
   Accessory dwelling units may be permitted in accordance with the following:
   A.   Density. One (1) accessory dwelling unit may be permitted on properties
of at least one-half (1/2) acre in size. Additional accessory dwelling units
may be permitted on properties of five (5) acres or greater at a density of one
(1) unit per five (5) acres. No more than five (5) ADUs shall be permitted on a
single property.
   B.   Size. Gross floor area of any ADU shall not exceed fifty (50) percent
of the principal dwelling. Existing historic accessory buildings more than
seventy-five (75) years old that exceed these floor space limits are permitted
as ADUs without having to meet the dimensional setback requirements.
   C.   Location. ADUs shall comply with the minimum area regulations for the
zoning district in which it is situated.
   D.   Permit issuance shall be contingent upon Township Sewage Enforcement
Officer and Pennsylvania DEP Approval for any on site septic sewage disposal
systems needed.
 150-57 HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS.
   A.   Height shall be measured from the lowest door elevation to the peak of
the roof.
   B.   Chimneys, flues, towers, spires, cupola domes, pole masts, antennas,
Church Steeples, barns and silos shall be exempt from the height limitations of
this chapter, provided that their location is not in the required yard.
 150-58 YARD AND LOT REGULATIONS.
   A.   Corner lots.
      (1)   Front yards are yards on which the building fronts on the public or
private road right-of-way and shall coincide with the property address, and the
yard opposite of the front yard shall be deemed to be a rear yard, and the
other (or others) side yards.
      (2)   No obstructions to vision shall be erected or maintained in the
line of sight.
      (3)   Any principle structure, addition thereto, or accessory structure
shall not be located closer to any private, public, or proposed road right of
way than the front yard setback of the applicable zoning district.
   B.   Setback exemption. No proposed dwelling need have a setback greater
than the average of the two (2) existing dwellings with the greatest setbacks
located within one-hundred (100) feet on each side of said proposed dwelling on
the same side of the street, within the same block and the same district.
However, in no event shall the front yard be less than ten (10) feet.
   C.   Projections into required yards.
      (1)   Cornices, canopies, eaves, bay windows, balconies, uncovered
stairways and necessary landings, and chimneys or other architectural features
may project into yards a distance not exceeding a total of three (3) feet.
      (2)   Patios, deck, and open porches may be located in the required side
and rear yards, provided that if the yard is adjacent to a private, public, or
proposed road right-of-way the setbacks listed in the minimum area regulations
for front yards of the applicable zoning district shall apply. Patios and open
porches may not be located closer than ten (10) feet to any adjacent property
line.
   D.   Existing small lots. A lot owned individually and separately and
separated in ownership from any adjoining tracts of land on the effective date
of this chapter and subsequent amendments, which has a total lot area or lot
width less than prescribed in this chapter, may be used, provided such lot
shall be developed in conformity with all applicable district regulations other
than the minimum lot area, lot width, and side yards. Existing small lots
meeting the above stipulation shall provide side and rear yards which may be
proportionately reduced by the percentage that the existing small lot is less
than the minimum Township standard. However, in no event shall each side yard
be less than five (5) feet or rear yard less than twenty (20) feet
   E.   Through lots. Where a lot extends through from street to street, the
applicable front yard regulations shall apply on both streets.
   F.   Waiver of yards. No side yard or rear yard shall be required where such
yard abuts an operating railroad right-of-way.
   G.   Single-family semi-detached dwelling. A single family semi-detached
dwelling shall satisfy zoning minimum area requirements on a single lot or on a
combination of two lots. When two lots are used, only one side yard will be
required on each lot and the total lot area of the two lots shall meet the lot
area requirement for the applicable zoning district. It will not be necessary
to make each unit of a double unit equally sized.
   H.   Any yard abutting a public or private roadway, whether existing or
proposed, shall comply with the front yard regulations.
   I.   Buffer Zone and Screening. [Added 11-10-2015 by Ord. No. 345]
      (1)   Buffer Zones.
         (a)   A seventy-five (75) foot buffer zone shall be required when a
property in the HC or I Zoning District abuts the R-1 or the R-2 Zoning
District or when a residential use is in existence in the CC Zoning District
and abuts the proposed development. Twenty-five (25) feet of the outermost edge
of the district boundary or property line shall be screened with evergreen
trees of sufficient height and density to screen from the view of adjoining
properties, the structures and uses on the premises on which the screening is
required to be located. The trees at time of planting shall be of at least five
(5) feet in height, staggering the tree plantings for optimal visual and
audible diversion and tree health.
      (2)   Screening.
         (a)   Screening shall be provided along Route 11, Route 16, and
Williamsport Pike for manufacturing, warehousing, outdoor storage facilities,
mining, landfills, prisons, resource recovery, and other similar uses.
      (3)   When any tree used for screening purposes begins to show signs of
death, it shall be removed and replanted immediately to maintain screening.
      (4)   The requirement in this Section may be waived or modified by the
Board of Supervisors if the applicant demonstrates to the Board of Supervisors
that the proposed use of the property, and structures to be built on the
property, shall have no adverse effect on the adjacent properties and
surrounding community. In making this determination the Board shall consider
several factors, including, but not limited to, aesthetics, economic impact,
noise, and lighting.
 150-59 PRIVATE OUTDOOR SWIMMING POOLS.
   A land use permit shall be required for the installation or construction of
a private outdoor swimming pool subject to the following conditions:
   A.   The water edge of such pool shall not be located nearer than twenty
(20) feet to any lot line for an in-ground pool or nearer than fifteen (15)
feet for an aboveground pool. Swimming pools located adjacent to a public or
private street shall comply with the minimum area regulations for the zoning
district in which it is located. [Amended 4-14-2020 by Ord. No. 355]
   B.   Wading pools less than two (2) feet in depth shall be exempt from this
section.
 150-60 STORAGE OF RECREATIONAL VEHICLES, CAMPING TRAILERS, BOATS AND
DISMANTLED OR NON-OPERABLE VEHICLES.
   A.   No more than two (2) recreational vehicles or camper trailers may be
stored outside, but not occupied, on any individual residential lot.
   B.   No more than three (3) motorized boats may be stored outside on any
individual residential lot.
   C.   The residential storage of not more than three (3) dismantled, non-
operable or non-licensed vehicles as defined in this chapter shall be permitted
provided they are concealed from view. For the purpose of this section,
concealed may include covering the entire vehicle, installing a privacy fence,
placing them in a building or the like. Any more than three dismantled, non-
operable or non-licensed vehicles shall be stored in an enclosed building.
 150-61 RURAL ENTERPRISE.
   Rural Enterprise may be permitted upon a property that is primarily used for
agriculture.
   A.   The following are permitted under Rural Enterprise:
      (1)   Direct sale to the public of agricultural products produced
principally on the farm, provided that at least fifty percent (50%) of such
products are produced by the farm operator.
      (2)   Any and all production, primary processing, direct marketing and
storage of agricultural products produced principally on the farm.
      (3)   The sale of agricultural goods, services, supplies, and repairs
and/or the conduct of traditional trades, restaurants, and the production and
sale of home occupation goods, arts and crafts, so long as these uses remain
incidental to the agricultural character of the farm and are limited to
occupying residential and/or principally agricultural structures of the
property.
      (4)   The accommodation of tourists and visitors within principally
family residential and/or agricultural structures otherwise permitted under the
law so long as the accommodations of tourists and visitors is undertaken as
part-time and is incidental to the agricultural character of the property.
      (5)   Activities including: hayrides, corn mazes, farm tours, pick-your-
own crop events, seasonal celebrations, weddings, conferences and similar
activities provided they are part-time and are incidental to the agricultural
character of the property.
      (6)   Other similar uses upon approval by the Board of Supervisors.
   B.   Rural Enterprise Regulations. Rural Enterprise shall comply with the
following:
      (1)   A Zoning Permit shall be required. A written description of the
business being proposed, and a sketch shall be submitted to the Township for
approval before beginning such operation.
      (2)   A Safe means of ingress and egress based on vehicle type and trips
generated shall be provided.
      (3)   Adequate parking for intended use shall be provided.
      (4)   Federal, State, and local regulations for sanitation.
      (5)   Land Development regulations when required by improvements.
 150-62 CUSTOMARY HOME OCCUPATIONS AND NO-IMPACT HOME-BASED BUSINESS.
   A.   Customary home occupations and professional offices or studios are
permitted as an accessory use subject to the following provisions:
      (1)   Where permitted. Customary home occupations shall be permitted
within a single-dwelling unit or in a building or other structure accessory to
the dwelling unit, provided that not more than two (2) persons in addition to
those persons residing in said dwelling are employed in the same home
occupation.
      (2)   Evidence of use. The use shall not display or create outside the
building any evidence of the home occupation, except that one (1) unanimated,
non-illuminated flat sign having an area of not more than four (4) square feet
shall be permitted on each street front of the zone lot on which the building
is situated. Off site signage is to be permitted in accordance with §
150-64. No offensive noise, vibration, smoke, dust or odor shall be created.
[Amended 11-10-2015 by Ord. No. 345]
      (3)   Area limitation. The use shall not occupy more than thirty percent
(30%) of the floor area used for dwelling purposes.
      (4)   There shall be no display or sale of retail goods and no
stockpiling or inventory of a substantial nature.
      (5)   All home occupations must register with the Township.
   B.   No-impact Home-Based Business.
      (1)   A No-impact Home-based Business shall be permitted as defined upon
approval of a completed application.
 150-63 HOMEOWNERS ASSOCIATIONS.
   Whenever a developer or owner proposes to provide land or structures for the
benefit of more than one (1) homeowner for a project and the costs are to be
shared by more than one (1) owner such as common open space, active play areas,
stormwater improvements etc.; a homeowners association shall be established in
accordance with the following provisions:
   A.   The homeowners association shall be established as an incorporated
organization operating under recorded land agreements through which each lot
owner (and any succeeding owner) is automatically a member and each lot is
automatically subject to a charge for a proportionate share of the expenses for
the organization s activities. Additionally, specific provisions shall be
established which define completely all membership requirements of all non-lot
owners in the event that rental units are included in the project.
   B.   The homeowners association s declaration of covenants, conditions and
restrictions shall, at a minimum, establish the following:
      (1)   Property rights, including the owners easements of enjoyment and
delegation of use.
      (2)   Membership and voting rights, including any distinction between
membership classes.
      (3)   Covenant for maintenance assessments, including the creation of the
lien and personal obligation of assessments, purpose of assessments, the
maximum annual assessments, special assessments for capital improvements,
uniform rate of assessment, due dates, effect of nonpayment of assessments and
subordination of the lien to mortgages.
      (4)   Architectural and exterior maintenance control.
      (5)   General provisions, including enforcement, amendments and property
annexation procedures.
   C.   The developer or owner shall assume all responsibility for the
homeowners association until seventy-five percent (75%) of the dwelling lots
are sold or until such time as the homeowners formally assume such
responsibility. Once the homeowners association is established, the developer
or owner shall be responsible for payment of dues to the homeowners association
for lots which he or she owns.
   D.   Staged developments. If the developer or owner proposes to construct
the project over a period of separate stages, the homeowners association shall
also be staged consistent with the development time schedule.
   E.   The declaration of covenants, conditions and restrictions of the
Homeowners Association shall state that the Township of Antrim shall not be
responsible in any manner concerning the Homeowners Association, including, but
not limited to the maintenance responsibilities for the common improvements in
the development.
   F.   Review. The articles of incorporation and all declarations of
covenants, conditions and restrictions of the homeowners association shall be
subject to review by the Township Solicitor.
   G.   Board Member Registration with the Township. The name, address, phone
number and e-mail address of each Homeowners Association Board member shall be
registered with Antrim Township. Their title in the association and their term
to serve shall also be part of this registration. Registration shall be made in
writing containing all required information. Registration shall be updated
within 15 days of a position s vacancy, fulfillment, or renewed term. [Added 4-
14-2020 by Ord. No. 355]
   H.   Recording. The Homeowners Association Documents shall be recorded and
properly indexed at the Franklin County Register and Recorder s office before
any land use permits can be applied for. [Amended 4-14-2020 by Ord. No. 355]
 150-64 SIGNS.
   A.   Purpose.
   The intent of this Article is to provide for the regulation of signs to
protect the public, health, safety, and welfare in accordance with the
following activities.
      (1)   To regulate the size, location, illumination, alteration, and
maintenance of signs and reduce the hazards to pedestrian and vehicular
traffic.
      (2)   To prohibit the construction of and require the removal of signs
which are hazardous or create sign clutter.
      (3)   To provide opportunities for a variety of sign types and encourage
sign designs which meet agricultural, residential, and business needs in a
manner which is compatible with the locality, enhances the economic value and
visual character of the properties, and contributes to rather than detracts
from the character of the Township.
      (4)   To establish a process for the review and approval of sign permit
applications.
   B.   General regulations apply to all signs.
      (1)   No sign shall be erected, structurally altered, relocated or
changed without first obtaining a land use permit unless specifically exempt by
§
150-64(D).
      (2)   No sign shall be located in the established right-of-way of any
street.
      (3)   No sign shall exceed the established height limitations of the
applicable district where located.
      (4)   Sign height shall be measured from the existing ground elevation to
the highest point of the sign structure.
      (5)   Signs shall not project across property lines.
      (6)   All temporary or permanent signs shall be removed within thirty
(30) days after the circumstances leading to their erection no longer apply.
After the thirty (30) day period, the Township may remove any such sign and
charge the property owner for the costs incurred.
      (7)   All signs shall be constructed of durable materials and kept in
good condition and repair.
      (8)   Lighted signs shall not glare or shine into traffic or neighboring
properties. Flood lighting shall not spill off of sign.
      (9)   Double faced signs, a sign with a sign face message on both sides,
shall be counted as a single sign.
      (10)   Only one (1) freestanding or ground sign shall be permitted per
road frontage per property.
      (11)   Off site signs shall have written permission from the property
owner acknowledging its placement, maintenance, and compliance with all
regulations is the property owner s responsibility.
      (12)   Single signs advertising multiple businesses on one parcel or
within a business park or professional center shall be exempt from size
limitations when located at the entrance provided all other regulations are
met. Such sign shall not be considered a billboard.
   C.   Prohibited signs. The following types of signs shall be prohibited:
      (1)   Signs which use words such as STOP, LOOK, DANGER, YIELD or any
similar words, phases, symbols, lights or characters in such a manner as to
interfere with or mislead or confuse traffic.
      (2)   Signs which by reason of size, location, coloring, or manner of
illumination obstruct the vision of drivers, including but not limited to:
         (a)   Signs erected in the line of sight.
         (b)   Signs obstructing vision when entering or leaving a roadway from
a driveway.
         (c)   Signs detracting from the visibility or effectiveness of any
traffic sign or signal on public streets or roads.
      (3)   Signs illuminated by flashing, intermittent or rotating lights.
      (4)   Signs containing obscene, indecent or immoral words, pictures, or
descriptions.
      (5)   Signs imitating governmental signs, including traffic control
signs.
      (6)   Any sign that is unsafe or insecure, abandoned, or in a dilapidated
condition.
   D.   Exempt Signs. No Land Use Permit is needed before erecting the
following signs. Exempt signs shall conform to all other regulations.
      (1)   Official federal, state, county, or township signs.
      (2)   Public service signs such as those advertising the location of
restrooms, telephones or similar public conveniences and signs advertising
meeting times and places of nonprofit service or charitable clubs or
organizations provided they shall not exceed four (4) square feet.
      (3)   Entrance signs or directional signs for the purpose of directing
traffic when erected on the property in which it serves as long as it does not
exceed 8 square feet.
      (4)   Temporary signs for civic events.
      (5)   Political signs.
      (6)   Real Estate signs.
      (7)   Trespassing signs or signs indicating the private nature of a road,
driveway or premises, signs prohibiting or otherwise controlling hunting or
fishing upon particular premises, and signs indicating ownership of a property,
provided the sign area does not exceed four (4) square feet.
      (8)   Window signs.
      (9)   Revolving barbershop pole sign, provided that it does not exceed
thirty-six (36) inches in height.
      (10)   Signs advertising the variety of crop growing in a field.
      (11)   Canopy or awning signs.
      (12)   Balloons, inflatable devices, pennants, bunting or banners.
      (13)   Changing the sign face so long as the overall size or height is
not changing. [Added 4-14-2020 by Ord. No. 355]
   E.   Sign types. The following regulations shall apply to the specific sign
type as defined in §
150-4.
      (1)   Freestanding Signs.
         (a)   The lowest edge of a freestanding sign shall be less than four
(4) feet or greater than seven (7) feet above the ground.
         (b)   One (1) freestanding sign shall be permitted per road frontage.
         (c)   Freestanding signs shall not exceed fifty (50) square feet.
      (2)   Ground signs.
         (a)   Ground signs shall be supported and permanently placed by
embedding, anchoring, or connecting the sign in such a manner as to incorporate
it into the landscape or architectural design scheme.
         (b)   Ground signs shall be limited to one (1) such sign per road
frontage.
         (c)   Ground signs shall not exceed fifty (50) square feet.
      (3)   Projecting signs.
         (a)   Projecting signs shall be permitted and shall be attached to a
wall and project no more than four (4) feet from the building wall.
         (b)   Projecting signs shall be securely supported and fastened to the
wall.
         (c)   Projecting signs shall be a minimum of eight (8) feet from
ground level.
      (4)   Wall signs.
         (a)   No portion of a wall sign shall extend more than six (6) inches
from the building wall.
      (5)   Roof signs.
         (a)   One roof sign per building shall be permitted.
         (b)   Roof signs shall be no more than four (4) feet higher than the
highest eave of the roof.
      (6)   Billboards. Any freestanding sign larger than fifty (50) square
feet shall be considered a billboard and are subject to the following
regulations.
         (a)   No Billboard shall be closer than fifty (50) feet to any
property line or right-of-way line of any street.
         (b)   No Billboard face shall exceed eight (8) feet in vertical
measurement or sixteen (16) feet in length and the bottom shall be less than
four (4) feet or shall be higher than seven (7) feet above the ground.
         (c)   Billboards along the interstate shall conform to interstate
regulations.
         (d)   No Billboard shall be located within five hundred (500) feet of
any interchange or intersection.
         (e)   No Billboard shall be within five-hundred (500) feet of another
billboard.
         (f)   Stacking of billboards shall not be permitted.
         (g)   Any Billboard that does not have advertising for more than one
(1) year shall be removed.
   F.   Removal of unsafe, unlawful, or abandoned signs.
      (1)   Upon written notice by the Township, the owner, person, or firm
maintaining a sign must remove or repair said sign when it:
         (a)   becomes unsafe, is in danger of falling, or it becomes so
deteriorated that it no longer serves a useful purpose of communication;
         (b)   is determined by the Township to be a nuisance;
         (c)   is unlawfully erected in violation of any of the provisions of
this Article.
      (2)   The Township may remove or cause to be removed said sign at the
expense of the property owner in the event the property owner has not complied
with the terms of said notice within fourteen (14) days of the date of the
notice. However, in the event of danger, the Township may remove said sign
immediately at the property owner s expense upon the issuance of said notice to
the property owner.
      (3)   Abandoned Signs.
         (a)   No person shall maintain or permit to be maintained on any
premises owned or controlled by such person a sign which has been abandoned.
         (b)   The Township may remove or cause to be removed said sign at the
expense of the property owner in the event the property owner has not complied
with the terms of said notice within thirty (30) days of the notice.
   G.   Nonconforming signs. Any sign legally existing at the time of the
passage of this Article that does not conform in use, location, height, or size
with the regulations shall be considered a legal non-conforming use or
structure and may continue in such status until such time as it is either
abandoned or removed by its owner, subject to the following limitations:
      (1)   Structural alterations, enlargement or re-erection are permissible
only where such alterations will not increase the degree of nonconformity of
the sign.
      (2)   Any legal nonconforming sign shall be brought into compliance if
such sign is allowed to deteriorate to the extent that the cost of repair or
restoration exceeds fifty (50%) percent of the replacement cost of the sign as
determined by the Township.
 150-65 TEMPORARY MOBILE HOME PERMIT.
   A.   Granny Flat: A mobile home may be temporarily placed on an approved lot
having erected thereon no more than one (1) single-family dwelling where the
mobile home is connected to the sewage disposal system of the permanent
dwelling and where the temporary mobile home is to be occupied by the following
family members: father, mother, father-in-law, mother-in-law, paternal
grandparents, maternal grandparents, foster parents, aunt (mother s or father s
sister), uncle (mother s or father s brother), son or daughter (step, adopted,
or biological), brother or sister of the owner and occupant of the permanent
residence on the lot; such occupancy of the temporary mobile home to be by
special permit only for a period not to exceed one (1) year, renewable at the
option of the Township; all such permits to expire and be subject to renewal on
July 1 of each year regardless of the date of issuance. A signed statement will
be required from a medical doctor as to the need prior to a land use permit
being issued.
   B.   Sales Trailers: One (1) sales trailer shall be permitted per builder in
a subdivision. Sales trailers shall be on their own lot placed within the
minimum area regulations and shall be removed when the developer no longer owns
any other lot in the development. Adequate parking shall be provided. The sales
trailer shall not be serviced with water, sewer, or septic unless appropriate
permits have been issued and all fees have been paid. All fees shall be
forfeited and are non transferable with the removal of the trailer(s). Sales
Trailers are not required to connect to utilities.
   C.   Construction Trailers: Each builder of a subdivision may have
construction trailer(s) placed somewhere in the development within the minimum
area regulations set forth in this chapter. The construction trailer(s) shall
be removed from the premises once the development is built out or once the
builder has not been active for a period of eighteen (18) months in this
development. The construction trailer(s) shall not be serviced with water,
sewer, or septic unless appropriate permits have been issued and all fees have
been paid. All fees will be forfeited and are non transferable with the removal
of the trailer(s). Construction Trailers are not required to connect to
utilities.
   D.   Where a land use permit has been issued for the construction or
alteration of a principal building, a temporary permit for one (1) manufactured
home or camping trailer may be issued. Said residence may be occupied during
the term of the temporary permit, and shall be situated upon the lot for which
the land use permit has been issued, provided that all yard setback
requirements are met. Upon completion of the principal structure and the
occupancy permits for the principal structure have been issued; the
manufactured home or camping trailer shall be removed within ninety (90) days.
ARTICLE XII NONCONFORMING USES AND BUILDINGS
 150-66 DEFINITIONS AND USE PROVISIONS.
   A.   The definitions of nonconforming lot, nonconforming use and
nonconforming structure shall be as set forth in §
150-4.
   B.   Use provisions. Any nonconforming lot, use of land, structure, or
combination thereof may be continued, subject to the following:
      (1)   The use shall not be moved to another location where such use would
be nonconforming.
      (2)   The use shall not be changed to another nonconforming use without
first obtaining approval by the Zoning Hearing Board in accordance with §
150-67 herein.
      (3)   The use shall not be reestablished unless in accordance with §
150-68, if such use has been discontinued for a period of one year or more.
 150-67 EXPANSION AND/OR CHANGE OF NONCONFORMING LOTS, USES, OR STRUCTURES.
   A.   Lots. Nonconforming lots may be used in accordance with §
150-58(B) entitled Setback exemption . Lots may be expanded without appearing
before the Zoning Hearing Board as long as it is decreasing the degree of
nonconformity.
   B.   Uses.
      (1)   Any person seeking permission to change a nonconforming use to any
other nonconforming use shall sufficiently document to the Zoning Hearing Board
that such new nonconforming use is more in compliance with the applicable
provisions of this chapter than the present nonconforming use.
      (2)   Any expansion of a non residential non conforming use shall apply
to the Zoning Hearing Board.
      (3)   The Zoning Hearing Board may attach additional conditions when
approving the expansion or change of a nonconforming use for the purpose of
promoting the objectives and intent of this chapter.
   C.   Buildings and Structures.
      (1)   Any nonconforming structure or building, but not including signs,
may be expanded, reconstructed, or structurally altered without applying to the
Zoning Hearing Board, provided that a land use permit has been applied for and
issued showing that the distance from the property line to the expansion shall
not be less than the current nonconforming portion of the structure or
building.
      (2)   Any expansion of nonconformity not covered by subsection (C)(1)
above shall apply to the Zoning Hearing Board for approval before a building
permit or land use permit may be issued.
      (3)   Any expansion or alteration of any building or structure that would
create a non conforming building or structure must apply to the Zoning Hearing
Board for approval before a building permit or land use permit may be issued.
   D.   Repair. Any nonconforming use or structure which is destroyed by fire,
casualty or act of God may be repaired, rebuilt and used as before, provided
that no increase in the degree of nonconformity is thereby created. All repairs
shall be commenced within one year after the damage occurs or such use or
structure shall not be rebuilt except as a conforming use or structure.
   E.   Standards. Each application for an expansion or change of a
nonconforming use, building or structure shall be subject to the following
standards:
      (1)   It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to sufficiently
document to the Zoning Hearing Board that the proposed expansion or change will
not be contrary to the purposes of this chapter and the public health, safety
and welfare of Township residents in general and of the residents of the
immediate area in particular.
      (2)   Such expansion or change shall not extend beyond the lot lines
existing on the date the chapter or its subsequent amendments were adopted.
 150-68 DISCONTINUANCE.
   Any person desiring to temporarily discontinue a nonconforming use may do so
and may resume the same within one (1) year after such discontinuance, provided
that such person has notified the Township in writing of his or her intention
to do so within thirty (30) days after the use is discontinued. A discontinued
use will not be deemed to be resumed unless such use is operated on a regular
basis for six (6) months after such resumption begins.
 150-69 REPAIRS AND MAINTENANCE.
   Notwithstanding any of the above regulations, nothing in this chapter shall
be deemed to prevent normal maintenance and repair of any nonconforming use or
structure.
 150-70 REGISTRATION OF NONCONFORMING USE.
   All lawful uses existing at the effective date of this chapter which do not
conform to the requirements set forth in this chapter, or any other amendments
thereto, shall be identified and registered by the Zoning Officer.
 150-71 MINERAL EXTRACTION.
   Property acquired for the purpose of extracting sand, gravel, slate or other
minerals therefrom and held for such purpose on the effective date of this
chapter shall be considered in use for such extraction whether or not such
extraction has actually commenced, and extraction, including erection of any
necessary buildings or structures incidental to the extraction or processing of
the deposits, will be allowed to commence and continue. In order for property
to qualify hereunder, the following conditions must be documented by the
landowner as evidence that the property was acquired and held for the purpose
of later mineral extraction:
   A.   The land was acquired prior to the effective date of this chapter.
   B.   The land was acquired and is owned by an individual, corporation or
otherwise engaged at the time of acquisition in the business of mineral
extraction.
   C.   The property has not been permanently developed, in whole or in part,
for any purpose other than mineral extraction or processing.
   D.   The land contains mineral deposits of a demonstrable economic value.
ARTICLE XIII ZONING HEARING BOARD
 150-72 CREATION; MEMBERSHIP REGULATIONS.
   A.   There is hereby created for the Township a Zoning Hearing Board in
accordance with the provisions of Article IX of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, 53 P.S. 10901 et seq.
   B.   The membership of the Board shall consist of five (5) residents of the
Township appointed by resolution by the Board of Supervisors. The terms of
office shall be five (5) years and shall be so fixed that the term of office of
at least one (1) member shall expire each year. The Board shall promptly notify
the Board of Supervisors of any vacancies which occur. Appointments to fill
vacancies shall be only for the unexpired portion. Members of the Board shall
hold no other office in the Township.
   C.   Any Board member may be removed for malfeasance, misfeasance or
nonfeasance in office or for other just cause by a majority vote of the Board
of Supervisors which appointed the member, taken after the member has received
fifteen (15) days advance notice of the intent to take such a vote. A hearing
shall be held in accordance with the vote if the member shall request it in
writing.
   D.   The Board shall elect from its own membership its officers, who shall
serve annual terms as such and may succeed themselves. For the conduct of any
hearing and the taking of any action, a quorum shall be not less than a
majority of all the members of the Board, but the Board may appoint a hearing
officer from its own membership to conduct any hearing on its behalf and the
parties may waive further action by the Board as provided in this chapter.
   E.   The Board may make, alter and rescind rules and forms for its
procedure, consistent with ordinances of the Township and laws of the
commonwealth. The Board shall keep full public records of its business, which
records shall be the property of the Township, and shall submit a report of its
activities to the Board of Supervisors as requested by the Board of
Supervisors.
   F.   Within the limits of funds appropriated by the Board of Supervisors,
the Board may employ or contract for secretaries, clerks, legal counsel,
consultants and other technical and clerical services. Members of the Board may
receive compensation for the performance of their duties as may be fixed by the
Board of Supervisors, but in no case shall it exceed the rate of compensation
authorized to be paid to the members of the Board of Supervisors.
   G.   The Board of Supervisors may appoint by resolution at least one but no
more than three (3) residents of the Township to serve as alternate members of
the Board. The term of office of an alternate member shall be three (3) years.
When seated pursuant to Subsection (H) hereof, an alternate shall be entitled
to participate in all proceedings and discussions of the Board to the same and
full extent as provided by law for Board members, including specifically the
right to cast a vote as a voting member during the proceedings, and shall have
all the powers and duties set forth in this chapter and as otherwise provided
by law. Alternates shall hold no other office in the Township, including Zoning
Officer and member of the Planning Commission. Any alternate may participate in
any proceeding or discussion of the Board but shall not be entitled to vote as
a member of the Board nor be compensated unless designated as a voting
alternate member pursuant to Subsection (H).
   H.   If, by reason of absence or disqualification of a member, a quorum is
not reached, the Chairman of the Board shall designate as many alternate
members of the Board to sit on the Board as may be needed to provide a quorum.
Any alternate member of the Board shall continue to serve on the Board in all
proceedings involving the matter or case for which the alternate was initially
appointed until the Board has made a final determination of the matter or case.
Designation of an alternate pursuant to this section shall be made on a case-
by-case basis in rotating accordance to declining seniority among all the
alternates.
 150-73 HEARINGS.
   The Zoning Hearing Board shall conduct hearings and make decisions in
accordance with the following requirements:
   A.   Public notice shall be given and written notice shall be given to the
applicant, the Zoning Officer and to any person who has made timely request for
the same. Written notices shall be given at such time and in such manner as
shall be prescribed by the rules of the Board. In addition to the written
notice provided herein, written notice of said hearing shall be conspicuously
posted on the affected tract of land at least one (1) week prior to the
hearings.
   B.   The hearing shall be held within sixty (60) days from the date of the
applicant s request, unless the applicant has agreed in writing to an extension
of time.
   C.   The hearings shall be conducted by the Board or the Board may appoint
any member as a hearing officer. The decision, or, where no decision is called
for, the findings shall be made by the Board; however, the appellant or the
applicant, as the case may be, in addition to the Township, may, prior to the
decision of the hearing, waive decision or findings by the Board and accept the
decision or findings of the hearing officer as final.
   D.   The parties to the hearing shall be the Township, any person affected
by the application who has made timely appearance of record before the Board,
and any other person, including civic or community organizations, permitted to
appear by the Board. The Board shall have the power to require that all persons
who wish to be considered parties enter appearances in writing on forms
provided by the Board for that purpose.
   E.   The Chairman or Acting Chairman of the Board or the hearing officer
presiding shall have power to administer oaths and issue subpoenas to compel
the attendance of witnesses and the production of relevant documents and
papers, including witnesses and documents requested by the parties.
   F.   The parties shall have the right to be represented by counsel and shall
be afforded the opportunity to respond and present evidence and argument and
cross-examine adverse witnesses on all relevant issues.
   G.   Formal rules of evidence shall not apply, but irrelevant, immaterial or
unduly repetitious evidence may be excluded.
   H.   The Board or the hearing officer, as the case may be, shall keep a
stenographic record of the proceedings. The appearance fee for a stenographer
shall be shared equally by the applicant and the Board. The cost of the
original transcript shall be paid by the Board if the transcript is ordered by
the Board or hearing officer or shall be paid by the person appealing from the
decision of the Board if such appeal is made, and in either event the cost of
additional copies shall be paid by the person requesting such copy or copies.
In other cases the party requesting the original transcript shall bear the cost
thereof.
   I.   The Board or the hearing officer shall not communicate, directly or
indirectly, with any party or his or her representatives in connection with any
issue involved except upon notice and opportunity for all parties to
participate, shall not take notice of any communication, reports, staff
memoranda or other materials, except advice from their solicitor, unless the
parties are afforded an opportunity to contest the material so noticed and
shall not inspect the site or its surroundings after the commencement of
hearings with any party or his or her representative unless all parties are
given the opportunity to be present.
   J.   The Board or the hearing officer, as the case may be, shall render a
written decision or, when no decision is called for, make a written finding on
the application within forty-five (45) days after the last hearing before the
Board or hearing officer. Where the application is contested or denied, each
decision shall be accompanied by findings of fact and conclusions based thereon
together with the reasons therefor. Conclusions based on any provision of this
chapter or of any law, ordinance, rule or regulation shall contain a reference
to the provision relied on and the reason why the conclusion is deemed
appropriate in light of the facts found. If the hearing is conducted by a
hearing officer and there has been no stipulation that his or her decision or
findings are final, the Board shall make his or her report and recommendations
available to the parties within forty-five (45) days, and the parties shall be
entitled to make written representations thereon to the Board prior to final
decision or entry of findings, and the Board s decision shall be entered no
later than thirty (30) days after the report of the hearing officer. Where the
Board fails to render the decision within the period required by this
subsection or fails to hold the required hearing, the decision shall be deemed
to have been rendered in favor of the applicant unless the applicant has agreed
in writing or on the record to an extension of time. When a decision has been
rendered in favor of the applicant because of the failure of the Board to meet
or render a decision as hereinafter provided, the Board shall give public
notice of said decision within ten (10) days from the last day it could have
met to render a decision in the same manner as provided in Subsection (A) of
this section. If the Board shall fail to provide such notice, the applicant may
do so. Nothing in this subsection shall prejudice the right of any party
opposing the application to appeal the decision to a court of competent
jurisdiction.
   K.   A copy of the final decision or, where no decision is called for, of
the findings shall be delivered to the applicant personally or mailed to him or
her not later than the day following its date. To all other persons who have
filed their name and address with the Board not later than the last day of the
hearing, the Board shall provide by mail or otherwise brief notice of the
decision or findings and a statement of the place at which the full decision or
findings may be examined.
   L.   The Board of Supervisors shall establish, by resolution, fees with
respect to hearings before the Zoning Hearing Board.
 150-74 JURISDICTION.
   A.   The Zoning Hearing Board shall have exclusive jurisdiction to hear and
render final adjudications in the following matters:
      (1)   Substantive challenges to the validity of any land use ordinance,
except those brought before the Board of Supervisors pursuant to Subsections
609.1 and 916.1(a)(2) of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code
(hereinafter MPC ), 53 P.S. §§ 10609.1 and 10916.1.
      (2)   Challenges to the validity of a land use ordinance raising
procedural questions or alleged defects in the process of enactment or
adoption, which challenges shall be raised by an appeal taken within thirty
(30) days after the effective date of said ordinance. Where the ordinance
appealed from is the initial zoning ordinance of the Township and a Zoning
Hearing Board has not been previously established, the appeal raising
procedural questions shall be taken directly to court.
      (3)   Appeals from the determination of the Zoning Officer, including but
not limited to the granting or denial of any permit or failure to act on the
application therefor, the issuance of any cease and desist order or the
registration or refusal to register any nonconforming use, structure or lot.
      (4)   Appeals from a determination by the Township Engineer or the Zoning
Officer with reference to the administration of any floodplain or flood hazard
ordinance or such provisions within a land use ordinance.
      (5)   Applications for variances from the terms of this chapter and flood
hazard ordinance or such provisions within a land use ordinance, pursuant to
Section 910.2 of the MPC, 53 P.S. § 10910.2.
      (6)   Appeals from the Zoning Officer s determination under Section 916.2
of the MPC, 53 P.S. § 10916.2.
      (7)   Appeals from the determination of the Zoning Officer or Township
Engineer in the administration of any land use ordinance or provision thereof
with reference to sedimentation and erosion control and stormwater management
insofar as the same relate to development not involving applications under
Article V or VII of the MPC, 53 P.S. §§ 10501 et seq. and 10701 et seq.
   B.   The Board of Supervisors shall have exclusive jurisdiction to hear and
render final adjudications in the following matters:
      (1)   All applications for approvals of planned residential development
under Article VII of the MPC, pursuant to the provisions of Section 702 of the
MPC, 53 P.S. § 10702.
      (2)   All applications pursuant to Section 508 of the MPC, 53 P.S. §
10508, for approval of subdivisions or land developments under Article V of the
MPC, 53 P.S. § 10501 et seq.
      (3)   Applications for conditional uses under the express provisions of
this chapter.
      (4)   Applications for curative amendments to this chapter or pursuant to
Sections 609.1 and 916.1(a) of the MPC, 53 P.S. §§ 10609.2 and 10916.1(a).
      (5)   All petitions for amendments to land use ordinances, pursuant to
the procedures set forth in Section 609 of the MPC, 53 P.S. § 10609.
      (6)   Appeals from the determination of the Zoning Officer or the
Township Engineer in the administration of any land use ordinance or provisions
thereof with reference to sedimentation and erosion control and stormwater
management insofar as the same relate to applications for land development
under Article V and VII of the MPC, 53 P.S. § 10501 et seq. and 10701 et seq.
Where such determination relates only to development not involving an Article V
or VII application, the appeal from such determination of the Zoning Officer or
the Township Engineer shall be to the Zoning Hearing Board pursuant to this
section. Where the applicable land use ordinance vests jurisdiction for final
administration of subdivision and land development applications in the Planning
Commission, all appeals from determinations under this subsection shall be to
the Planning Commission and all appeals from the decision of the Planning
Commission shall be to court.
 150-75 VARIANCE.
   A.   The Zoning Hearing Board shall hear requests for variances where it is
alleged that the provisions of this chapter inflict unnecessary hardship upon
the applicant. The Board may by rule prescribe the form of application and may
require preliminary application to the Zoning Officer. The Board may grant a
variance, provided that all of the following findings are made where relevant
in a given case:
      (1)   That there are unique physical circumstances or conditions,
including irregularity, narrowness or shallowness of lot size or shape, or
exceptional topographical or other physical conditions peculiar to the
particular property and that the unnecessary hardship is due to such conditions
and not the circumstances or conditions generally created by the provisions of
this chapter in the neighborhood or district in which the property is located.
      (2)   That because of such physical circumstances or conditions, there is
no possibility that the property can be developed in strict conformity with the
provisions of this chapter and that the authorization of a variance is
therefore necessary to enable the reasonable use of the property.
      (3)   That such unnecessary hardship has not been created by the
applicant.
      (4)   That the variance, if authorized, will not alter the essential
character of the neighborhood or district in which the property is located, nor
substantially or permanently impair the appropriate use or development of
adjacent property, nor be detrimental to the public welfare.
      (5)   That the variance, if authorized, will represent the minimum
variance that will afford relief and will represent the least modification
possible of the regulation in issue.
   B.   In granting any variance, the Board may attach such reasonable
conditions and safeguards as it may deem necessary to implement the purposes of
this chapter and the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S. § 10101
et seq.
   C.   Applications for variances under this section will require a scaled
drawing showing topographical features.
 150-76 PARTIES APPELLANT BEFORE THE BOARD.
   Appeals raising the substantive validity of any land use ordinance (except
those to be brought before the Board of Supervisors pursuant to the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code), procedural questions or alleged
defects in the process of enactment or adoption of a land use ordinance; or
from the determination of the Zoning Officer, including but not limited to the
granting or denial of any permit, or failure to act on the application
therefore, the issuance of any cease and desist order or the registration or
refusal to register any nonconforming use, structure or lot; from a
determination by the Township Engineer or the Zoning Officer with reference to
the administration of any floodplain or flood hazard ordinance or such
provisions within a land use ordinance; from the determination of any officer
or agency charged with the administration of any transfers of development
rights or performance density provisions of this chapter; from the
determination of the Zoning Officer or Township Engineer in the administration
of any land use ordinance or provision thereof with reference to sedimentation
and erosion control and stormwater management insofar as the same relate to
development not involving subdivision and land development or planned
residential development may be filed with the Zoning Hearing Board in writing
by the landowner affected, any officer or agency of the Township, or any person
aggrieved. Requests for a variance may be filed with the Board by any landowner
or any tenant with the permission of such landowner.
 150-77 TIME LIMITATIONS.
   A.   No person shall be allowed to file any proceeding with the Zoning
Hearing Board later than thirty (30) days after an application for development,
preliminary or final, has been approved by the Township if such proceeding is
designed to secure reversal or to limit the approval in any manner unless such
person alleges and proves that he or she had no notice, knowledge or reason to
believe that such approval had been given. If such person has succeeded to his
or her interest after such approval, he or she shall be bound by the knowledge
of his or her predecessor in interest. The failure of anyone other than the
landowner to appeal from an adverse decision on a tentative plan or from an
adverse decision by the Zoning Officer on a challenge to the validity of this
chapter or an amendment hereto or map or an amendment thereto shall preclude an
appeal from a final approval except in the case where the final submission
substantially deviates from the approved tentative approval.
   B.   All appeals from determinations adverse to the landowner shall be filed
by the landowner within thirty (30) days after notice of the determination is
issued.
 150-78 STAY OF PROCEEDINGS.
   A.   Upon filing of any appeal proceeding before the Zoning Hearing Board
and during its pendency before the Board, all land development pursuant to any
challenged ordinance, order or approval of the Zoning Officer or of any agency
or body and all official action thereunder shall be stayed unless the Zoning
Officer or any other appropriate agency or body certifies to the Board facts
indicating that such stay would cause imminent peril to life or property, in
which case the development or official action shall not be stayed otherwise
than by a restraining order, which may be granted by the Board or by the Zoning
Officer or other appropriate agency or body. When an application for
development, preliminary or final, has been duly approved and proceedings
designed to reverse or limit the approval are filed with the Board by persons
other than the applicant, the applicant may petition the court having
jurisdiction of zoning appeals to order such persons to post bond as a
condition to continuing the proceedings before the Board.
   B.   After the petition is presented, the court shall hold a hearing to
determine if the filing of the appeal is frivolous. At the hearing, evidence
may be presented on the merits of the case. It shall be the consideration of
all evidence presented, if the court determines that the appeal is frivolous,
it shall grant the petition for a bond. The right to petition the court to
order the appellants to post bond may be waived by the appellee, but such
waiver may be revoked by him or her if an appeal is taken from a final decision
of the court.
   C.   The question whether or not such petition should be granted and the
amount of the bond shall be within the sound discretion of the court. An order
denying a petition for bond shall be interlocutory. An order directing the
responding party to post a bond shall be interlocutory.
   D.   If an appeal is taken by a respondent to the petition for a bond from
an order of the court dismissing a zoning appeal for refusal to post a bond and
the appellate court sustains the order of the court below to post a bond, the
respondent to the petition for a bond, upon motion of the petitioner and after
hearing in the court having jurisdiction of zoning appeals, shall be liable for
all reasonable costs, expenses and attorney fees incurred by the petitioner.
 150-79 CONDITIONAL USES.
   A.   Objectives. On application, and after a public hearing by the
Supervisors and recommendations by the Planning Commission, the Supervisors may
authorize the issuance of land use permits and/or approval for any of the
conditional uses which this chapter requires in the district in which such use
is proposed to be located. In approving any such use, the Supervisors shall
take into consideration the public health, safety and welfare, the comfort and
convenience of the public in general and of the residents of the immediate
neighborhood in particular, and may prescribe appropriate conditions and
safeguards as may be required in order that the result of its action may, to
the extent possible, further the expressed intent of this chapter and the
accomplishments of the following objectives in particular:
      (1)   That all proposed structures, equipment or materials shall be
readily accessible for fire and police protection.
      (2)   That the proposed use shall be of such location, size and character
that, in general, it will be in harmony with the appropriate and orderly
development of the district in which it is proposed to be situated and will not
be detrimental to the orderly development of the adjacent properties in
accordance with the zoning classification of such properties.
      (3)   That, in addition to the above, in the case of any use located in
or directly adjacent to, a residential district:
         (a)   The location and size of such use, the nature and intensity of
operations involved in or conducted in connection therewith, its site layout
and its relation to access streets shall be such that both pedestrian and
vehicular traffic to and from the use and the assembly of persons in connection
therewith will not be hazardous or inconvenient to, or incongruous with, said
residential district or conflict with the normal traffic of the neighborhood.
         (b)   The location and height of buildings, the location, nature and
height of walls and fences and nature and extent of landscaping on the site
shall be such that the use will not hinder or discourage the appropriate
development and use of adjacent land and buildings.
   B.   Application. In addition to any other requirements in this chapter,
each application for a conditional use shall be accompanied by a proposed plan
showing the size and location of the lot, the location of all buildings and
proposed facilities, including access drives, parking areas and all streets
within two-hundred (200) feet of the lot.
   C.   Public hearing. The Township Board of Supervisors shall not take action
on any application for a conditional use approval without first holding a
public hearing. Notice shall be provided and the hearing shall be conducted in
accordance with the Municipalities Planning Code.
   D.   Commission action. The Commission shall, within thirty-five (35) days
of the date of the public hearing on the application for conditional use
approval, take final action to recommend to the Supervisors approval,
disapproval or modification for said conditional use and shall so notify the
applicant in writing.
   E.   Effect of conditional use approval. Any use for which a conditional use
permit may be granted shall be deemed to be a conforming use in the district in
which such use is located, provided that such permit shall be deemed to affect
only the lot or portion thereof for which such permit shall have been granted.
ARTICLE XIV AMENDMENTS
 150-80 ENACTMENT OF ZONING ORDINANCE AMENDMENTS.
   A.   The Board of Supervisors may from time to time amend, supplement or
repeal any of the regulations and provisions of this chapter. The procedure for
the preparation of a proposed zoning ordinance as set forth in Section 607 of
the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S. § 10607, is hereby
declared optional.
   B.   Before voting on the enactment of an amendment, the Board of
Supervisors shall hold a public hearing thereon, pursuant to public notice. In
addition, if the proposed amendment involves a Zoning Map change, notice of
said public hearing shall be conspicuously posted by the Township at points
deemed sufficient by the Township along the perimeter of the tract to notify
potentially interested citizens. The affected tract or area shall be posted at
least one week prior to the date of the hearing.
   C.   In the case of an amendment other than that prepared by the Planning
Commission, the Board of Supervisors shall submit each such amendment to the
Planning Commission at least thirty (30) days prior to the hearing on such
proposed amendment to provide the Planning Commission an opportunity to submit
recommendations.
   D.   If after any public hearing held upon an amendment the proposed
amendment is changed substantially or is revised to include land previously not
affected by it, the Board of Supervisors shall hold another public hearing,
pursuant to public notice, before proceeding to vote on the amendment.
   E.   At least thirty (30) days prior to the public hearing on the amendment
by the Board of Supervisors, the Township shall submit the proposed amendment
to the county planning agency for recommendations.
   F.   Within thirty (30) days after enactment, a copy of the amendment to
this chapter shall be forwarded to the county planning agency.
 150-81 PROCEDURE FOR TOWNSHIP CURATIVE AMENDMENTS.
   A.   If the Township determines that this chapter, or any portion hereof, is
substantially invalid, it shall take the following actions:
      (1)   The Township shall declare by formal action this chapter or
portions hereof substantially invalid and propose to prepare a curative
amendment to overcome such invalidity. Within thirty (30) days of such
declaration and proposal, the Board of Supervisors shall:
         (a)   By resolution make specific findings setting forth the declared
invalidity of this chapter, which may include:
            [1]   References to specific uses which are either not permitted or
not permitted in sufficient quantity.
            [2]   Reference to a class of use or uses which requires revisions.
            [3]   Reference to this entire chapter which requires revisions.
         (b)   Begin to prepare and consider a curative amendment to this
chapter to correct the declared invalidity.
   B.   Within one-hundred-eighty (180) days from the date of the declaration
and proposal, the Township shall enact a curative amendment to validate or
reaffirm the validity of this chapter pursuant to the provisions of Section 609
of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code (hereinafter MPC ), 53 P.S. §
10609, in order to cure the declared invalidity of this chapter.
   C.   Upon the initiation of the procedures as set forth in Subsection (A),
the Board of Supervisors shall not be required to entertain or consider any
landowner s curative amendment filed under Section 609.1 of the MPC, 53 P.S.
10609.1, nor shall the Zoning Hearing Board be required to give a report
requested under Section 909.1 or 916.1 of the MPC, 53 P.S. 10909.1 or 10916.1,
subsequent to the declaration and proposal based upon the grounds identical or
substantially similar to those specified by the resolution required by
Subsection (A)(1). Upon completion of the procedures set forth in Subsections
(A) and (B), no rights to a cure pursuant to the provisions of Sections 609.1
and 916.1 of the MPC, 53 P.S. §§ 10609.1 and 10916.1, shall, from the date of
the declaration and proposal, accrue to any landowner on the basis of the
substantive validity of this chapter for which there has been a curative
amendment pursuant to this section.
   D.   The Township having utilized the procedures set forth in this section
may not again utilize said procedure for a period of thirty-six (36) months
following the date of enactment of a curative amendment, or reaffirmation of
the validity of this chapter; provided, however, that if after the date of
declaration and proposal there is a substantially new duty imposed upon the
Township by virtue of a change in statute or by virtue of a Pennsylvania
Appellate Court decision, the Township may utilize the provisions of this
section to propose a curative amendment to this chapter to fulfill said duty or
obligation.
 150-82 PROCEDURE FOR LANDOWNER CURATIVE AMENDMENTS.
   A.   A landowner who desires to challenge on substantive grounds the
validity of this chapter or the Zoning Map or any provisions thereof which
prohibit or restrict the use or development of land in which he or she has an
interest may submit a curative amendment to the Board of Supervisors with a
written request that his or her challenge and proposed amendment be heard and
decided as provided in Section 916.1 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code (hereinafter MPC ), 53 P.S. § 10916.1. The curative amendment and
challenge shall be referred to the Planning Commission and the County Planning
Agency as provided in Section 609 and notice of the hearing thereon shall be
given as provided in Section 610 and Section 916.1 of the MPC, 53 P.S. §§
10609, 10610 and 10916.1.
   B.   The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with Section 908 of the
Municipalities Planning Code and all references therein to the Zoning Hearing
Board shall, for purposes of this section be references to the Board of
Supervisors. If the Township does not accept a landowner s curative amendment
brought in accordance with this subsection and a court subsequently rules that
the challenge has merit, the court s decision shall not result in a declaration
of invalidity for this entire chapter and Zoning Map but only for those
provisions which specifically relate to the landowner s curative amendment and
challenge.
   C.   The Board of Supervisors, if it determines that a validity challenge
has merit, may accept a landowner s curative amendment, with or without
revision, or may adopt an alternate amendment which will cure the challenged
defects. The Board of Supervisors shall consider the curative amendments, plans
and explanatory material submitted by the landowner and shall also consider:
      (1)   The impact of the proposal upon roads, sewer facilities, water
supplies, schools, and other public service facilities.
      (2)   If the proposal is for a residential use, the impact of the
proposal upon regional housing needs and the effectiveness of the proposal in
providing housing units of a type actually available to and affordable by
classes of persons otherwise unlawfully excluded by the challenged provisions
of this chapter or Zoning Map.
      (3)   The suitability of the site for the intensity of use proposed by
the site s soils, slopes, woodlands, wetlands, floodplains, aquifers, natural
resources and other natural features.
      (4)   The impact of the proposed use on the site s soils, slopes,
woodlands, wetlands, floodplains, natural resources and natural features, the
degree to which these are protected or destroyed, the tolerance of the
resources to development and any adverse environmental impacts.
      (5)   The impact of the proposal on the preservation of agriculture and
other land uses which are essential to public health and welfare.
ARTICLE XV ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
 150-83 APPOINTMENT AND POWERS OF ZONING OFFICER.
   A.   For the administration of this chapter, a Zoning Officer, who shall not
hold any elective office in the Township, shall be appointed.
   B.   The Zoning Officer shall meet the qualifications established by the
Township and shall be able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Township a
working knowledge of municipal zoning.
   C.   The Zoning Officer shall administer this chapter in accordance with its
literal terms and shall not have the power to permit any construction or any
use or change of use which does not conform to this chapter.
   D.   The Zoning Officer is hereby authorized to institute civil enforcement
proceedings as a means of enforcement when acting within the scope of his or
her employment.
   E.   The Zoning Officer or his or her duly authorized assistant(s) shall
have the right to enter any building or enter upon any land at any reasonable
hour as necessary in the execution of his or her duties, provided that:
      (1)   The Zoning Officer shall notify the landowner and tenant before
conducting any inspections.
      (2)   The Zoning Officer or his or her duly authorized assistant(s) shall
display identification signed by the Township Supervisors upon commencing an
inspection.
      (3)   Inspections shall be commenced in the presence of the landowner or
his or her representative or tenant.
   F.   The Zoning Officer shall maintain files, open to the public, of all
applications for certificates of occupancy and permits along with plans
submitted therewith as well as final certificates and permits.
   G.   The Zoning Officer shall also maintain records, open to the public, of
every complaint of a violation of the provisions of this chapter as well as
action taken as a result of such complaint.
   H.   The Zoning Officer shall submit to the Township Supervisors for
insertion in the Supervisors minutes, a written report summarizing for the
month all land use permits issued by him or her as well as complaints of
violations and action taken as a result of such complaints.
 150-84 PERMITS.
   A.   Land Use Permits
      (1)   No building or structure in excess of one-hundred (100) square
feet, in any district, shall be placed, erected or structurally altered without
a land use permit duly issued upon application to the Township. No land use
permit shall be issued unless the proposed construction or use is in full
conformity with all provisions of this chapter and all other Township
ordinances. Any land use permit issued in violation of the provisions of this
chapter shall be null and void and of no effect, and any work undertaken or use
established pursuant to any such permit shall be unlawful.
      (2)   No land use permits shall be issued for the construction or
alteration of any building upon a lot without legal access to a street or
highway.
      (3)   No land use permit shall be issued for a structure in any district
where such structure or use is allowed only by approval of the Zoning Hearing
Board unless and until such approval has been duly granted by the Zoning
Hearing Board.
      (4)   The Township shall, within fifteen (15) days after the filing of a
complete and properly prepared application, either issue or deny a land use
permit. If a land use permit is denied, the Township shall state in writing to
the applicant the reasons for such denial.
      (5)   A hand sketch of the property shall be submitted showing the
location of all buildings and drives on the property, the property s road
frontage and the location of the proposed improvement. Dimensions from the side
and rear property line to the closest point of the improvement must be shown as
well as the distance from the center of the road(s) to the closest point of the
improvement. Such drawing is not needed if the improvement is within the
existing footprint of the building or structure.
      (6)   A copy of the water, sewer, or septic permit shall be submitted
along with such land use application prior to issuance.
      (7)   All Township land use permits issued pursuant to this article shall
be valid for 18 months. Land use permits for construction in excess of one
million dollars ($1,000,000) shall be valid for thirty-six (36) months. Two (2)
extensions may be granted, each for an additional eighteen (18) or thirty-six
(36) months determined by the original construction cost as long as reasonable
cause is shown. Extension requests shall be made in writing.
      (8)   An as built survey shall be completed for all new residential
dwellings, new commercial structures or industrial structures. Such surveys
shall show all information as required by the Township and be signed and sealed
by a surveyor licensed in the state of Pennsylvania.
      (9)   Land Development Plans.
         (a)   Any developer of a single tract of land for any of the following
reasons shall be required to present a land development plan for review and
approval by Antrim Township:
            [1]   Multifamily residential purposes.
            [2]   Commercial.
            [3]   Industrial.
            [4]   Agricultural buildings of ten thousand (10,000) square feet
or more.
            [5]   Changing, altering or modifying a dwelling, single-family
detached (house), into a dwelling, multifamily or dwelling, single-family
semidetached (duplex) or dwelling, single-family attached (townhouse) or
dwelling, group.
         (b)   The land development plan shall be prepared in accordance with
all subdivision/land development requirements for a final plan. When a land
development plan is required, the review time for the developer s fully
completed land use permit application shall commence after Board of Supervisors
final action on the land development plan. Land development plans shall be
reviewed in accordance with the Subdivision/Land development Chapter.
   B.   Zoning Permit.
      (1)   No use shall commence within the Township without first obtaining a
Zoning Permit to ensure that such use is permitted in that zoning district and
that such location complies with all applicable regulations for such use.
      (2)   Any change of use on a property or within a structure requires a
zoning permit to be obtained before any change shall occur. Such change shall
comply with all regulations of the Township.
      (3)   A hand sketch of the property shall be submitted upon request from
the Township showing at a minimum the location of all buildings, parking areas
including the number of parking spaces, drives on the property, the property s
road frontage and the location of the proposed improvement.
      (4)   All fees that may apply to such use or change of use shall be paid
in full prior to issuance of the Zoning Permit.
      (5)   Any improvements determined to be needed for such use to comply
with regulations shall obtain proper approvals before the Zoning Permit can be
issued.
      (6)   Any Zoning Permit issued in violation of the provisions of this
chapter shall be null and void and of no effect, and any work undertaken or use
established pursuant to any such permit shall be unlawful.
 150-85 FEES.
   A.   Any individual or other entity requesting a zoning change shall be
required to pay any and all Township fees involved with the zoning change
request, including, but not limited to, advertising, attorney, engineer,
stenographer, copying, time spent by Township staff, etc.
   B.   The Board of Supervisors shall have the right to establish other fees
in addition to the fees described above to offset the costs of enforcing or
administering this chapter.
 150-86 ENFORCEMENT NOTICE.
   A.   If it appears to the Township that a violation of this chapter has
occurred, the Township shall initiate enforcement proceedings by sending an
enforcement notice as provided in this section.
   B.   The enforcement notice shall be sent to the owner of record of the
parcel on which the violation has occurred, to any person who has filed a
written request to receive enforcement notices regarding that parcel and to any
other person requested in writing by the owner of record.
   C.   An enforcement notice shall state at least the following:
      (1)   The name of the owner of record and any other person against whom
the Township intends to take action.
      (2)   The location of the property in violation.
      (3)   The specific violation with a description of the requirements which
have not been met, citing in each instance the applicable provisions of this
chapter.
      (4)   The date before which the steps for compliance must be commenced
and the date before which the steps must be completed.
      (5)   That the recipient of the notice has the right to appeal to the
Zoning Hearing Board within a period of ten (10) days.
      (6)   That failure to comply with the notice within the time specified,
unless extended by appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board, constitutes a violation,
with possible sanctions clearly described.
 150-87 CAUSES OF ACTION.
   In case any building, structure, landscaping or land is or is proposed to be
erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, converted, maintained or used in
violation of this chapter, the Board of Supervisors or, with the approval of
the Board of Supervisors, an officer of the Township, or any aggrieved owner or
tenant of real property who shows that his or her property or person will be
substantially affected by the alleged violation, in addition to other remedies
may institute any appropriate action or proceeding to prevent, restrain,
correct or abate such building, structure, landscaping or land or to prevent,
in or about such premises, any act, conduct, business or use constituting a
violation. When any such action is instituted by a landowner or tenant, notice
of that action shall be served upon the Township at least thirty (30) days
prior to the time the action is begun by serving a copy of the complaint on the
Board of Supervisors. No such action may be maintained until such notice has
been given.
 150-88 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
   A.   Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated or
permitted the violation of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon being
found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced by the
Township, pay a judgment of not more than five-hundred dollars ($500) plus all
court costs, including reasonable attorneys fees, incurred by the Township as a
result thereof. No judgment shall commence or be imposed, levied or payable
until the date of the determination of a violation by the District Justice. If
the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the Township may
enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable rules of civil procedure. Each
day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation, unless
the District Justice determining that there has been a violation further
determines that there was a good faith basis for the person, partnership or
corporation violating this chapter to have believed that there was no such
violation, in which event there shall be deemed to have been only one such
violation until the fifth day following the date of the determination of a
violation by the District Justice and thereafter each day that a violation
continues shall constitute a separate violation.
   B.   The Court of Common Pleas, upon petition, may grant an order of stay,
upon cause shown, tolling the per diem fine pending a final adjudication of the
violation and judgment.
   C.   Nothing contained in this section shall be construed or interpreted to
grant to any person or entity other than the Township the right to commence any
action for enforcement pursuant to this section.
   D.   District Justices shall have initial jurisdiction over proceedings
brought under this section.
CHAPTER A151 CHAPTER A153: RESERVED
 
CHAPTER A154: CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Antrim 5-26-
1987 as Ch. 13, Part 3 of the 1987 Code of Ordinances. Amendments noted where
applicable.]
Section
A154-1    License granted
A154-2    Use of poles
A154-3    Distribution facilities
A154-4    Use of streets and sidewalks
A154-5    Grounds for recision
A154-6    Time of construction
A154-7    Required Consents
A154-8    Rates
A154-9    Regulations and rate changes
A154-10    Royalties
A154-11    Prohibited activities
A154-12    Service availability
A154-13    Liability insurance
A154-14    Construction time
A154-15    Penalties
 A154-1 LICENSE GRANTED.
[Amended 3-26-1996 by Ord. No. 243]
   To the extent they are legally authorized to do so, the Supervisors of
Antrim Township, Franklin County, Pennsylvania, hereinafter called the
licensor, granted to Cumberland Valley Cable Company, a Pennsylvania
corporation, hereinafter called the licensee, nonexclusive permission to supply
community antenna television service and FM antenna radio service for sale to
the inhabitants of Antrim Township and permission to erect, maintain and
operate the licensee s distribution facilities in, under, over, along, across
and upon the streets, alleys, roads, bridges and sidewalks within the limits of
Antrim Township as now existing or hereinafter extended, for a period of 30
years and thereafter until terminated by the licensor or the licensee upon one
year s written notice, subject to the terms and conditions set forth in this
ordinance.
 A154-2 USE OF POLES.
   The licensee shall, to the extent it is reasonably possible, attach its
distribution facilities to utility poles and the licensee shall erect no poles
upon the public streets, alleys, roads or sidewalks within Antrim Township
without the express written consent of the Township.
 A154-3 DISTRIBUTION FACILITIES.
   The distribution facilities of the licensee shall be at all times maintained
in good and safe order and condition and shall be constructed and maintained so
as not to interfere with other authorized cable services or television
reception by inhabitants of Antrim Township not using the licensee s service,
and so as not to unnecessarily burden or obstruct the free use of the streets,
alleys, roads, bridges or sidewalks.
 A154-4 USE OF STREETS AND SIDEWALKS.
   The permission granted hereby shall be subject to all the ordinances,
regulations and rules now in force or which may be adopted relative to the use
of the streets, roads and alleys, bridges and sidewalks of Antrim Township.
 A154-5 GROUNDS FOR RECISION.
   Breach of any of the conditions and terms of this ordinance shall be grounds
for the recision of the permission hereby granted.
 A154-6 TIME OF CONSTRUCTION.
   A.   The licensee shall in good faith proceed with the construction of the
system authorized by this ordinance within 60 days following approval thereof.
   B.   The licensee shall have such service completed or in operation within
two years from the date of the approval of this ordinance. Failure to commence
operation within that time shall render null and void the rights hereby given.
Any delay occasioned by obtaining approval from utilities companies or other
unforeseen events which are not within the control of the licensee shall be
treated as an excusable delay.
 A154-7 REQUIRED CONSENTS.
   The rights hereby given shall be effective only to the extent the licensee
has the legal authority and right to do so, and it shall be the responsibility
of the licensee to obtain any necessary consents from any other public body or
authority or from the owners of properties which may be required to exercise
any of the rights granted hereby.
 A154-8 RATES.
   The charges by the licensee for community antenna television service and FM
antenna radio service for sale to the inhabitants of the Township of Antrim,
Franklin County, Pennsylvania, shall be as follows:
   A.   Sixteen dollars and thirty-five cents, connection charge.
   B.   Six dollars and forty-five cents per month service charge for the first
set in each customer location and $1 per month service charge for each
additional set in the same customer location.
   C.   No charge for connections or service to schools or fire department or
fire company.
 A154-9 REGULATIONS AND RATE CHANGES.
   The licensee shall make no substantial changes in the rules and regulations
nor raise the rates above those in the attached schedule except with the
express written consent of the licensor.
 A154-10 ROYALTIES.
   The licensee shall pay the licensor 2% of the gross operating revenue from
community antenna television service and FM antenna radio service beginning
with the first year of operation, payable at the end of each operating year,
and shall, upon request of the Board of Supervisors of the licensor, submit an
audited statement of its operations to support the basis for the aforesaid
payment.
 A154-11 PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES.
   The following activities by the licensee are prohibited in Antrim Township
during the term of this ordinance unless authorized by the Board of
Supervisors:
   A.   Pay television: sale of programs on a program-by-program basis.
   B.   Television sales and service: engaging in the sale, service, rental or
leasing of television receivers.
   C.   Music to businesses: background music service per se to commercial
establishments, except that which is a normal part of the community antenna
service authorized by this ordinance.
 A154-12 SERVICE AVAILABILITY.
   Service shall be made available to all inhabitants of the Township of Antrim
who may desire such service, except in any areas which may not be economically
served.
 A154-13 LIABILITY INSURANCE.
   The licensee agrees to maintain and keep in full force and effect at all
times during the term of this ordinance sufficient liability insurance coverage
to protect the Township of Antrim against any such claims, suits, judgments,
executions or demands in a sum not less than $100,000 as to any one accident or
occurrence, and not less than $50,000 for property damage as to any one
accident or occurrence.
 A154-14 CONSTRUCTION TIME.
   The licensee shall commence construction of the facilities for furnishing
said service within one month from the date of enactment of this ordinance and
shall endeavor to furnish antenna television service to the inhabitants of the
Township of Antrim in areas that have at least 10 houses per mile as fast as
economically feasible.
 A154-15 PENALTIES.
   Any person who shall violate this ordinance or any of the provisions hereof
shall be liable, upon summary conviction for a first offense and upon summary
conviction for each subsequent offense, to a fine of not less than $15 nor more
than $300, or imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days, together with the
costs of prosecution for each offense. Each day that a violation continues
shall be deemed and shall be taken to be a separate offense and shall be
punishable as such.
CHAPTER A155: FEES
[The current Fee Schedule is under review by the Township Board of Supervisors.
Upon completion of said review, the Fee Schedule will be included here. The
current schedule of fees applicable in the Township is available in the
Township offices.]
CHAPTER A156: HISTORICAL LEGISLATIVE INFORMATION
The ordinances and resolutions listed on the following pages are no longer of
general interest, primarily because their provisions were carried out directly
after their enactment. Since they are mainly of historical interest, it has not
been considered necessary to include their entire text. Instead, they are
arranged in groups, according to subject matter, and within each group listed
by title in chronological order. Any person who desires to read the full text
of any of the ordinances or resolutions may do so by consulting the original
Ordinance Books on file in the Townships offices.
Appendix
A   ANNEXATION OF TERRITORY
B   BOND ISSUES AND LOANS
C   FRANCHISES AND SERVICES
D   GOVERNMENTAL AND INTERGOVERNMENTAL AFFAIRS
G   SEWERS
H   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
I   WATER SERVICE
J   TABLE OF ZONING MAP AMENDMENTS
APPENDIX A ANNEXATION OF TERRITORY
APPENDIX B BOND ISSUES AND LOANS
Ord./Res. Type of Action Amount Purpose
Ord./Res.      Type of Action Amount         Purpose
17, 1960       Bond Issue     $25,000.00     Water tower
64, 12-15-1974 Notes Sale     $470,000.00    Sewage disposal system
66, 12-15-1974 Notes Sale     $400,000.00    Sewage disposal system
100, 5-14-1980 Bond Issue     $6,305,000.00  Sewer project
154, 9-23-1986 Bond Issue     $6,580,000.00  Sewer project refinancing
320, 1-25-2011 Notes Sale     $9,010,000.00  Sewer revenue bond refunding
332, 5-27-2014 Notes Sale     $3,300,000.00  Sewer system improvements and
                                             renovations
347, 3-8-2016  Notes Sale     $4,469,000.00  General obligation note refunding
358, 8-25-2020 Bond Issue     $12,000,000.00 Sewer revenue note refunding
 
APPENDIX C FRANCHISES AND SERVICES
 
Ord./Res.      Franchisee/Service Offered
31, 11-13-1967 Alleman Cable Company
 
APPENDIX D GOVERNMENTAL AND INTERGOVERNMENTAL AFFAIRS
Ord./Res. Subject
Ord./Res.      Subject
3, 7-26-1952   Insurance coverage for employees of the Township: Federal Old
               Age and Survivors Insurance
5, 1-31-1953   Insurance coverage for employees of Township: Federal Old Age
               and Survivors Insurance
34, 1-22-1968  Appointing Township Manager and setting wages
65, 1-20-1975  Agreement with Municipal Authority regarding sewage facilities
68, 5-12-1975  Agreement with Municipal Authority regarding sewage disposal
               system
69, 5-12-1975  Grant of easements to Municipal Authority for sewer system
186, 1-24-1989 Electing to join the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement System
318, 5-11-2010 Electing to change Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement System
               benefits
343, 7-14-2015 Amending Municipal Pension Plan administered by Pennsylvania
               Municipal Retirement System
356, 4-14-2020 Amending Municipal Pension Plan administered by Pennsylvania
               Municipal Retirement System
 
APPENDIX G SEWERS
 
Ord./Res.      Description
155, 9-23-1986 Agreement with Municipal Authority whereby Township agrees to
               lease and operate public sewer facilities
 
APPENDIX H1 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Street Activity Location Ord./Res.
Street                 Activity          Location               Ord./Res.
Allison Drive          Opening           Woodlawn Estates       216, 9-10-1991
Anna Court             Opening           Cherry Hill            166, 11-10-1987
                                         Subdivision
Anna Mae Drive         Opening           AJ Estates Subdivision 178, 10-11-1988
Antrim Court           Opening           Woodlawn Estates       216, 9-10-1991
Antrim Lane            Opening           Hartman Subdivision    102, 10-14-1980
Barmer Alley           Opening           Route 436 to Center    7, 5-13-1955
                                         Avenue
                                         Portion intersecting
Bemisderfer Road       Vacate            with Leitersburg Road  276, 2-12-2002
                                         (SR 2002)
Bowman Court           Opening           Cherry Hill            166, 11-10-1987
                                         Subdivision
Branch Street          Opening and sewer Brook Street to cul-   203, 7-24-1990
                                         de-sac
Brenda Drive           Opening           Brookside Manor        39, 4-14-1969
Brian Lane             Opening           Cordell Development    49, 2-28-1972
Brooks Street          Opening and sewer Township Route 422 to  203, 7-24-1990
                                         cul-de-sac
Campion Court          Opening           Osborne Avenue to cul- 206, 1-22-1991
                                         de-sac
Carey Drive            Opening           Minter Subdivision     146, 10- -1985
Carey Drive            Opening           End of street cul-de-  215, 9-10-1991
                                         sac
Carl Circle2           Opening           Carl Subdivision       97, 11-13-1979
Carol Avenue           Opening           Brookside Manor        39, 4-14-1969
                      Opening           Lisa Drive to Brenda   92, 3-27-1979
                                         Drive
                      Opening           Extension to Shanks    143, 9-24-1985
                                         Church Road
                                         Portion in the
                                         Stoneybrake Village
                                         Subdivision at the
Choxes Chase Street    Vacate            intersection of Kings  273, 10-9-2001
                                         Court, Queens Court
                                         and Choxes Chase
                                         Street
Colonial Drive         Opening and sewer Williamson Avenue to   130, 8-11-1984
                                         Greenway Circle
Commerce Avenue        Opening           Greencastle/Antrim     130, 8-14-1984
                                         Subdivision
Country Road           Opening           Country Side Acres     83, 4-12-1977
Clearview Avenue       Opening           Clear View Addition    6, 11-12-1954
                      Opening           Locust St. South 335   18, 9-22-1960
                                         feet
Donovan Drive          Opening           Garden Ridge Estates   217, 9-10-1991
East Side Drive        Opening           Route 36 Spur East     16, 4-7-1960
Farm Lane              Opening           Brookside Manor        39, 4-14-1969
                      Opening           Melissa Lane to cul-   92, 3-27-1979
                                         de-sac
                      Opening           Raymond L. Eberly      179, 10-25-1988
                                         Subdivision
Franklin Court         Opening           Woodlawn Estates       216, 9-10-1991
Greenview Drive        Opening           Greenview Acres        22, 4-27-1961
                      Opening           Extension              143, 9-24-1985
Grosh Drive            Opening           Valley View Trailer    146, 10- -1985
                                         Park
Hade Street            Opening           Parallel U.S. 11 west  18, 9-22-1960
Hamilton Drive         Opening           Penn Antrim Manor      201, 6-16-1990
                                         Subdivision
Jo Ann Drive           Opening           Antrim Valley Estates  205, 11-13-1990
                                         Subdivision
                                         Route 16 to a point
John Wayne Drive       Opening           east of Roadway Motor  199, 6-12-1990
                                         Plaza
Joy Street             Opening           Hess Development       51, 5-22-1972
Kauffman Avenue        Opening           Center Avenue          7, 5-13-1955
                                         southeast 470 feet
Kauffman Street        Opening           Kauffman s Subdivision 78, 4-5-1976
Kimberly Drive         Opening           Hess Development       51, 5-22-1972
Larry Avenue           Opening           Cordell Subdivision    49, 2-28-1972
                      Opening           Extension              82, 3-8-1977
Lee Street             Opening           Hess Development        
Lisa Drive             Opening           Brookside Manor        89, 11-28-1978
                      Opening           Farm Lane to Nancy     92, 3-27-1979
                                         Drive
                      Opening           Raymond L. Eberly      179, 10-25-1988
                                         Subdivision
Locust Street          Opening           Route 11 to Cresap     6, 11-12-1954
                                         Avenue
                      Opening           Proposed street to     18, 9-22-1960
                                         Route 11
Lohman Avenue          Opening and sewer Lincoln Investment     193, 12-12-1989
                                         Corp. Subdivision
Lorford Drive          Opening           Hege Subdivision       103, 12-16-1980
Lynn Drive             Opening           Hess Development       51, 5-22-1972
Maple Avenue           Opening           Route 280, 32          7, 5-13-1955
                                         southeast 286 feet
Melissa Drive          Opening           Brookside Manor        39, 4-14-1969
Mountain Laurel Lane   Opening           Ridgeview Estates      207, 2-12-1991
                                         Subdivision
Nancy Drive            Opening           Brookside Manor        92, 3-27-1979
Old Hykes Road         Vacate            Section of Route 371   138, 5-28-1985
PA Harry Drive         Opening           Clayhill Road to cul-  208, 3-12-1991
                                         de-sac
Penn Dixie Lane        Opening           Greenview Acres        22, 4-27-1961
Pine Drive             Opening and sewer P.N. Patalinghug S.D.  164, 10-13-1987
Preston Lane           Opening           Shank s Church Road to 195, 1-9-1990
                                         Township Route 349
Prospect Avenue        Opening           Clearview Avenue to    6, 11-12-1954
                                         Route 11
Public Square          Opening           State Line             18, 9-22-1960
Randy Drive            Opening           Brookside Manor        89, 11-28-1978
                      Opening           Raymond L. Eberly      179, 10-25-1988
                                         Subdivision
                      Opening           Raymond L. Eberly      208, 3-12-1991
                                         Subdivision
Randy Drive Ext.       Opening           Intersection of Farm   209, 3-12-1991
                                         Lane to cul-de-sac
Reagan Drive           Opening           Raymond L. Eberly      208, 3-12-1991
                                         Subdivision
Redwood Drive          Opening           Keener-1977            88, 6-27-1978
                                         Subdivision
                      Opening           900 ft. extension      98, 1-22-1980
                      Opening           1011.48 ft. extension  173, 7-26-1988
Ridge View Drive       Opening           Keener-1975            88, 6-27-1978
                                         Subdivision
Roberts Road           Opening           Rolling Hills          115, 10-12-1982
Robinhood Circle       Opening           Lincoln Investment     194, 12-19-1989
                                         Corp. Subdivision
Rogers Drive           Opening           Rolling Hills          115, 10-12-1982
Ruritan Drive          Opening           Kauffman s Subdivision 78, 4-5-1976
Ryan Lane              Opening and sewer Woodland Estates       163, 10-13-1987
Sandy Circle East      Opening           Cordell Development    49, 2-28-1972
Sandy Circle North     Opening           Cordell Development    49, 2-28-1972
Scenic View Drive      Opening           Lohman Subdivision     143, 9-24-1985
Shane Drive            Opening           Howard Sheely          184, 12-13-1988
                                         Subdivision
Sheely Drive           Opening           Howard Sheely          184, 12-13-1988
                                         Subdivision
Sherwood Drive opening Accepting         Entire length Lincoln  156, 1-5-1987
                                         Investment Corp.
                                       Subdivision            187, 2-14-1989
Skyline Village Drive  Opening           Skyline Village        80, 5-7-1976
                      Opening           Extension to cul-de-   96, 11-13-1979
                                         sac
South Allison Street   Opening           Allison Street to East 16, 4-7-1960
                                         Side Drive
Township Route 438     Vacate            Route 16 to 81 exit    108, 10-13-1981
Tower Drive            Opening           Woodlawn Estates       216, 9-10-1991
Twin Drive             Opening           Walnut Acres           215, 9-10-1991
                                         Development
Unnamed Alley          Opening           Connects U.S. 11 to    18, 9-22-1960
                                         Alley A
Unnamed Alley          Opening           North of Locust Street 18, 9-22-1960
Unnamed Alley          Opening           Connects U.S. 11 and   18, 9-22-1960
                                         parallel streets
Unnamed Alley          Opening           Connects U.S. 11       18, 9-22-1960
Unnamed Alley          Opening           Connects U.S. to       18, 9-22-1960
                                         parallel street west
Unnamed Alley          Opening           Connects U.S. 11 and   18, 9-22-1960
                                         parallel street west
Unnamed Alley          Opening           Connects U.S. 11 and   18, 9-22-1960
                                         proposed street west
Unnamed Alley          Opening           Clearview Avenue to    18, 9-22-1960
                                         U.S. 11
Unnamed Alley          Opening           U.S. 11 to Cresap      18, 9-22-1960
                                         Avenue
Unnamed Street         Opening           Reed Road to Route     25.5, 9-11-1963
                                         28067
Unnamed Street         Opening           Greencastle Lane to    11, 8-1-1957
                                         stream
Unnamed Street         Opening           U.S. 11 to State Line  18, 9-22-1960
                                         Square
Unnamed Street         Opening           Parallel with U.S. 11  18, 9-22-1960
                                         west
Unnamed Street         Opening           Alley to U.S. 11 234   18, 9-22-1960
                                         feet
Unnamed Street         Opening           Reed Road to Route     24, 7-18-1962
                                         28067
Unnamed Street         Opening           Hess Development       38, 2-17-1968
Unnamed Street         Opening           Talheim Addition       40, 7-7-1969
Unnamed Street         Opening           Reed Road to 28067     52, - -1972
Unnamed Street         Opening           Kegerreis Development  55, 8-14-1972
Victoria Drive         Opening and sewer Lincoln Investment     194, 12-19-1989
                                         Corp. Subdivision
Walnut Loop            Opening           Greenview Acres        22, 4-27-1961
                      Opening           Greenview Acres        143, 9-24-1985
Walnut Street          Opening           Clearview Avenue East  6, 11-12-1954
                                         315 feet
Walter Avenue          Opening           Greencastle Line to    15, 11-5-1959
                                         Route 28004
Washington Court       Opening           Woodlawn Estates       216, 9-10-1991
West Avenue            Opening           Willow Sale            56, 11-6-1972
                                         Development
West View Circle       Opening           West View Estates      21, 4-27-1961
Willowdale Road        Opening           Portion of Route 422   148, 10-22-1985
 
1 Editor s Note: See also Ch. 139, Vehicles and Traffic, Art. VI, Road
Abandonment.
2 Editor s Note: Ordinance No. 248, adopted 11-18-1997, amended Ord. No. 97 to
rename Carl Drive as Carl Circle.
APPENDIX I WATER SERVICE
 
Ordinance Number Adoption Date Description
 
APPENDIX J TABLE OF ZONING MAP AMENDMENTS
 
Ordinance Number Adoption Date Description
                              
Zoning Map Amendment1 Editor s Note: Exhibit A is on file in the Township
offices.
PARALLEL REFERENCES
   
References to Pennsylvania Statutes
   
References to Pennsylvania Code
   
References to Pennsylvania Consolidated Statutes
   
References to Pennsylvania Consolidated Statutes Annotated
   
References to Resolutions
   
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO PENNSYLVANIA STATUTES
 
P.S. Cite Code Section
P.S. Cite                       Code Section
16 P.S.  §  11011-6            130-38
24 P.S.  §  6-686              130-53
35 P.S.  §§  691.1 et seq.    110-57;
                                110-69
35 P.S.  §§  750.1 et seq.    110-69;
                                110-71
                                118-3;
                                118-29;
35 P.S.  §§ 6018.101 et seq.  118-36;
                                118-40;
                                118-43;
                                150-11
35 P.S.  §§  6018.101 6018.100110-78
53 P.S.  §§  881.101 et seq.  24-1
53 P.S.  §§  895.101 et seq.  24-1
                                118-3;
                                118-29;
53 P.S.  §§  4000.101 et seq. 118-40;
                                118-43;
                                150-11
                                130-8;
53 P.S.  §  6924.101 et seq.   130-15;
                                130-31
53 P.S. 6924.301.1              130-18
53 P.S.  §§  7101 et seq.     130-41
53 P.S.  §  7106               110-39
53 P.S.  §  7271               110-39
53 P.S.  §§  10101 et seq.    27-1;
                                150-75
53 P.S.  §§  10401 et seq.    125-9
53 P.S.  §§  10501 et seq.    150-74
53 P.S.  §  10508              150-74
53 P.S.  §§  10601 et seq.    150-4
53 P.S.  §  10607              150-80
                                150-4;
53 P.S.  §  10609              150-81;
                                150-82
53 P.S.  §  10609.1            150-74;
                                150-81
53 P.S.  §  10609.2            105-4
53 P.S.  §  10610              150-82
53 P.S.  §§  10701 et seq.    150-74
53 P.S.  §  10702              150-74
53 P.S.  §§  10901 et seq.    150-4;
                                150-72
53 P.S.  §  10909.1            150-81
53 P.S.  §  10910.2            150-74
                                150-74;
53 P.S.  §  10916.1            150-81;
                                150-82;
                                150-82
53 P.S.  §  10916.1(a)         150-74
53 P.S.  § 10916.2             150-74
53 P.S.  §  66601(d)           1-1
53 P.S.  §  67304              139-51 II
53 P.S.  §  67305              139-51 II
53 P.S.  §  67311              139-51 II
53 P.S.  §§  67601 et seq.    143-7
53 P.S.  §  67705              126-4
                                124-3;
65 P.S.  §§  271 et seq.      125-9;
                                150-4
68 P.S.  §§  399.1 et seq.    110-45
72 P.S.  §§  8101-C et seq.   130-42
72 P.S.  §§  8101-D et seq.   130-29
                                
 
 
REFERENCES TO PENNSYLVANIA CODE
 
Pa. Code Cite Code Section
Pa. Code Cite           Code Section
25 Pa. Code             126-1;
                        126-9
25 Pa. Code Ch. 73      126-15
25 Pa. Code Ch. 92a     126-1
25 Pa. Code Ch. 93      126-3
25 Pa. Code 93.4b(a)    126-1
25 Pa. Code 93.4b(b)    126-1
                        70-1;
                        70-5;
25 Pa. Code Ch. 102     126-1;
                        126-8;
                        126-15
25 Pa. Code Ch. 252     111-4
25 Pa. Code Ch. 287     70-1;
                        70-6
25 Pa. Code Ch. 299     70-1
34 Pa. Code             150-35;
                        150-42
34 Pa. Code Ch. 401-405 65-2
67 Pa. Code Ch. 441     125-17
 
REFERENCES TO PENNSYLVANIA CONSOLIDATED STATUTES
 
Pa. C.S. Code Cite Code Section
Pa. C.S. Code Cite            Code Section
2 Pa. C.S.  §§  551 et. seq.111-61
53 Pa. C.S.  §§  2301 et seq25-17
53 Pa. C.S.  §§  2301-2315  8-6
                              110-1;
                              110-35;
53 Pa. C.S.  §§  5601 et seq111-4;
                              124-3;
                              125-9;
                              150-4
53 Pa. C.S.  §§  8421 et seq130-24
62 Pa. C.S.  §§  1901 et seq8-2
                              139-1;
75 Pa. C.S.  §§  101 et seq.139-20 -
                              139-25;
                              139-36
                              
 
REFERENCES TO PENNSYLVANIA CONSOLIDATED STATUTES ANNOTATED
 
 
Pa. C.S.A. Cite                 Code Section
2 Pa. C.S.A.  §§  551 555     110-45
42 Pa. C.S.A.  §  5572         110-45
53 Pa. C.S.A. Ch. 23, Subch. A  8-4
75 Pa. C.S.A.  §§  7301 et seq139-46
                                
 
REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS
 
 
Res. No. Date Passed Code Section
263      5-13-2014   111-4
                    
 
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
3        7-26-1952   Ch. A156, App. D
5        1-31-1953   Ch. A156, App. D
6        11-12-1954  Ch. A156, App. H
7        5-13-1955   Ch. A156, App. H
11       8-1-1957    Ch. A156, App. H
15       11-5-1959   Ch. A156, App. H
16       4-7-1960    Ch. A156, App. H
17       - -1960     Ch. A156, App. B
18       9-22-1960   Ch. A156, App. H
21       4-27-1961   Ch. A156, App. H
22       4-27-1961   Ch. A156, App. H
24       7-18-1962   Ch. A156, App. H
25.5     9-11-1963   Ch. A156, App. H
31       11-13-1967  Ch. A156, App. C
34       1-22-1968   Ch. A156, App. D
38       2-17-1968   Ch. A156, App. H
39       4-14-1969   Ch. A156, App. H;
                     Ch. A156, App. H
40       7-7-1969    Ch. A156, App. H
49       2-28-1972   Ch. A156, App. H
51       5-22-1972   Ch. A156, App. H
52       - -1972     Ch. A156, App. H
55       8-14-1972   Ch. A156, App. H
56       11-6-1972   Ch. A156, App. H
64       12-15-1974  Ch. A156, App. B
65       1-20-1975   Ch. A156, App. D
66       12-15-1974  Ch. A156, App. B
68       5-12-1975   Ch. A156, App. D
69       5-12-1975   Ch. A156, App. D
78       4-5-1976    Ch. A156, App. H
80       5-7-1976    Ch. A156, App. H
82       3-8-1977    Ch. A156, App. H
83       4-12-1977   Ch. A156, App. H
88       6-27-1978   Ch. A156, App. H
89       11-28-1978  Ch. A156, App. H
92       3-27-1979   Ch. A156, App. H
96       11-13-1979  Ch. A156, App. H
97       11-13-1979  Ch. A156, App. H
98       1-22-1980   Ch. A156, App. H
100      5-14-1980   Ch. A156, App. B
102      10-14-1980  Ch. A156, App. H
103      12-16-1980  Ch. A156, App. H
108      10-13-1981  Ch. A156, App. H
115      10-12-1982  Ch. A156, App. H
130      8-11-1984   Ch. A156, App. H
138      5-28-1985   Ch. A156, App. H
143      9-24-1985   Ch. A156, App. H
146      10- -1985   Ch. A156, App. H
148      10-22-1985  Ch. A156, App. H
154      9-23-1986   Ch. A156, App. B
155      9-23-1986   Ch. A156, App. G
156      1-5-1987    Ch. A156, App. H
159      7-28-1987   130-28 -
                     130-43
163      10-13-1987  Ch. A156, App. H
164      10-13-1987  Ch. A156, App. H
165      10-13-1987  110-38
166      11-10-1987  Ch. A156, App. H
169      3-22-1988   110-37
172      7-12-1988   110-37
173      7-26-1988   110-37;
                     Ch. A156, App. H
174      7-26-1988   110-36
175      8-23-1988   110-37
178      10-11-1988  Ch. A156, App. H
179      10-25-1988  Ch. A156, App. H
184      12-13-1988  Ch. A156, App. H
186      1-24-1989   Ch. A156, App. D
187      2-14-1989   Ch. A156, App. H
190      5-9-1989    33-1
193      12-12-1989  Ch. A156, App. H
194      12-19-1989  Ch. A156, App. H
195      1-9-1990    Ch. A156, App. H
196      1-9-1990    110-9
197      5-8-1990    110-37
199      6-12-1990   Ch. A156, App. H
200      6-12-1990   130-4
201      6-16-1990   Ch. A156, App. H
202      7-10-1990   84-13
203      7-24-1990   Ch. A156, App. H
205      11-13-1990  Ch. A156, App. H
206      1-22-1991   Ch. A156, App. H
207      2-12-1991   Ch. A156, App. H
208      3-12-1991   Ch. A156, App. H
210      5-9-1991    114-1 -
                     114-6
209      3-12-1991   Ch. A156, App. H
213      5-14-1991   48-1 -
                     48-18
215      9-10-1991   Ch. A156, App. H
216      9-10-1991   Ch. A156, App. H
217      9-10-1991   Ch. A156, App. H
218      5-26-1992   33-1
222      8-6-1992    118-28 -
                     118-43
231      1-3-1994    110-37
240      11-18-1995  33-1
241      1-2-1996    110-37
242      2-13-1996   45-1 -
                     45-4
243      3-26-1996   A154-1
                     1-1 -
                     1-15;
                     27-2;
                     33-2;
                     45-4;
                     48-1;
                     48-17;
                     84-6;
                     84-9;
                     84-14;
                     84-15;
                     110-1;
                     110-3;
                     110-10;
                     110-12;
                     110-15;
                     110-23;
                     110-25;
                     110-32;
246      7-8-1997    110-35;
                     110-36;
                     110-37;
                     110-45;
                     114-6;
                     118-36;
                     118-41;
                     130-2;
                     130-4;
                     130-5;
                     130-11;
                     130-12;
                     130-30;
                     130-33;
                     130-36;
                     130-43;
                     130-44;
                     130-50;
                     139-1 
                     139-48
248      11-18-1997  Ch. A156, App. H
349      1-27-1998   139-21
250      3-10-1998   139-8
251      5-26-1998   110-56 -
                     110-67
252      5-26-1998   110-46 -
                     110-55
253      5-26-1998   110-68 -
                     110-83
256      9-22-1998   139-51 I
257      9-22-1998   19-1 -
                     19-4
260      7-27-1999   84-2;
                     84-5
264      9-12-2000   139-8
265      9-12-2000   139-21
266      9-12-2000   143-1 -
                     143-11
269      2-27-2001   139-23
                     92-1 -
272      6-26-2001   92-5;
                     92-7 -
                     92-13
273      10-9-2001   Ch. A156, App. H
                     139-8;
                     139-21;
274      12-11-2001  139-22;
                     139-29;
                     139-39
275      12-27-2001  130-52 -
                     130-58
276      2-12-2002   Ch. A156, App. H
277      9-24-2002   Ch. A156, App. J
278      11-25-2002  142-1 -
                     142-5
279      11-26-2002  Ch. A156, App. J
281      1-4-2003    143-1;
                     143-4
280      1-14-2003   144-1 -
                     144-8
286      4-27-2004   65-1 -
                     65-8
294      8-23-2005   7-1;
                     7-2
300      5-9-2006    139-8
308      7-10-2007   110-36
                     110-20;
311      4-8-2008    111-1 -
                     111-68
314      9-16-2008   Ch. A156, App. J
316      6-9-2009    110-37;
                     111-8
                     65-6;
317      8-25-2009   110-9;
                     110-50;
                     110-71
318      5-11-2010   Ch. A156, App. D
319      10-12-2010  60-1 -
                     60-8
320      1-25-2011   Ch. A156, App. B
321      3-8-2011    Ch. A156, App. J
322      5-12-2011   9-1
325      7-10-2012   Ch. A156, App. J
                     130-15 -
326      12-11-2012  130-27;
                     130-44
327      8-13-2013   139-23
                     130-28 -
329      9-24-2013   130-43;
                     130-52 -
                     130-58
330      11-12-2013  92-6 -
                     92-13
331      5-27-2014   110-41;
                     110-45
332      5-27-2014   Ch. A156, App. B
333      7-22-2014   139-8
334      8-12-2014   110-39
335      8-12-2014   139-8
336      8-26-2014   Ch. A156, App. J
337      10-28-2014  139-8
                     124-1 -
                     124-9;
338      11-25-2014  125-1 -
                     125-35;
                     150-1 -
                     150-88
339      1-5-2015    25-1 -
                     25-17
340      1-13-2015   139-29;
                     139-39
341      4-14-2015   111-8
342      6-23-2015   8-1 -
                     8-8
343      7-14-2015   Ch. A156, App. D
344      9-22-2015   139-51 II
                     150-58;
345      11-10-2015  150-62;
                     Ch. A156, App. B
346      12-8-2015   110-2
347      3-8-2016    Ch. A156, App. B
348      8-23-2016   Ch. A156, App. J
                     111-4;
                     111-8;
349      9-27-2016   111-13;
                     111-19;
                     111-34;
                     139-21
                     130-11;
350      11-22-2016  130-16;
                     130-25
                     59-1 -
351      12-12-2017  59-7;
                     118-1 -
                     118-27
352      10-23-2018  Ch. A156, App. J
353      2-12-2019   124-8;
                     Ch. A156, App. J
354      2-25-2020   111-8
                     125-14;
                     125-15;
                     125-17;
355      4-14-2020   150-26;
                     150-30;
                     150-59;
                     150-63;
                     150-64
                     24-1 -
356      4-14-2020   24-6;
                     Ch. A156, App. D
357      7-28-2020   139-29
358      8-25-2020   Ch. A156, App. B
359      9-22-2020   Ch. A156, App. J
360      9-14-2021   111-8
361      10-12-2021  Ch. A156, App. J
362      9-27-2022   Ch. A156, App. J
363      2-14-2023   126-1 -
                     126-37
364      4-25-2023   150-23
365      7-11-2023   Ch. A156, App. J
366      1-4-2025    139-36 -
                     139-52
367      4-8-2025    70-1 -
                     70-11
368      10-14-2025  24-2
                    
 
 
 
