CORRY, PENNSYLVANIA
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2025 S-7 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ord. 1664, passed 3-17-2025
Published by:
AMERICAN LEGAL PUBLISHING
525 Vine Street * Suite 310 * Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-800-445-5588 www.amlegal.com
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE NO. 1590
COUNCIL BILL NO. 18-13
   Presented by: MAYOR MITCHELL
   AN ORDINANCE ENACTING A CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR THE CITY OF CORRY,
PENNSYLVANIA REVISING, AMENDING, RESTATING, CODIFYING AND COMPILING CERTAIN
EXISTING GENERAL ORDINANCES OF THE POLITICAL SUBDIVISION DEALING WITH SUBJECTS
EMBRACED IN SUCH CODE OF ORDINANCES, AND DECLARING AN EMERGENCY.
WHEREAS, the present general and permanent ordinances of the political
subdivision are inadequately arranged and classified and are insufficient in
form and substance for the complete preservation of the public peace, health,
safety and general welfare of the municipality and for the proper conduct of
its affairs; and
WHEREAS, the Acts of the Legislature of the State of Pennsylvania empower and
authorize the political subdivision to revise, amend, restate, codify and
compile any existing ordinances and all new ordinances not heretofore adopted
or published and to incorporate such ordinances into one ordinance in book
form; and
WHEREAS, the Legislative Authority of the Political Subdivision has authorized
a general compilation, revision and codification of the ordinances of the
Political Subdivision of a general and permanent nature and publication of such
ordinance in book form; and
WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of the
municipality and for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health,
safety and general welfare of the municipality that this ordinance take effect
at an early date.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE LEGISLATIVE AUTHORITY OF THE POLITICAL
SUBDIVISION OF CITY OF CORRY:
Section 1.   The general ordinances of the Political Subdivision as revised,
amended, restated, codified, and compiled in book form are hereby adopted as
and shall constitute the "Code of Ordinances of the City of Corry,
Pennsylvania."
Section 2.   Such Code of Ordinances as adopted in Section 1 shall consist of
the following Titles:
   TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
         10.      General Code Construction; General Penalty
   TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
         30.      City Officials
         31.      City Organizations
         32.      Finances
         33.      City Policies
         34.      Police
         35.      Firefighters
   TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
         50.      Refuse
         51.      Water
         52.      Sewer
   TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
         70.      General Regulations
         71.      Streets and Sidewalks
         72.      Bicycles and Recreational Vehicles
         73.      Parking Regulations
         74.      Traffic Schedules
         75.      Parking Schedules
   TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
         90.      Fair Housing
         91.      Animals
         92.      Fire Prevention
         93.      Property Maintenance
         94.      Parks and Recreation
         95.      Nuisances
   TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
         110.   Rental Properties
         111.   Mineral Excavation
         112.   Amusements
         113.   Licenses, Fees and Taxes
         114.   Sexually Oriented Businesses
         115.   Alcohol
   TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
         130.   General Regulations
         131.   Loitering
   TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
         150.   Building Codes
         151.   Property Maintenance
         152.   Stormwater Management
         153.   Floodplains
         154.   Subdivisions
         155.   Schedule of Fees
         156.   Zoning
   TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
      Table
         I.      Streets and Sidewalks
         II.      Property Transfers and Regulations
         III.      Agreements
         IV.      Franchises
         V.      Plans and Programs
         VI.      Miscellaneous
   Section 3.   All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated in such
Code of Ordinances shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date
of this ordinance except as they are included and reordained in whole or in
part in such Code; provided, such repeal shall not affect any offense committed
or penalty incurred or any right established prior to the effective date of
this ordinance, nor shall such repeal affect the provisions of ordinances
levying taxes, appropriating money, annexing or detaching territory,
establishing franchises, or granting special rights to certain persons,
authorizing public improvements, authorizing the issuance of bonds or borrowing
of money, authorizing the purchase or sale of real or personal property,
granting or accepting easements, plat or dedication of land to public use,
vacating or setting the boundaries of streets or other public places; nor shall
such repeal affect any other ordinance of a temporary or special nature or
pertaining to subjects not contained in or covered by the Code.
   Section 4.   Such Code shall be deemed published as of the day of its
adoption and approval by the Legislative Authority and the Clerk of the
Political Subdivision is hereby authorized and ordered to file a copy of such
Code of Ordinances in the Office of the Clerk.
   Section 5.   Such Code shall be in full force and effect as provided in
Section 6, and such Code shall be presumptive evidence in all courts and places
of the ordinance and all provisions, sections, penalties and regulations
therein contained and of the date of passage, and that the same is properly
signed, attested, recorded, and approved and that any public hearings and
notices thereof as required by law have been given.
   Section 6.   This ordinance is declared to be an emergency measure necessary
for the immediate preservation of the peace, health, safety and general welfare
of the people of this municipality, and shall take effect at the earliest date
provided by law.
PASSED AND ADOPTED by the Legislative Authority of the Political Subdivision on
this 21st day of January, 2019.
ATTEST:
Joanne M. Smith /s/       David E. Mitchell /s/
JOANNE M. SMITH, CITY CLERK      DAVID E. MITCHELL, MAYOR
ORDINANCE NO. 1592
COUNCIL BILL NO. 19-02
   Presented by: MAYOR MITCHELL
   AN ORDINANCE ENACTING AND ADOPTING A SUPPLEMENT TO THE CODE OF ORDINANCES
FOR THE CITY OF CORRY, PENNSYLVANIA, AND DECLARING AN EMERGENCY.
WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio, has
completed the 2019 S-1 supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the Political
Subdivision, which supplement contains all ordinances of a general and
permanent nature enacted since the prior supplement to the Code of Ordinances
of this Political Subdivision; and
WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of the
municipality and for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health,
safety and general welfare of the municipality that this ordinance take effect
at an early date;
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE LEGISLATIVE AUTHORITY OF THE CITY OF
CORRY:
Section 1.   That the 2019 S-1 supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the
Political Subdivision as submitted by American Legal Publishing Corporation of
Cincinnati, Ohio, and as attached hereto, be and the same is hereby adopted by
reference as if set out in its entirety.
Section 2.   Such supplement shall be deemed published as of the day of its
adoption and approval by the Legislative Authority and the Clerk of the
Political Subdivision is hereby authorized and ordered to insert such
supplement into the copy of the Code of Ordinances kept on file in the Office
of the Clerk.
Section 3.   This ordinance is declared to be an emergency measure necessary
for the immediate preservation of the peace, health, safety and general welfare
of the people of this municipality, and shall take effect at the earliest date
provided for by law.
PASSED AND ADOPTED by the Legislative Authority of the City of Corry on this
18th day of March, 2019.
ATTEST:
Joanne M. Smith /s/                      David E. Mitchell /s/
JOANNE M. SMITH, CITY CLERK                     DAVID E. MITCHELL, MAYOR
CHARTER
CHARTER OF THE CITY OF CORRY
ERIE COUNTY PENNSYLVANIA
SECTION 1
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania in general assembly met, and it is hereby enacted by the authority
of the same; that the following described territory now constituting the
borough of Corry, be and the same is hereby constituted a city by the name and
title of the city of Corry; and by the said name are hereby constituted a body
corporate and politic with all the incidents of a corporation; to wit, all that
territory embraced within the following boundaries, commencing at the south-
west corner of lot fifty-one in the Township of Concord Erie County
Pennsylvania thence running north to the south-west corner of fifty-three in
Wayne Township County and state aforesaid; thence east on the track line to
Warren County line, thence south on said county line to south-east corner of
fractional lot fifty-four in Concord Township, thence west on south line of
lots fifty-four, fifty-three, fifty-two and fifty-one to the place of
beginning.
SECTION 2
That the said city shall be and remain divided for municipal purposes into two
wards; one to be called the North, and the other the South Ward which said
wards shall be bounded as follows, to wit: all of said corporation North of the
Atlantic and great Western Oil Creek and Philadelphia and Erie Rails Roads
shall be called the North Ward and all of said City south of said roads shall
be called the South Ward which said wards may again subdivided by the select
and common council as by them may be deemed for the best interest of said
corporation.
SECTION 3
The inhabitants of said city entitled to vote for members of the general
assembly having resided therein ten days immediately preceding the election
shall on the third Friday of March one thousand eight hundred and sixty-six and
annually thereafter on the same day which now is or may be thereafter fixed by
law for township elections within this state meet at some convenient place in
said city, to be designated by the present council of the borough of Corry
between the hours of eight in the forenoon and five in the afternoon and elect
one citizen who shall be styled a Mayor and one person to be High Constable of
said city and six citizens to be as a select council and six persons to be a
common council for said city two Justices of the Peace to fill vacancy that is
now or may hereafter occur in the office of Justice of the Peace of said City
provided that no Justice of the Peace shall be elected under this act until a
vacancy shall occur in some one of the offices of Justice of the Peace within
the present borough of Corry; one Constable the necessary school directors as
is now provided law, for each school district in said city; one Police Justice
who shall have the jurisdictions of power to try and determine all actions of
fines, penalties or forfeitures imposed by the laws of this state relating to
said city or imposed by any of the ordinances by-laws, rules or regulations
thereof and to issue executions to one of the Constables or High Constables of
said city for the collection of any judgements rendered in the premises to be
collected in the same manner as judgments of Justices of the Peace founded on
trespafs or trover are now by law collectable, and the Constable to whom such
executions may be issued shall be liable thereon in the same manner as if
founded on such judgment in trespafs or trover; and the said Police Justice
shall also have power and criminal jurisdictions of Justices of the Peace in
all cafus of offences whatsoever committed in the city and for the preservation
of the peace thereof; and shall be entitled to the same fees as Justices of the
Peace of this state for similar services and the Justices of the Peace of said
City shall have concurrent jurisdiction in the co elections of fines and
penalties the preservation of the peace and in the criminal matters aforesaid;
said elections and all subsequent elections in said city shall be governed by
the laws of the state regulating township elections and said first election
shall be holden by the Judges and Inspectors of Elections last elected in the
present Borough of Corry.
SECTION 4
The members elect of the select council shall on the day next succeeding their
election, divide themselves by lot into three classes; and the term of office
of the first class shall expire upon the first and the second upon the second
and the third on the third city election next succeeding, at which respective
elections the vacancies shall be supplied by the election annually of one third
part of said select council in the manner aforesaid.
SECTION 5
That the Mayor, Common Council and High Constable shall respectively hold their
offices until the city election next succeeding, and shall be thereafter
annually elected, and after the first election aforesaid the city election
shall be holden on the same day as township elections are or shall be holden by
the laws of this state; and the Justices of Peace, Common Constables,
Assessors, Inspectors and Judges of Elections and Auditors of said Borough of
Corry in office at or immediately before said first elections shall continue in
office in said city till the next elections for said several offices and be
vested with the same powers and subject to the same duties until others are
elected and qualified under this act.
SECTION 6
The legislative powers of said city and corporation shall be vested in the
select council and common council thereof who shall perform legislative acts in
separate bodies, and a majority of the members of each body must be present to
constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. The Mayor whereas present
shall be the presiding officer of the select council and in case of an equal
division, shall give the casting vote. The common council shall annually choose
one of their own number to preside at its deliberations who shall vote as other
members; and no act by-law or ordinance shall be valid unless passed by a
majority of the members present in each body legally assembled.
SECTION 7
The stated meetings of the select and common council shall be holden for the
transaction of business every two weeks, and may hold meetings as much often as
the Mayor and the respective councils may designate, and at such place in said
city as shall be provided by the ordinances thereof; and the doors of
respective halls of said select and common councils shall be open for the
admission of orderly and peaceful disposed citizens who may choose to attend
sessions thereof; and the said council may provide by ordinance for the
punishment by fine of any disorderly conduct disturbing either of the
perspective sessions and either body may expel such persons from the hall at
its sessions.
SECTION 8
That each body shall appoint a clerk, who shall make and keep a full record of
it s proceedings recording the names of the members present; and all of the
ordinances and by-laws rules and regulations of said councils shall signed by
the Mayor and clerk of the respective councils and published in one or more of
the public newspapers of said city and the publication proved by oath of some
creditable witness and recorded in the records of said city; and the said
record shall be deemed and taken as sufficient evidence, of the passage and
publication of all such ordinances by-laws, rules and regulations.
SECTION 9
That the Mayor of said city shall have the same powers and jurisdiction of the
Police Justices, elected under this act.
SECTION 10
The select and common councils shall have power to compel the owners or
occupiers of lots to repair the sidewalks in front of their respective lots or
to cause the repairs to made and file their liens as is now provided by the
general laws of this state and the said common council and select council may
by a general ordinance regulate the portion of the sidewalks which the owners
of dwelling houses and others may use for door steps and other purposes in
front of their respective premises; and may impose penalties for mutilating or
injuring trees growing upon the streets and public grounds of said city; and
the council shall be vested with all the powers in said city which at and
immediately before the passage of this act belonged to and were vested in the
burgefs and council of the Borough of Corry.
SECTION 11
That the select and common council shall have power, and they are hereby
authorized and empowered to pass from time to time such and so many ordinances
as may be thought proper and necessary for the prevention or regulation of the
erection or removal from any other place in said city of any wooden dwelling
house, shop or warehouse carriage house store stable or other wooden building
within the limits of the said city. Provided, that such ordinances shall not be
contrary to the constitution or laws of this state.
SECTION 12
That all the estate and property whatever real or personal, or mixed and all
chases in action, claims, or demands of the Borough of Corry or of the burgefs
and council thereof, are hereby vested in the corporation or body corporate or
politics of the City of Corry in the same manner and for the same estate which
the corporate authorities of the said borough held or had therein; and all
suits now pending may be prosecuted to judgment by and for said city, in the
same manner and with the same effect as could have been done by the said
burgefs and council if this act had not been enacted; and all judgments suits
claims and demands whatsoever against said borough are hereby transferred to
and shall continue and may be prosecuted against said city as fully and
completely as they could have been against said borough if the said borough
charter had not been abolished.
SECTION 13
That the mode of enforcing payment of any judgment against said city shall be
the same as is now or hereafter may be provided by law for enforcing payment of
judgments against the several townships of this state, provided, that any or
either party to any judgment may have the same right of appeal to the Court of
Common Pleas of Erie County that is now provided by law to appeal from Justices
of the Peace.
SECTION 14
That the select and common council of said city of Corry shall have power to
raise in addition to the amount raised for city proposes may raise not to
exceed one and one-half percent on the taxable property real and personal
within said city; to appoint as many Policemen as they may deem for the best
interest of said city; to raise not to exceed one half of one percent on the
real and personal estate of said city for city purposes; to provide for a
distribution of a sufficient quantity of good and wholesome water to and
through the city and the permanent continuance for the accommodation of the
inhabitants thereof; to organize one or more fire companies; to establish a
sufficient number of reservoirs to supply water in case of fires; to provide
for the lighting of said city with gas or oil in such other way as the said
select and common council may determine.
   Jas R Kelley
   Speaker of the House of Representatives
   D Fleming
   Speaker of the Senate
Approved, the eight day of March, anno domini, one thousand eight hundred and
sixty-six.
   Als Curtin
Office of the Secretary of the Commonwealth
Harrisburg, March 8, 1866
Pennsylvania:
   I do hereby certify that the foregoing and annexed is a full true and
correct copy of the original act of the general assembly entitled. An act to
incorporate the City of Corry as the same remains on file in this office.
In testimony whereof, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the
Secretary's office to be offixed, the day and year above written.
   W W. Armstrong
   Deputy Secretary of the Commonwealth
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   GENERAL CODE CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
CHAPTER 10: GENERAL CODE CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
Section
   
10.01   Approval, adoption and title of code
   
10.02   Rules of interpretation and definitions
   
10.03   Effect of code on previous provisions
   
10.04   Sections and ordinances repealed
   
10.05   Exemptions from repeal
   
10.06   Application to future ordinances
   
10.07   Changes and revisions in previously adopted ordinances
   
10.08   Interpretation of provisions
   
10.09   Headings, editor’s notes, statutory references
   
10.10   Filing copies of code
   
10.11   Amendments to the code; code books to be kept up-to-date
   
10.12   Severability
   
10.13   Reference to other sections
   
10.14   Errors and omissions
   
10.15   Sections histories; statutory references
   
10.16   Altering or tampering with the code; penalties for violation
   
10.17   City seal
 
   
10.99   General penalty
§ 10.01 APPROVAL, ADOPTION AND TITLE OF CODE.
   (A)   Pursuant to 11 Pa.C.S. §§ 11018.15, the codification of all ordinances
of a permanent and general nature for the City of Corry, Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, as revised, codified, rearranged, renumbered and consolidated
into component codes, titles, chapters and sections, are approved, adopted,
ordained and enacted as a single ordinance of the City of Corry, and shall be
known and designated as the “City of Corry Code”, for which designation “code
of ordinances”, “codified ordinances” or “code” may be substituted.
   (B)   Code title, chapter and section headings do not constitute any part of
the law as contained in the code.
§ 10.02 RULES OF INTERPRETATION AND DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   Rules of interpretation.
      (1)   Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain, ordinary and usual
sense. Technical words and phrases having a peculiar and appropriate meaning in
law shall be understood according to their technical import.
      (2)   Words imputing joint authority to three or more persons shall be
construed as imputing authority to a majority of the persons unless otherwise
declared in the section giving the authority.
      (3)   Where a section requires an act to be done which, by law, an agent
or deputy may perform in addition to the principal, the performance of the act
by an authorized deputy or agent is valid.
      (4)   Words denoting the masculine gender shall be deemed to include the
feminine and neuter genders; words in the singular shall include the plural and
words in the plural shall include the singular; the use of a verb in the
present tense shall include the future, if applicable.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this code, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICE. All departments and the personnel thereof
established by the city code or ordinance.
      ADOPTING ORDINANCE. The ordinance of the City of Corry adopting the
codified ordinances of the City of Corry, Pennsylvania, in accordance with the
City Code of Pennsylvania.
      AND. May be read OR, and OR may be read AND, if the sense requires it.
      AUTHORITY. Whenever in this code, authority is given to an officer or an
act is required to be performed, the authority may be exercised and the act may
be performed, at the instance of the officer, by a deputy or subordinate,
unless contrary to law or to the clear intent of any particular provision.
      BUDGET. The annual budget of the city.
      CALENDAR/COMPUTATION OF TIME. The terms MONTH and YEAR mean the CALENDAR
MONTH or YEAR. The time expressed in days within which an act is to be done or
a period is to expire shall be computed by excluding the first and including
the last day, unless the last day is a Sunday, in which case it shall be
excluded. If time is expressed in hours, the whole of Sunday shall be excluded.
      CITY and MUNICIPALITY. The City of Corry, Pennsylvania.
      CONTRACT ADMINISTRATION. The management of the execution of contracts
between the city and any individual, partnership, association, corporation or
governmental body.
      COUNCIL. The City Council of the City of Corry, Pennsylvania.
      COUNTY. The County of Erie, Pennsylvania.
      ENGINEER. The engineer of the city.
      KEEPER and PROPRIETOR. Persons, firms, associations, corporations, clubs
and copartnerships, whether acting by themselves or as a servant, agent or
employee.
      LAND/REAL ESTATE. Includes rights and easements of an incorporeal nature.
      LAW. All applicable laws and ordinances of the United States of America,
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and the County of Erie.
      MANAGER. The CITY MANAGER of the City of Corry.
      OATH. Includes AFFIRMATION. When an oath is required or authorized by
law, an affirmation in lieu thereof may be taken by a person having
conscientious scruples about taking an oath. An AFFIRMATION shall have the same
effect as an OATH.
      ORDINANCE. Any ordinance of the City of Corry, including this code.
      OWNER. When applied to property, includes a part owner, joint owner or
tenant in common of the whole or any part of the property.
      PERSON. An individual, association, club, corporation, firm, partnership,
body politic or any other legal entity.
      PREMISES. When used as applicable to property, extends to and includes
land and buildings.
      PROPERTY. Includes real and personal property and any mixed and lesser
estates or interests therein. PERSONAL PROPERTY includes every kind of property
except REAL PROPERTY. REAL PROPERTY includes lands, tenements and
hereditaments.
      REASONABLE TIME. In all cases where provision is made for and act to be
done or notice to be given within a REASONABLE TIME, it shall be deemed to mean
the time only as may be necessary for the prompt performance of the act or the
giving of the notice.
      SIDEWALK. Any portion of a street between the curb line and the adjacent
property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding parkways.
      SOLICITOR. The solicitor of the city.
      STATE and COMMONWEALTH. The Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
      STREET. Alleys, avenues, boulevards, lanes, roads, streets, state
highways and other public ways in the city.
      TENANT and OCCUPANT. As applied to buildings or land, shall extend and be
applied to any person holding a written or oral lease of, or who occupies the
whole or any part of, a building or land, alone or with others.
      TIME. Whenever any time established in the codified ordinances for the
taking of any action expires on a Sunday or legal holiday, the time shall not
expire on the day but shall expire on the next weekday.
§ 10.03 EFFECT OF CODE ON PREVIOUS PROVISIONS.
   The provisions of this code, insofar as they are substantially the same as
those of ordinances and resolutions in force immediately prior to the enactment
of this code of ordinances, are intended as a continuation of the ordinances
and resolutions, and not as new enactments, and the effectiveness of the
provisions shall date from the date of adoption of the prior ordinance or
resolution. All the provisions are hereby continued in full force and effect
and are hereby reaffirmed as to their adoption by the City Council, and it is
the intention of the City Council that each provision contained within the code
is hereby reenacted and reaffirmed as it appears in the code.
§ 10.04 SECTIONS AND ORDINANCES REPEALED.
   All ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict with the provisions of
this code are hereby repealed.
§ 10.05 EXEMPTIONS FROM REPEAL.
   The repeal provided for in §
10.04 shall not affect the following ordinances, resolutions, rights and
obligations which are hereby expressly saved from repeal; provided, however,
that the repeal of ordinances or parts thereof in §
10.04, or the saving from repeal of ordinances or parts thereof pursuant to
this section, shall not be construed so as to revive an ordinance or part
thereof previously repealed, superseded or no longer of any effect:
   (A)   Any offense or act committed or done, or any penalty or forfeiture
incurred, or any contract or right established or accruing, before the adoption
of these codified ordinances;
   (B)   Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of
money by or to the city, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city,
or any evidence of the city’s indebtedness, or any contract or obligation
assumed by the city;
   (C)   Any ordinance or resolution of the Council not in conflict or
inconsistent with the provisions of these codified ordinances;
   (D)   Any right, license or franchise conferred by any ordinance or
resolution of Council or any other person or corporation;
   (E)   Any ordinance establishing, naming, relocating or vacating any street
or other public way;
   (F)   Any ordinance or part thereof providing for the establishment of
positions, for salaries, or compensation;
   (G)   Any prosecution, suit or other proceeding pending, or any judgment
rendered, on or prior to the adoption of these codified ordinances;
   (H)   Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes or assessments;
   (I)   Any ordinance establishing or changing the boundaries of the city; or
   (J)   Any ordinance or resolution adopted by Council after the adoption of
the codified ordinances.
§ 10.06 APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.
   All provisions of Title I, compatible with future legislation, shall apply
to ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code unless
otherwise specifically provided.
§ 10.07 CHANGES AND REVISIONS IN PREVIOUSLY ADOPTED ORDINANCES.
   (A)   Nonsubstantive grammatical changes. In compiling and preparing the
ordinances and resolutions of the city for adoption and revision as part of the
code, certain nonsubstantive grammatical and style changes were made in one or
more of the ordinances. It is the intention of the City Council that all the
changes be adopted as part of the code as if the ordinances and resolutions so
changed had been previously formally amended to read as such.
   (B)   Substantive changes and revisions. In addition to the changes and
revisions in division (A) above, changes and revisions of a substantive nature
are hereby made to various ordinances and resolutions included in the code.
These changes are enacted to bring provisions into conformity with the desired
policies of the City Council, and it is the intent of the City Council that all
the changes be adopted as part of the code as if the ordinances and resolutions
so changed have been previously formally amended to read as such. All changes
and revisions shall be deemed to be in effect as of the effective date of this
code.
§ 10.08 INTERPRETATION OF PROVISIONS.
   In interpreting and applying the provision of the code, they shall be held
to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety,
comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where the provisions of the code
impose greater restrictions or requirements than those of any state statute,
other ordinance, resolution or regulation, the provisions of the code shall
control. Where the provisions of any statute, other ordinance, resolution or
regulation impose greater restrictions or requirements, the provisions of the
statute, other ordinance, resolution or regulation shall control.
§ 10.09 HEADINGS, EDITOR’S NOTES, STATUTORY REFERENCES.
   (A)   Headings of titles, chapters, sections and divisions in the code, or
in supplements to the code, are inserted into the code, and may be inserted
into the supplements to the code, for the convenience of persons using the code
and are not part of the legislation.
   (B)   Editors’s notes and/or statutory references indicating sources of
sections, giving other information or referring the statutes or to other parts
of the code are inserted in the code, and may be inserted in supplements to the
code, for the convenience of persons using the code and are not part of the
legislation.
§ 10.10 FILING COPIES OF CODE.
   One copy of the code in a bound volume shall be retained at the offices of
the city and shall remain there for use and examination of the public. One
attested copy shall be filed with the County Law Library or shall be filed
electronically.
§ 10.11 AMENDMENTS TO THE CODE; CODE BOOKS TO BE KEPT UP-TO-DATE.
   (A)   Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the
code, when passed and adopted so as to indicate the intention of City Council
to be a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated into the code so that
the references in the code shall be understood and intended to include the
changes. When any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to
the code shall be adopted, they shall be printed and inserted in the bound code
book as amendments and supplements to it.
   (B)   The City Manager or someone authorized or directed by him or her shall
keep the certified copies of the code book, which are required to be kept in
the City Manager’s office for public use, up-to-date. All changes in the code,
and all ordinances and resolutions adopted subsequent to the effective date of
this code, which the City Council specifically adopts as part of the code,
shall be included in the code book by reference until the changes or new
ordinances or resolutions are printed as supplements to the code book and
inserted into the code book.
§ 10.12 SEVERABILITY.
   (A)   If any title, chapter, section, division or part thereof of this code
now enacted or subsequently amended or its application to any person or
circumstances is held to be illegal, invalid or unconstitutional by a court of
competent jurisdiction, that determination shall not affect, impair or
invalidate the remainder thereof, but is confined in its operation and
application to the title, chapter, section, division or part thereof determined
illegal, invalid or unconstitutional.
   (B)   It is the intent of the City Council to declare that this code would
have been adopted if the illegal, invalid or unconstitutional title, chapter,
section, division or part thereof would not have been included.
§ 10.13 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
   Whenever in one section, reference is made to another section hereof, the
reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified or renumbered unless the subject matter is changed
or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
§ 10.14 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   (A)   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of
any words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention
of the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning can
be attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was
clearly intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be corrected and the
word or words supplied, omitted or substituted as will conform with the
manifest intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though the
correct words were contained in the text as originally published.
   (B)   No alteration shall be made or permitted if any question exists
regarding the nature or extent of the error.
§ 10.15 SECTIONS HISTORIES; STATUTORY REFERENCES.
   (A)   (1)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and
passage date of the original ordinance, and amending ordinances, if any, are
listed following the text of the code section.
      (2)   Example: (Ord. 10, passed 5-13-1960; Ord. 15, passed 1-1-1970; Ord.
20, passed 1-1-1980; Ord. 25, passed 1-1-1985)
     (B)   (1)   If a statutory cite is included in the history, this indicates
that the text of the section reads substantially the same as the statute.
Example: (65 Pa.C.S.A. § 704) (Ord. 10, passed 1-17-1980; Am. Ord. 20, passed
1-1-1985).
      (2)   If a statutory cite is set forth as a “statutory reference”
following the text of the section, this indicates that the reader should refer
to that statute for further information. Example:
   § 39.10 OPEN MEETINGS.
      Official action and deliberations by a quorum of the members of an agency
shall take place at a meeting open to the public unless otherwise permitted.
   Statutory reference:
      Open meetings and public records, see 65 Pa.C.S. §§ 701 et seq.
§ 10.16 ALTERING OR TAMPERING WITH THE CODE; PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION.
   It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, or to alter or tamper with the code or any part or portion
thereof, in any manner which will cause the law of the city to be
misrepresented thereby.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 10.17 CITY SEAL.
   (A)   The original seal presented by Mayor Smith on May 27, 1866 shall be
re-dedicated as the official seal of the City Council.
   (B)   The hand crafted oak reproduction of the city seal be accepted as the
official insignia for the City of Corry and permanently displayed in City
Council chambers.
   (C)   Stanley Butcher and Donna Johnson be recognized for their
craftsmanship skills in creating the oak reproduction.
(Res. 97-07, passed 3-17-1997)
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   A person who violates any provision of this code of ordinances for which no
penalty is specified commits a summary offense and upon conviction shall be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 or to imprisonment for not more
than 90 days, or both.
Statutory reference:
   Authority, see 11 Pa.C.S. § 11018.17
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   CITY OFFICIALS
      
31.   CITY ORGANIZATIONS
      
32.   FINANCES
      
33.   CITY POLICIES
      
34.   POLICE
      
35.   FIREFIGHTERS
CHAPTER 30: CITY OFFICIALS
Section
Employees
   
30.01   City Administrator
   
30.02   Bonds for officials
   
30.03   Tax Hearing Officer
   
30.04   Tax representative
   
30.05   City Treasurer duties
Pension
   
30.15   Definitions
   
30.16   Creation of retirement system
   
30.17   Creation, membership and duties of Pension Board
   
30.18   Contribution to fund
   
30.19   Right to retire and pension upon retirement
   
30.20   Limited vesting benefit
   
30.21   Permanent disability
   
30.22   Effect of social security
   
30.23   Computation of time of service
   
30.24   Persons entitled to benefits
   
30.25   Receipt and investment of funds; payments
   
30.26   Exemption from attachment or execution; non-assignability
   
30.27   Termination of employment
   
30.28   Re-entry into service of the city
   
30.29   Death of member
   
30.30   Retirees updating personal information
EMPLOYEES
§ 30.01 CITY ADMINISTRATOR.
   (A)   Established. The office of City Administrator is created pursuant to
11 Pa.C.S. §§ 10101 et seq., as amended, known as The Third Class City Code.
   (B)   Powers and duties. The City Administrator shall possess the following
powers and duties:
      (1)   Be the Chief Administrative Officer of the city responsible to the
City Council as a whole for the proper and efficient administration of the
affairs of the city;
      (2)   Direct and supervise the administration of all departments and
functions of the city, except as otherwise provided by ordinance or law;
      (3)   Except as otherwise provided by ordinance or law, appoint city
employees on the basis of merit system principles and suspend, remove or
otherwise discipline employees, subject to the following:
         (a)   The City Administrator may make recommendations to Council
concerning appointments or removals at the department head level;
         (b)   Prior to any action being taken with regard to appointments or
removals at the department head level, the City Administrator shall confer with
Council; and
         (c)   Council shall confirm appointments or removals at the department
head level.
      (4)   Designate a qualified administrative officer of the city to perform
the City Administrator’s duties during the City Administrator’s temporary
absence or disability. In the event the City Administrator fails or is unable
to make such designation, or if the absence or disability continues more than
30 days, the Council may, by resolution, appoint an officer of the city to
perform the duties of the City Administrator during the City Administrator’s
absence or disability until the City Administrator is able to return to work;
      (5)   Negotiate contracts for the city, subject to the approval of City
Council, make recommendations concerning the nature and location of municipal
improvements and execute municipal improvements as determined by the City
Council;
      (6)   See that all terms and conditions imposed in favor of the city or
its inhabitants in any statute, franchise or contract are faithfully kept and
performed, and upon knowledge of any violation, call the same to the attention
of the City Council;
      (7)   To attend all meetings of the City Council with the right to take
part in the discussions, but without the right to vote;
      (8)   Recommend to the City Council for adoption such measures as the
City Administrator may deem necessary or expedient, keep the Council advised of
the financial condition of the city and make reports to the Council as
requested by it;
      (9)   Investigate at any time the affairs of any officer or department of
the city that is under the City Administrator’s jurisdiction;
      (10)   Prepare and submit the annual city budget for review and approval
by the City Council. The recommended budget shall be submitted to City Council
for its review no later than the last stated meeting in November. The budget so
submitted shall be accompanied by an enabling ordinance, together with such
explanatory comment or statement as the City Administrator may deem desirable.
The budget document shall be in such form as is required by law for city
budgets, and shall contain such additional documentation or explanation of the
various items of expenditure and revenue as may be required by Council; and
      (11)   Perform the function of Open Records Officer and such other duties
as may be designated by the City Council.
(Ord. 1521, passed 10-15-2012)
Statutory reference:
   Authority for City Administrator, see 11 Pa.C.S. §§ 112A00 et seq.
§ 30.02 BONDS FOR OFFICIALS.
   (A)   City Treasurer.
      (1)   The City Treasurer shall give lawful bond to the city, with a
surety or other company authorized by law to act as surety, to be approved by
Council.
      (2)   The said bond shall be in the sum of $200,000 conditioned for the
honest and faithful discharge of his or her official duties.
   (B)   City Solicitor.
      (1)   The City Solicitor shall give lawful bond to the city, with a
surety or other company authorized by law to act as a surety, to be approved by
Council.
      (2)   The said bond shall be in the sum of $10,000 conditioned for the
faithful performance of his or her official duties.
   (C)   Director of Accounts and Finance.
      (1)   The Director of Accounts and Finance shall give lawful bond to the
city, with a surety or other company authorized by law to act as surety, to be
approved by Council.
      (2)   The said bond shall be in the sum of $10,000 conditioned for the
faithful performance of his or her official duties.
   (D)   City Controller.
      (1)   The City Controller shall give lawful bond to the city, with a
surety or other company authorized by law to act as surety, to be approved by
Council.
      (2)   The said bond shall be in the sum of $10,000 conditioned for the
honest and faithful discharge of his or her official duties.
   (E)   City Engineer.
      (1)   The City Engineer shall give lawful bond to the city, with a surety
or other company authorized by law to act as surety, to be approved by Council.
      (2)   The said bond shall be in the sun of $10,000 conditioned for the
faithful performance of his or her official duties.
(Ord. 1100, passed 4-1-1968; Ord. 1101, passed 4-1-1968; Ord. 1102, passed 4-1-
1968; Ord. 1103, passed 4-1-1968; Ord. 1191, passed 1-14-1974)
§ 30.03 TAX HEARING OFFICER.
   The city hereby appoints Berkheimer as its Tax Hearing Officer, and further,
adopts and incorporates the Local Taxpayers Bill of Rights Act, 53 Pa.C.S. §§
8421 et seq., regulations as promulgated by Berkheimer in their entirety.
(Res. 13-03, passed 3-18-2013)
§ 30.04 TAX REPRESENTATIVE.
   (A)   The city hereby appoints the City Manager and the City Clerk as its
authorized representatives to make requests upon and receive any and all tax
information and records from Berkheimer relative to the collection of taxes for
the city, as desired and deemed necessary by the city, to be used for official
purposes only.
   (B)   Berkheimer is hereby directed to provide and/or transmit any and all
tax information and records, or any portion thereof, relating to the collection
of taxes for the city, upon request, to the City Manager and the City Clerk as
the authorized contact representatives for it.
   (C)   The city hereby saves harmless, indemnifies and/or absolves Berkheimer
from and against any and all liability in connection with the release of said
confidential information.
(Res. 13-02, passed 3-18-2013)
§ 30.05 CITY TREASURER DUTIES.
   The City Treasurer duly elected and/or appointed shall be responsible for
the following:
   (A)   Per 11 Pa.C.S. § 11402.1, Except as otherwise provided by the act of
December 31, 1965 (P.L.1257, No. 511), known as The Local Tax Enabling Act, the
City Treasurer, by virtue of the City Treasurer's office, shall be the
collector of the city, county, school and institution district taxes assessed
or levied in the city by the proper authorities in the city. As tax collector,
the City Treasurer shall maintain and keep an office which may be the same as
that of the City Building for the purpose of receiving taxes during regular
business hours.
   (B)   In addition, the City Treasurer shall faithfully and efficiently
complete all mandatory duties and responsibilities of the role as established
by Title 11 and other statutes, and/or revisions currently governing the
position now or in the future.
   (C)   The City Treasurer shall be responsible for any other tasks and duties
allowed for by statute and as assigned by the City Council.
(Res. 20-23, passed 11-2-2020)
PENSION
§ 30.15 DEFINITIONS.
    The following words and phrases, unless a different meaning is plainly
required by the context, shall have the following meanings.
   BOARD. Officers and Employees Pension Board.
   CITY. City of Corry, Pennsylvania
   EMPLOYEE. A person in the service of the city, except police officers,
firefighters and part-time or occasional workers, who is either or who is not
now adequately protected under all circumstances by pensions authorized by the
laws of the Commonwealth and in force at the time of the passage of this
subchapter.
   FUND. Officers and Employees’ Pension Fund.
   HE or SHE. The masculine and feminine pronouns.
   MEMBER. A person who is a member of the retirement system.
   OFFICER. A person elected or appointed to city service.
   PENSION BENEFITS. That retirement allowance fixed by the Act of 1945, May
23, P.L. 903, as amended, and this subchapter.
   PERSON. An officer or employee of the city.
(Ord. 1144, passed 10-19-1970; Ord. 1638, passed 7-17-2023 ; Ord. 1663, passed
3-17-2025)
§ 30.16 CREATION OF RETIREMENT SYSTEM.
    There is hereby created a retirement system for officers and employees in
active service of the city, except police officers, firefighters, and part-time
or occasional employees.
(Ord. 1144, passed 10-19-1970; Ord. 1638 , passed 7-17-2023; Ord. 1663, passed
3-17-2025)
§ 30.17 CREATION, MEMBERSHIP AND DUTIES OF PENSION BOARD.
   (A)    There is hereby created a board to be known as the “Non-Uniform
Employees’ Pension Board”, consisting of the Mayor, the City Controller, the
Director of Finance and two employees to be chosen by the employees
contributing to the Pension Fund.
   (B)   The representative chosen by the employees shall not serve for a term
of more than four years. Said term to run concurrently with the term of the
Mayor.
   (C)   A vacancy occurring during the term of the person or persons chosen by
the employees shall be filled for the unexpired term by an employee or
employees chosen by the employees contributing to the Pension Fund.
   (D)   The members of the Non-Uniform Employees’ Pension Board shall serve
without compensation.
   (E)   It shall be the duty of said Board to register all persons employed by
the city, except police officers, firefighters, and part-time or occasional
employees, and to administer the collection and distribution of the Fund herein
provided for, and make such reasonable rules as the Board may deem necessary to
carry into effect the provisions of this subchapter.
(Ord. 1144, passed 10-19-1970; Ord. 1638 , passed 7-17-2023; Ord. 1663, passed
3-17-2025)
§ 30.18 CONTRIBUTION TO FUND.
   (A)    All officers and employees of the city, who are members of the Fund
shall contribute to the Board an amount equal to 5% of each member’s gross
earnings. Gross earnings shall include all earnings paid by the city directly
and earnings paid by the city but reimbursed to the city by other entities.
   (B)   All officers and employees of the city shall contribute to the Board
an additional amount equal to 1% to provide sufficient funds for payments to
widows and widowers of members who were retired on pension or killed in
service.
   (C)   No person holding a position in the city as a laborer, at a per diem
wage, shall be compelled to pay or contribute toward the Fund herein provided
for, but such laborer shall have the option or choice of so doing, and shall
only, upon electing to contribute to the Fund, become entitled to the
compensation provided by this subchapter; provided, however, that such laborer
shall be required to contribute the same rates as required of other officers
and employees.
   (D)   Such contributions shall be regularly deducted by the city from each
member’s compensation and shall be paid over to the Fund.
(Ord. 1144, passed 10-19-1970; Ord. 1240, passed 6-19-1978; Ord. 1638 , passed
7-17-2023; Ord. 1663, passed 3-17-2025)
§ 30.19 RIGHT TO RETIRE AND PENSION UPON RETIREMENT.
   (A)   (1)     Each eligible member who attains the age of 60 years and
upwards who shall have so served as an officer or employee of city for a period
of 20 years, or more, shall, upon application to the Board, be retired from
service, and shall during the remainder of his or her life receive the pension
benefits prescribed.
      (2)   Any member who was hired by the city before March 17, 2025, who
shall have served 20 years and voluntarily retires shall, by continuing his or
her contributions until the age of 55 years, be entitled to begin receipt at
age of 55 years of the pension benefits prescribed. Any member who was hired by
the city on or after March 17, 2025, who shall have served 20 years and
voluntarily retires shall, by continuing his or her contributions until the age
of 55 years, be entitled to begin receipt at age of 60 years of the pension
benefits prescribed.
      (3)   Any member who shall have served 20 years and shall be terminated
without his or her voluntary action, shall, by continuing his or her
contributions until the age of 55 years, be entitled to begin receipt, at the
age of 55 of pension benefits prescribed.
   (B)   During the lifetime of any retired member he or she shall be entitled
to receive annually from the Fund as pension benefits a sum equal to 50% of the
amount which would constitute the highest average annual salary or wages which
he or she earned during any five years of his or her service for the city, or
which would be determined by the rate of the monthly pay of such person at the
date of retirement, whichever is the higher. The pension benefits are to be
paid in monthly payments.
   (C)   If a member has served for 12 years or more of service, but less than
20 years of service, and his or her employment is terminated for any reason,
then and in that event, he or she will have the option of having the total
amount of the contributions paid into the Pension Fund by such employee
refunded to him or her in full, without interest, or receiving the portion of
the annual pension set forth below.
   (D)   Where an officer or employee shall have served for 12 years, or more,
and shall have attained the age of 60 years and his or her tenure of office or
employment shall be terminated without his or her voluntary action before the
expiration of 20 years of service, he or she shall, in such event, during the
remainder of his or her life, be entitled to receive such portion of the full
compensation as the period of his or her service up to date of its termination
bears to the full 20-year period of service.
   (E)   Where an officer or employee shall have served for 12 years, or more,
and shall not have attained the age of 60 years, and his or her tenure of
office or employment shall be terminated without his or her voluntary action
before the expiration of 20 years of service, he or she shall, in such event,
during the remainder of his or her life, after attaining the age of 60 years,
be entitled to receive such portion of the full compensation as the period of
his or her service up to date of its termination bears to the full 20-year
period of service.
(Ord. 1144, passed 10-19-1970; Ord. 1617, passed 2-1-2022 ; Ord. 1638, passed
7-17-2023 ; Ord. 1663, passed 3-17-2025)
§ 30.20 LIMITED VESTING BENEFIT.
   (A)   A member who has completed 12 years or more of full-time continuous
service but shall not have attained the minimum age and minimum period of
continuous service required for retirement eligibility may be entitled to vest
his or her retirement benefits subject to all of the following conditions:
      (1)   The member must file with the Management Board of the fund a
written notice of his or her intention to vest;
      (2)   The member must include in the notice the date the member intends
to terminate his or her service;
      (3)   The termination date shall be at least 30 days later than the date
of notice to vest;
      (4)   The member must be in good standing with the city on the date of
notice to vest; and
      (5)   The Board shall indicate on the notice to vest the rate of the
monthly pay of the member as of the date of the notice to vest or the highest
average annual salary which the member received during any five years of
service preceding that date, whichever is higher.
   (B)   Upon reaching the date which would have been the member’s retirement
date had the member continued employment with the city, the member shall notify
the Board in writing that the member desires to collect his or her pension. The
amount of retirement benefits the member is entitled to receive under this
section shall be computed as follows:
      (1)   The initial determination of the member’s base retirement benefits
shall be computed on the salary indicated on the notice to vest; and
      (2)   The portion of the base retirement due the member shall be
determined by applying to the base amounts the percentage that his or her years
of service actually rendered bears to the years of service which would have
been rendered had the member continued to be employed by the city until his or
her minimum retirement date.
   (C)   A member who is eligible for a benefit under this section and under
division (E) of § 
30.19 above should follow the above procedure to have their benefit determined
under the limited vested benefit provision or notify the Board that they want
to have their benefit determined pursuant to division (E) of § 
30.19, whichever deem to be in their best interest. Such member may request
that a determination be made of their benefit entitlement under both
provisions.
(Ord. 1663, passed 3-17-2025)
§ 30.21 PERMANENT DISABILITY.
   A member who becomes permanently disabled to an extent as to render him or
her unable to perform the duties of his or her position or office, which member
has completed 15 years of service, and has not attained the age of 55 years,
shall be entitled to full pension benefits during such disability. Proof of
such disability shall consist of the sworn statement of a practicing physician,
designated by the Board that the employee is in a condition of health which
permanently disables him or her from performing the duties of his or her
position or office. Members receiving disability benefits shall thereafter be
subject to physical examination at any reasonable time or times, upon order of
the Board, and upon his or her refusal to submit to any such examination, his
or her compensation shall cease.
(Ord. 1144, passed 10-19-1970; Ord. 1638 , passed 7-17-2023; Ord. 1663, passed
3-17-2025)
§ 30.22 EFFECT OF SOCIAL SECURITY.
   In accordance with Section 4 (c.1) of PA Act 362 of 1945 as amended
(Optional Retirement System for Officers and Employees Article of the Third
Class City Code), the city elected provide benefits without reduction for the
social security offset provision in Section 4 (c) of Act 362.
(Ord. 1663, passed 3-17-2025)
§ 30.23 COMPUTATION OF TIME OF SERVICE.
   The time of service herein specified shall be computed from the time of the
first or original service to the city, and need not be continuous. Time of
service shall include any time not exceeding six years spent by the employee on
active duty with the armed forces of the United States after becoming a member
of the plan, providing that the employee received an honorable discharge or a
certificate of satisfactory service and the employee pays to the Board an
amount equal to the contributions the employee would have paid during such
service based on the employee’s last monthly salary or wage prior to entering
active duty for each. Notwithstanding the preceding, all employees shall be
afforded the rights and options mandated by the Uniformed Services Employment
and Reemployment Rights Act of 1994 (USERRA).
(Ord. 1144, passed 10-19-1970; Ord. 1638 , passed 7-17-2023; Ord. 1663, passed
3-17-2025)
§ 30.24 PERSONS ENTITLED TO BENEFITS.
   The benefits conferred by this subchapter shall apply to all persons
regularly employed on or after the effective date of this subchapter, in any
paid capacity by the city, except police officers, firefighters and part-time
or seasonal workers.
(Ord. 1144, passed 10-19-1970; Ord. 1638 , passed 7-17-2023; Ord. 1663, passed
3-17-2025)
§ 30.25 RECEIPT AND INVESTMENT OF FUNDS; PAYMENTS.
   It shall be the duty of the Board to receive, retain, invest and reinvest
the Fund created by virtue of this subchapter and the Statutes of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and to pay over by warrant or check, signed by two
Board members, the amounts due to members or their beneficiaries.
(Ord. 1144, passed 10-19-1970; Ord. 1638 , passed 7-17-2023; Ord. 1663, passed
3-17-2025)
§ 30.26 EXEMPTION FROM ATTACHMENT OR EXECUTION; NON-ASSIGNABILITY.
   The compensation herein provided for shall not be subject to attachment or
execution, and shall be payable only to the beneficiary designated by this
subchapter, and shall not be the subject of assignment or transfer.
(Ord. 1144, passed 10-19-1970; Ord. 1638 , passed 7-17-2023; Ord. 1663, passed
3-17-2025)
§ 30.27 TERMINATION OF EMPLOYMENT.
   If for any cause any member contributing to the Pension Fund shall cease to
be an employee of the city before the said employee becomes entitled to a
pension, the total amount of the contributions paid into the pension fund by
such employee shall be refunded to him or her in full, without interest.
(Ord. 1144, passed 10-19-1970; Ord. 1638 , passed 7-17-2023; Ord. 1663, passed
3-17-2025)
§ 30.28 RE-ENTRY INTO SERVICE OF THE CITY.
   If any member shall have returned to him or her the amount contributed as
aforesaid, and shall afterward reenter the employ of the city, said member
shall not be entitled to the previous pension service designated, unless he or
she shall return to the pension fund the amount withdrawn, in which event
pension service shall be computed from the time the employee first enters the
service of the city.
(Ord. 1144, passed 10-19-1970; Ord. 1638 , passed 7-17-2023; Ord. 1663, passed
3-17-2025)
§ 30.29 DEATH OF MEMBER.
   (A)   In the event of the death of any member (except as noted in division
(B) of this section) before becoming entitled to any pension benefit, the total
amount of contributions paid into the Fund by such member shall be paid to
their designated beneficiary, or if there is no designated beneficiary, over to
their estate without interest.
   (B)   The widow or widower of a member of the Fund who retires on pension or
being eligible for pension but is still employed full time, dies or is killed
in the performance of his or her duties as a city employee, shall, during his
or her lifetime, or so long as such person does not remarry, be entitled to
receive a pension calculated at the rate of 50% of the pension the member was
receiving or would have received had such member retired at the time of their
death.
(Ord. 1240, passed 6-19-1978; Ord. 1638 , passed 7-17-2023; Ord. 1663, passed
3-17-2025)
§ 30.30  RETIREES UPDATING PERSONAL INFORMATION.
   (A)   Purpose. To ensure the safety of all retired employees’ personal
information and confirm the identity of the retired employee requesting any
changes to their information including but not limited to changes to address,
phone number, email and bank accounts.
   (B)   Policy. To eliminate any question in the identity of the retired
employee and to eliminate the possibility of all fraudulent requests.
   (C)   Recommendation. The city recommends to follow the procedure whenever a
request for a change to a retired employees’ personal information.
   (D)   Procedures for retired employees updating information.
      (1)   Retired employees that reside in the Corry School District are
required to make any updates to the pension in person. Retiree shall present a
copy of a valid photo identification and complete any required documents.
      (2)   Retired employees that reside in the Corry School District that are
disabled and unable to physically make an in-person request may give written
permission for a specified point of contact with city staff to hand deliver a
copy of the retiree’s photo identification and allow the point of contact to
complete any required documents. The retiree must supply a contact phone
number. City staff will call the retiree to confirm requested changes.
      (3)   Or the retiree may follow the procedure below for individuals that
do not reside in the Corry School District.
         (a)   Retired employees that do not reside in the Corry School
District must initiate the request by calling the City of Corry.
         (b)   Required documents can be mailed or emailed to the retiree. The
retiree must complete all required documents and have the documents signed and
notarized by a Notary Public. Notarized documents and a copy of a photo
identification must be returned to the city by mail or email.
      (4)   City points of contact.
 
Name         Role                Phone              Email
Samantha     Executive Assistant 814-663-7041, ext. svollentine@corrypa.gov
Vallentine                       103
Joanne Smith City Administrator  814-663-0121       jsmith@corrypa.gov
 
   (E)   Procedures to notify city of retired employee’s death.
      (1)   It is mandatory that a family member of a retiree inform the city
of the death of the retiree or beneficiary immediately. A copy of a death
certificate is required to be submitted to the city.
      (2)   If in the case of a death of a retiree and there is a beneficiary.
The beneficiary must follow all of the same procedures in division (D) above to
verify identity and submit required documentation.
   (F)   Procedures for city staff.
      (1)   City staff must confirm identity of retiree by verifying photo
identification and by confirming request by in-person or by phone conversation.
      (2)   City staff to confirm all documentation has been completed in full.
All requests must be reviewed, approved and signed by two staff members. The
final review must be done by the City Administrator.
      (3)   After final review of the City Administrator, city staff will
forward request or death certificate to Northwest Bank to update the official
pension records. If Northwest Bank has any questions or concerns they will
contact the city immediately.
(Res. 24-07, passed 2-19-2024)
CHAPTER 31: CITY ORGANIZATIONS
Section
   
31.01   Shade Tree Commission
   
31.02   Community Development Agency
   
31.03   Central Purchasing Department
   
31.04   Recreational Board
   
31.05   County Planning Commission
   
31.06   Conelway Regional Emergency Management Agency
   
31.07   Golf Commission
§ 31.01 SHADE TREE COMMISSION.
   (A)   The Committee shall consist of seven members to serve without
compensation, said Committee to be known as the “Municipal Shade Tree
Committee”.
   (B)   City Council shall appoint members as necessary to fill vacancies on
the Committee. Terms of office, after the initial term, shall be for three
years.
   (C)   The Committee shall set regular meeting dates and times and shall
establish rules for the organization of the Committee. It shall annually elect,
from its membership, officers consisting of a chairperson, vice chairperson,
secretary and treasurer. It shall keep minutes of each meeting and, together
with the City Treasurer, shall keep a record of all monies and expenditures of
the Committee.
   (D)   The Committee shall study the conditions of the urban forest in the
city and formulate a plan for planting and caring for shade trees. It shall
regulate and enforce such powers as may be conferred by City Council from time
to time.
   (E)   The Committee shall establish a fund raising program for the
implementation of its activities. All funds raised by the Committee shall be
used to promote a shade tree program in the city. City Council may allocate
funds to the Committee and may authorize the use of public works employees and
equipment from time to time to assist in shade tree activities.
   (F)   The City Treasurer shall be authorized to establish a separate Shade
Tree Fund, in the Special Account, into which all donations, contributions and
memorial funds will be deposited. All proceeds in the Shade Tree Fund shall be
used for municipal shade tree activities in the city.
(Res. 96-07, passed 4-15-1996)
§ 31.02 COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT AGENCY.
   (A)   The redevelopment authority in the city is hereby designated the
official Community Development Agency of the city and it shall prepare as soon
as possible whatever applications may be appropriate to obtain and actively
utilize the special community development funds for the city.
   (B)   A cooperation agreement shall be made which shall define the duties
and responsibilities of the new Community Development Agency, said agreement
subject to final approval by the City Council and the Redevelopment Authority
Board.
(Res. passed 2-3-1975)
§ 31.03 CENTRAL PURCHASING DEPARTMENT.
   (A)   There is hereby established a Central Purchasing Department for the
city which shall have supervision over the purchase and distribution of all
supplies purchased.
   (B)   The said Department shall be attached to the Department of Accounts
and Finance or such other department as Council may determine, and shall be
operated in accordance with rules and regulations to be adopted by Council, the
rules to include the manner in which questions shall be secured on the supplies
purchased.
   (C)   The said Department shall assist Council at all times in eliminating
waste and extravagance in the purchase and distribution of the supplies of the
city.
   (D)   The said Purchasing Department shall be supervised by a Central
Purchasing Agent who shall be designated by Council.
(Ord. 1099, passed 4-1-1968)
§ 31.04 RECREATIONAL BOARD.
   (A)   There is hereby created a Recreational Board consisting of five
persons, two of whom shall be members of the School Board and all of whom shall
be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of Council. Members of this Board
shall serve for a period of five years, but in the first appointments the terms
shall be so arranged that the term of one member shall expire annually. Such
Board members shall serve without pay.
   (B)   The said Recreational Board is further empowered to join with the city
school district in equipping, operating and maintaining recreation places.
(Ord. 968, passed 4-24-1961)
§ 31.05 COUNTY PLANNING COMMISSION.
   Council hereby authorizes the participation and membership of the city in
the County Metropolitan Planning Commission.
(Res. passed 10-3-1977)
§ 31.06 CONELWAY REGIONAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY.
   (A)   This section shall be known as the Conelway Regional Emergency
Management Agency Ordinance.
   (B)   The purpose of this section is to promote the general welfare of the
city through participation in the Conelway Regional Emergency Management Agency
in order to plan for and respond to any natural or man-caused disaster
emergency that may endanger the lives and property of the citizens of the city
as authorized by the Intergovernmental Cooperation Law of 1972.
   (C)   The city hereby accepts membership into the Conelway Regional
Emergency Management Agency and shall remain a member unless and until such
time as the City Council shall repeal this section establishing its membership
and provide notice in writing to the remaining member governments of the
Conelway Regional Emergency Management Agency in accordance with the
Intergovernmental Cooperation Agreement.
   (D)   The city hereby approves adoption of the Intermunicipal Cooperation
Agreement joining the Conelway Regional Emergency Management Agency, which
shall be incorporated into this section by reference. The City Council is
authorized by resolution duly adopted to approve future modifications or
amendments to this agreement on behalf of the city.
   (E)   The City Council is hereby authorized to appropriate moneys from the
governmental funds of the city, as approved by motion/resolution duly adopted,
to pay the city’s share of the expenses of the Conelway Regional Emergency
Management Agency; and further to approve the designation of one municipality
as the agent for purposes of paying the expenses of the Conelway Regional
Emergency Management Agency. In addition, the City Council is hereby authorized
to supply the resources and personnel necessary to effectively operate the
Conelway Regional Emergency Management Agency.
   (F)   The city hereby authorizes the Conelway Regional Emergency Management
Agency to assume the responsibilities and functions of the Corry Emergency
Management Agency and to prepare and maintain a joint Emergency Operations Plan
with the County of Erie.
   (G)   In accordance with the Intermunicipal Cooperation Agreement, the
following provisions shall apply to appointment and service of the city members
of the Conelway Regional Emergency Management Agency.
      (1)   The City Council shall annually appoint two individuals, one of
which shall be an elected official of the city, to serve as members of the
Conelway Regional Emergency Management Agency.
      (2)   The members of the Conelway Regional Emergency Management Agency
shall have planning and resource development responsibilities for emergency
operations within the territorial limits of the Conelway Regional Emergency
Management Agency.
      (3)   The City Council must ratify actions taken by the Conelway Regional
Emergency Management Agency members.
      (4)   The Conelway Regional Emergency Management Agency will recommend an
individual to serve as the Emergency Management Coordinator (EMC) and another
to serve as Deputy EMC. The Coordinator shall be appointed by the Governor in
accordance with the provisions of the Emergency Management Agency Code.
(Ord. 1520, passed 9-4-2012)
§ 31.07 GOLF COMMISSION.
   (A)   Creation. City Council hereby creates the City of Corry Golf
Commission (the "Commission").
   (B)   Purpose. The purposes of the Commission shall be to advise, recommend
and assist the city in the maintenance, operation, promotion, development and
administration of the golf course.
   (C)   Scope of authority. The Commission is a recommending body. The
Commission shall review and make recommendations to City Council about golf
course matters including, but not limited to: annual operating and capital
budget, contracts, course/club house fees, employment matters, facilities and
management organization for the day-to-day operation.
   (D)   Membership.
      (1)   Voting members. There shall be seven voting members of the
Commission appointed by the Mayor, with approval of Council. The voting members
shall be representatives at large and shall be selected without regard to
political affiliation.
      (2)   Non-voting members. In addition to the voting members, the
following persons shall be non-voting members of the Golf Commission:
         (a)   City Director of Parks and Property;
         (b)   City Administrator;
         (c)   City golf superintendent; and
         (d)   City golf professional.
      (3)   Compensation. The Commission members shall serve without
compensation.
      (4)   Term. Notwithstanding the terms for the initial commission members
set forth in Ord. 22-27, the term of Commission members after shall be as
follows:
         (a)   All voting members shall serve terms of three years.
         (b)   All voting members shall have term limit of two consecutive
terms and cannot be a voting member for one full year prior to reappointment.
         (c)   The non-voting members shall hold office corresponding to their
respective tenures in regular city administration positions.
      (5)   Vacancies. A vacancy in the Commission, other than expiration of
term, shall be for the unexpired term and shall be filled in the same manner as
the original appointment.
   (E)   Meetings; officers; quorum; records.
      (1)   Meetings. The Commission shall hold at least four meetings during
the year at a designated time and place, and all meetings shall be open to the
public.
      (2)   Officers. Following the appointment of the golf commissioners, the
Commission shall elect its own chairperson and such other offices as it may
deem necessary.
      (3)   Quorum. A majority of the voting members of the Commission shall be
necessary to constitute a quorum to conduct business at any meeting of the
Commission.
      (4)   Records. The Commission shall keep written records of meetings,
including meeting minutes and of its findings, determinations and of its
recommendations, which written records shall be kept as a permanent public
record.
(Res. 22-27, passed 10-17-2022)
CHAPTER 32: FINANCES
Section
Funds
   
32.01   Sewage Disposal Capital Reserve Fund
   
32.02   Redevelopment Capital Reserve Fund
   
32.03   Equipment Capital Reserve Fund
   
32.04   Sewer and Paving Revolving Fund
Taxes
   
32.20   Property taxes
   
32.21   Local services tax
   
32.22   Earned income tax
   
32.23   Collection costs
   
32.24   (Reserved)
   
32.25   Tax exemption cases
   
32.26   Assessment figures
   
32.27   Realty transfer tax
   
32.28   Economic revitalization tax assistance
   
32.29   Local tax collection
Cross-reference:
   Occupational privilege tax, see§§
113.01 through
113.12
FUNDS
§ 32.01 SEWAGE DISPOSAL CAPITAL RESERVE FUND.
   (A)   There is hereby established a Sewage Disposal Capital Reserve Fund,
the money in which shall be used, from time to time, for the purchase or
replacement of equipment and machinery and for expansion or modification of the
existing sewage collection and treatment facilities, including pump stations,
sewer mains, interceptors and other appurtenances.
   (B)   Council may appropriate monies from the sewage disposal funds to be
paid into the Sewage Disposal Capital Reserve Fund, or place in the Fund any
monies received from any other source unless received or acquired for a
particular purpose.
   (C)   The Fund shall be controlled, invested, reinvested and administered
and the monies therein and income from such monies expended for the specific
purpose or purposes for which the Fund is created in such matter as may be
determined by Council.
   (D)   The sum of $50,000 shall be placed in said Sewage Disposal Capital
Reserve Fund as a portion of the amount appropriated for capital improvements
by Ord. 1243.
   (E)   The money in the Fund, when invested, shall be invested in securities
designated by law as legal investments for sinking funds of municipalities.
(Ord. 1251, passed 12-3-1979)
§ 32.02 REDEVELOPMENT CAPITAL RESERVE FUND.
   (A)   There is hereby established a Redevelopement Capital Reserve Fund, the
money in which shall be used, from time to time, for redevelopement within the
city.
   (B)   Council may appropriate monies for said city funds to be paid into the
Redevelopement Capital Reserve Fund or place in the Fund any monies received
from the sale, lease or other disposition of any city property or from any
other source unless received or acquired for a particular purpose.
   (C)   The Fund shall be controlled, invested, reinvested and administered
and the monies therein and income from such monies expended for the specific
purpose or purposes for which the Fund is created in such manner as may be
determined by Council.
   (D)   The sum of $8,000 shall be placed in said reserve fund as a portion of
the amount appropriated for capital improvement reserve funds by Ord. 1072.
   (E)   The money in the Fund when invested shall be invested in securities
designated by law for sinking funds of municipalities.
(Ord. 1081, passed 3-6-1967)
§ 32.03 EQUIPMENT CAPITAL RESERVE FUND.
   (A)   There is hereby established an Equipment Capital Reserve Fund, the
money in which shall be used, from time to time, for the purchase or
replacement of equipment, machinery and motor vehicles for the Department of
Public Affairs, Department of Public Safety and Department of Streets and
Public Improvements.
   (B)   Council may appropriate monies from general city funds to be paid into
the Equipment Capital Reserve Fund, or place in the Fund any monies received
from the sale, lease or other disposition of any city property or from any
other source unless received or acquired for a particular purpose.
   (C)   The Fund shall be controlled, invested, reinvested and administered
and the monies therein and income from such monies expended for the specific
purpose or purposes for which the Fund is created in such matter as may be
determined by Council.
   (D)   The sum of $6,000 shall be placed in said Capital Reserve Fund as a
portion of the amount appropriated for capital improvement reserve funds by
Ord. 1072.
   (E)   The money in the Fund, when invested, shall be invested in securities
designated by law as legal investments for sinking funds of municipalities.
(Ord. 1080, passed 2-20-1967)
§ 32.04 SEWER AND PAVING REVOLVING FUND.
   There is hereby established a revolving fund to be used for the payment of
the indebtedness herein above referred to and for paving, repaving, curbing and
otherwise permanently improving streets until the five year paving plan shall
have been completed; said Fund to be known as the 1964 Sewer and Paving
Revolving Fund. All monies realized from the assessments as aforesaid and taxes
as aforesaid, shall be paid into the revolving fund hereby created as
collected, and shall be applied to the payment of principal and interest on the
said indebtedness and be used for street improvements as aforesaid.
(Res. passed 1-28-1965)
TAXES
§ 32.20 PROPERTY TAXES.
   (A)   (1)    A tax be and the same is hereby levied on all real, personal
and mixed property within the said municipality subject to taxation for the
fiscal year 2023 as follows:
         (a)   Tax rate for general purposes, the sum of 9.77 mills on each
dollar of assessed valuation, or the sum of 97.69 cents on each one hundred
dollars of assessed valuation; and
         (b)   Tax rate for non-general purposes, the sum of 0.58 mills on each
dollar of assessed valuation, or the sum of 5.81 cents on each one hundred
dollars of assessed valuation.
      (2)   The same being summarized in tabular form as follows:
 
                         Mills on each dollar of Cents on each one hundred
                         assessed valuation      dollars of assessed valuation
Tax rate for general     9.77 mills              97.69 cents
purposes:
Tax rate for non-general 0.58 mills              5.81 cents
purposes:
Total:                   10.35 mills             103.50 cents
 
      (3)   Making for all purposes, the total sum of ten and thirty-five one
hundredths (10.35) mills on the dollar ($1.035 on $100) upon the last assessed
valuation of the taxable property within the city.
   (B)   Failure to make payments in accordance with 72 P.S. § 5511.10, all
taxpayers, who shall fail to make payment of any such city property taxes
charged against them for four months after the due date of the tax notice,
shall be charged a penalty of 7%, which penalty shall be added to the taxes by
the tax collector and be collected by said tax collector. This section shall be
effective for the taxable year of 1977 and thereafter.
(Res. passed 2-7-1977; Ord. 1564, passed 12-19-2016; Ord. 1577, passed 12-18-
2017; Ord. 1585, passed 12-17-2018; Ord. 1598, passed 12-16-2019 ; Ord. 1626,
passed 12-19-2022)
§ 32.21 LOCAL SERVICES TAX.
   The local services tax ordinance, copies of which are on file in the office
of the City Clerk, is adopted and incorporated as part of this code of
ordinances as fully as if set out at length herein (Pennsylvania Act 32 of
2008).
(Ord. 1480, passed 12-3-2007)
Cross-reference:
   Occupational privilege tax, see§§
113.01 through
113.12
§ 32.22 EARNED INCOME TAX.
   The earned income tax ordinance, copies of which are on file in the office
of the City Clerk, is adopted and incorporated as part of this code of
ordinances as fully as if set out at length herein (Pennsylvania Act 32 of
2008).
(Ord. 1088, passed 11-13-1967)
§ 32.23 COLLECTION COSTS.
   (A)   The city adopts the cost of collection schedule attached to the
resolution codified herein and made apart of this section to be imposed by
Berkheimer upon any taxpayer whose taxes are or become delinquent and/or remain
due and unpaid.
   (B)    Berkheimer is authorized to retain said costs of collection set forth
in the attached schedule incurred in recovering delinquent taxes and assessed
to the delinquent taxpayer as allowed by law.
(Res. 13-04, passed 3-18-2013)
§ 32.24 (RESERVED).
§ 32.25 TAX EXEMPTION CASES.
   (A)   The city hereby agrees to the creation of a joint committee consisting
of representatives of all taxing bodies with jurisdiction over property within
its borders, and adopts the internal operating procedures, attached to the
resolution codified herein as Exhibit A, for governance of the said committee,
on condition that all taxing bodies with jurisdiction over any parcel of real
estate also adopt these procedures.
   (B)   The said committee be instructed, when considering requests for
settlements by any property owner, to apply the exemption criteria attached to
the resolution codified herein as Exhibit B.
   (C)   The Mayor be designated as the official of the city who is authorized
to execute any settlement agreements ratified pursuant to these procedures.
(Res. passed - -)
§ 32.26 ASSESSMENT FIGURES.
   (A)   The city, in lieu of directing a triennial assessment, hereby accepts
the county’s assessment figures and agrees to become subject to the provisions
of the Consolidated County Assessment Law, 53 Pa.C.S. §§ 8801 et seq., as
amended.
   (B)   The city shall use the county’s assessment figures at 100% of the
assessed value.
(Ord. 1274, passed 7-20-1981)
§ 32.27 REALTY TRANSFER TAX.
   The realty transfer tax ordinance, copies of which are on file in the office
of the City Clerk, is adopted and incorporated as part of this code of
ordinances as fully as if set out at length herein (Pennsylvania Act 32 of
2008).
(Ord. 1056, passed 12-30-1965)
§ 32.28 ECONOMIC REVITALIZATION TAX ASSISTANCE.
   The economic revitalization tax assistance ordinance, copies of which are on
file in the office of the City Clerk, is adopted and incorporated as part of
this code of ordinances as fully as if set out at length herein (Pennsylvania
Act 32 of 2008).
(Ord. 1322, passed 9-8-1987; Ord. 1621, passed 2-21-2022)
§ 32.29 LOCAL TAX COLLECTION.
   (A)   Definitions. The following words and phrases shall have the meanings
given to them within this resolution unless the context clearly indicates
otherwise.
      ADDITIONAL CHARGE. Any interest, fee, penalty, or charge accruing to and
in excess of the face amount of the real estate tax as provided in the real
estate tax notice.
      QUALIFYING EVENT.
         (a)   For the purposes of real property, the date of transfer of
ownership.
         (b)   For manufactured or mobile homes, the date of transfer of
ownership or the date a lease agreement commences for the original location or
relocation of a manufactured or mobile home on a parcel of land not owned by
the owner of the manufactured or mobile home. The term does not include the
renewal of a lease for the same location.
      TAX COLLECTOR. The elected tax collector for the City of Corry, Erie
County, any authorized or designated delinquent tax collector, the Erie County
Tax Claim Bureau, or any alternative collector of taxes as provided for in the
act of July 7, 1947 (P.L.1368, No. 542), known as the “Real Estate Tax Sale
Law”, an employee, agent or assignee authorized to collect the tax, a purchaser
of claim for the tax or any other person authorized by law or contract to
secure collection of, or take any action at law or in equity against the person
or property of the taxpayer for the real estate tax or amounts, liens or claims
derived from the real estate tax.
   (B)   Waiver. The tax collector shall, for tax years beginning on and after
January 1, 2023, grant a request to waive additional charges for real estate
taxes if the taxpayer does all of the following:
      (1)   Provides a waiver request of additional charges, on a form provided
by the state Department of Community and Economic Development, to the tax
collector in possession of the claim within 12 months of a qualifying event;
      (2)   Attests that a tax notice was not received; and
      (3)   Provides the tax collector in possession of the claim with one of
the following:
         (a)   A copy of the deed showing the date of real property transfer;
or
         (b)   A copy of the title following the acquisition of a mobile or
manufactured home subject to taxation as real estate showing the date of
issuance or a copy of an executed lease agreement between the owner of a mobile
or manufactured home and the owner of a parcel of land on which the mobile or
manufactured home will be situated showing the date the lease commences; and
      (4)   Pays the face value amount of the tax notice for the real estate
tax with the waiver request.
(Res. 22-28, passed 11-21-2022)
CHAPTER 33: CITY POLICIES
Section
General Provisions
   
33.001   Nonviolent civil rights demonstrations
   
33.002   Procedures for compliance with the professional services contract
provisions
   
33.003   Municipal Drug Task Force
   
33.004   [Reserved]
   
33.005   Northwest Pennsylvania Rail Authority
   
33.006   Grievance procedure for discrimination
   
33.007   Parks and recreation
   
33.008   No trespassing signs
   
33.009   Destruction of meeting tapes and digital recordings
   
33.010   Smoke-free properties and events
   
33.011   Nondiscrimination policy relating to 40 C.F.R. Part 7
   
33.012   Nondiscrimination policy relating to 40 C.F.R. Parts 5 and 7
Plans and Programs
   
33.020   County Emergency Operations Plan
   
33.021   Section 3 Plan
   
33.022   Minority and Women’s Business Enterprise Plan
   
33.023   Hazard Mitigation Plan
   
33.024   Emergency Operations Plan
   
33.025   Wasteload Management Plan
   
33.026   Solid Waste Management Plan
   
33.027   First Ward Rehab Program
   
33.028   Rodent Control Program
   
33.029   Community Development Block Grant Program
Cash Handling Procedures
   
33.065   Purpose
   
33.066   Required procedures
   
33.067   Application
   
33.068   Procedure
   
33.069   Cash received in person
   
33.070   Accepting payments
   
33.071   Balancing of cash receipts
   
33.072   Preparation of deposits
   
33.073   Reconciliation of cash collected
   
33.074   Pre-numbered receipts
   
33.075   Record retention
 
   
33.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 33.001 NONVIOLENT CIVIL RIGHTS DEMONSTRATIONS.
   (A)   It is the policy of the city that excessive force by local law
enforcement agencies shall not be used against individuals engaged in lawful
and nonviolent civil rights demonstrations within the boundaries of the city.
   (B)   It is the policy of the city to enforce applicable state and local
laws against the physical barring of an entrance to or exit from a facility or
location which is the subject of nonviolent civil rights demonstrations within
its jurisdiction.
   (C)   The City Council will coordinate with the city’s Chief of Police to
implement this section by amending the city’s Police Department procedures.
(Res. 16-11, passed 10-3-2016; Res. 17-12, passed 10-2-2017; Res. 20-15, passed
10-5-2020 ; Res. 22-21, passed 9-19-2022)
§ 33.002 PROCEDURES FOR COMPLIANCE WITH THE PROFESSIONAL SERVICES CONTRACT
PROVISIONS.
   City Council hereby adopts the city’s procedures for compliance with the
professional services contract provisions of Act 44 of 2009.
(Res. 12-07, passed 8-20-2012)
§ 33.003 MUNICIPAL DRUG TASK FORCE.
   (A)   Statement of purpose. The city evidences its intent to participate,
pursuant to the Intergovernmental Cooperation Act, 53 Pa.C.S. §§ 2301 et seq.,
in the municipal drug task force activities in cooperation with the office of
the Attorney General of the state and the District Attorney of Warren County in
order to interdict the illegal use and trafficking of narcotics and other
illegal drugs within the city as well as within nearby communities.
   (B)   Agreement. The city is hereby authorized to enter into a municipal
drug task force agreement, in substantially the form set forth in Exhibit A
attached to the ordinance codified herein in order to further the statement of
purpose set forth above.
   (C)   Intergovernmental cooperation. The officials of the city and the
members of the city Police Department may participate in intergovernmental
cooperative activities with adjacent and nearby municipal governments as part
of a regional effort to interdict illegal drug activities. The Mayor and City
Clerk are authorized to execute a municipal police cooperative agreement,
substantially in the form set forth as Exhibit “B” attached to the ordinance
codified herein, with adjacent and nearby municipal governments participating
in the municipal drug task force.
   (D)   Use of Police Department. The city shall utilize the services of its
police force, both full-time as well as part-time, under the conditions set
forth in the agreements and in compliance with the Municipal Police
Jurisdiction Act, 42 Pa.C.S.A. § 8953. The City Administrator and the Chief of
Police shall establish, pursuant to the terms of the agreements, appropriate
procedures to comply with all relevant provisions of the agreements and
relevant regulations, direction and guidance from the office of the Attorney
General.
   (E)   Finances. Activities conducted by the city pursuant to the terms of
the municipal drug task force agreement shall be financed with the assistance
of funds supplied by the office of the Attorney General of the state.
   (F)   Operation of drug task force. The organization structure necessary to
implement the terms of the Agreement and the acquisition, management or
disposal of all property, real or personal, involved in the agreements shall be
in accordance with both the terms of the agreements as well as the directives,
procedures and guidance of the Office of the District Attorney of Warren
County.
   (G)   Reservation of management rights. The city retains responsibility for
the management, control and direction of any of its employees who participated
in the municipal drug task force activities.
(Ord. 1371A, passed 9-7-1993)
§ 33.004 [RESERVED].
§ 33.005 NORTHWEST PENNSYLVANIA RAIL AUTHORITY.
   (A)   The city, acting through its City Council and with the cooperation of
the City of Meadville of the County of Crawford, Pennsylvania and other
interested municipalities in Crawford County and Erie County, Pennsylvania (the
“municipalities”), has determined that the commercial and economic prosperity
of the city and the greater Northwestern Pennsylvania region will be assured
and advanced by the creation of an authority pursuant to the provisions of the
Municipality Authorities Act, 53 Pa.C.S. §§ 5301 et seq., as amended (the
“Act”).
   (B)   The city has determined to enter into an agreement with and among the
other municipalities concerning the acquisition, maintenance, construction and
operation of certain railway lines, buildings and facilities, and the city has
convened and agreed to form the authority as provided in the Act.
   (C)   The city desires to signify its intention to create and organize the
Northwest Pennsylvania Rail Authority (the “authority”) in accordance with the
Act.
   (D)   The city finds that the Act specifies, inter alia, that the city and
the other municipalities may organize the authority for the purpose of
acquiring, holding, construction, financing, improving, maintaining and
operation, owning, leasing, either in the capacity of lessor or lessee, or
financing, projects devoted wholly or partially for public use relating to
transportation and all facilities necessary or incident thereto.
   (E)   The city deems it advisable that its citizens be provided with
continued rail service through a rail system to be owned and operated by the
authority.
   (F)   As provided in the Act, this authority will fix, alter, charge and
collect all fees and other charges at reasonable and uniform rates to be
determined exclusively by it, for the purpose of providing for the payment of
the expenses of the authority, the construction, improvement, repair,
maintenance and operation of its facilities and properties, and to fulfill the
terms and obligations of any agreements made with or holders of any such
obligation, or with the city and other municipalities, or any other
municipalities served or to be served by the authority, and to determine by
itself exclusively the services and improvements required to provide safe,
reasonable and adequate service to the areas served by the authority.
   (G)   It is desirable for the benefit of the commerce, health, safety and
prosperity of the people of the city to organize the authority with all powers
granted to authorities under the Act, for the purposes set forth in the
articles of incorporation of the authority and for the purpose of acquiring,
holding, constructing, financing, improving, maintaining and operation, owning,
and leasing, either in the capacity of lessor or lessee, projects devoted
wholly or partially for use relating to railway transportation and distribution
systems.
   (H)   The city reserves the right under this section and as provided under
the Act, to from time to time hereafter by subsequent ordinance or resolution
and in cooperation with the other municipalities, specify the projects to be
undertaken by the authority by limiting or expanding the powers of such
authority.
   (I)   A duly advertised public hearing was held on October 3, 1994, at which
comments were sought from the citizens of the city regarding the formation of
the authority.
   (J)   The city, under and pursuant to the provisions of the Municipality
Authorities Act, 53 Pa.C.S. §§ 5301 et seq., as amended, does hereby signify
its intent to organize and create together with the City of Meadville and other
interested municipalities along the line, a municipal authority to be known and
designated as the Northwest Pennsylvania Rail Authority.
   (K)   Appropriate city officials are hereby authorized and directed to
prepare complete and file articles of incorporation for the Northwest
Pennsylvania Rail Authority in substantially the same form as attached to the
ordinance codified herein as Exhibit A.
(Ord. 1379, passed 10-17-1994; Ord. 1383, passed 12-19-1994)
§ 33.006 GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE FOR DISCRIMINATION.
    The City Council accepts the handicapped access report prepared by the
Special Committee, and the recommended grievance procedure is hereby adopted.
(Res. passed 10-15-1984; Res. 17-21, passed 10-16-2017; Res. 18-01, passed 1-2-
2018; Res. 22-19, passed 9-19-2022; Res. 24-33, passed 10-21-2024)
§ 33.007 PARKS AND RECREATION.
   (A)   In order to assure optimum use of various city facilities, the
Director of Parks and Public Property is hereby delegated the responsibility
for preparing, or having prepared, schedules for use of the following city
facilities:
      (1)   City Park;
      (2)   Mead Park Tennis Courts; and
      (3)   Worth Street Ballfield.
   (B)   The Director of Parks and Public Property shall also exercise control
over the above referenced facilities unless otherwise directed by Council.
(Res. passed 4-18-1977)
§ 33.008 NO TRESPASSING SIGNS.
   The City Council may from time to time direct the posting of no trespassing
signs upon certain portions of city-owned property at such locations as City
Council shall direct or designate. Trespassing in posted areas is prohibited.
(Ord. 1023, passed 12-7-1964)
§ 33.009 DESTRUCTION OF MEETING TAPES AND DIGITAL RECORDINGS.
   All city audio and audio-visual tapes or digital files generated by the City
Clerk for the purpose of generating written minutes of any public meeting are
to be destroyed or erased 45 days following the approval of the minutes
reflected by each tape or digital file. Council simultaneously authorizes all
prior meeting tapes or files retained by the City Clerk, regardless of format,
to dispose of it in a similar manner at the earliest opportunity.
(Res. 18-05, passed 1-15-2018)
§ 33.010 SMOKE-FREE PROPERTIES AND EVENTS.
   All city-owned, leased properties as well as city-sponsored events shall
remain smoke-free. Additionally, in order to ensure public knowledge of the
Pennsylvania Clean Indoor Air Act, Act 27 of 2008, all properties shall be
posted with signage which shall indicate “No Smoking” including each entrance
to the property and each structure on the property.
(Res. 21-20, passed 12-20-2021)
§ 33.011  NONDISCRIMINATION POLICY RELATING TO 40 C.F.R. PART 7.
   (A)   Policy.
      (1)   Title 40 of the Code of Federal Regulations (C.F.R.), Part 7,
Nondiscrimination in Programs or Activities Receiving Federal Assistance from
the Environmental Protection Agency, prohibits discrimination on the basis of
race, color, national origin, age, sex, or disability in programs or activities
receiving federal assistance from the United States Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA). It requires recipients of federal assistance from the EPA to:
         (a)   Collect, maintain, and provide information showing compliance
with 40 C.F.R. Part 7.
         (b)   Designate a person to be the nondiscrimination coordinator to
coordinate efforts to comply with 40 C.F.R. Part 7.
         (c)   Adopt grievance procedures that assure the prompt and fair
resolution of discrimination complaints alleging violations of 40 C.F.R. Part
7.
         (d)   Provide continuing and prominent public notice of
nondiscrimination on the basis of race, color, national origin, age, sex, or
disability, and of the identity and contact information for the
nondiscrimination coordinator.
      (2)   It is the city’s policy not to discriminate on the basis of the
factors of 40 C.F.R. Part 7, as well as other applicable state and federal
laws.
   (B)   Notice of non-discrimination. The city has adopted a notice of non-
discrimination which is attached to Res. 24-11 as Exhibit A.
   (C)   Grievance procedure.
      (1)   The city adopted a grievance procedure to allow any person or group
to submit a complaint alleging discrimination of any kind by the city that may
constitute a violation of 40 C.F.R. Part 7 or any state or federal statutes or
regulations that the city enforces, and in order to assure the prompt and fair
resolution of any such discrimination complaints. The grievance procedure is
attached to Res. 24-11 as Exhibit B.
      (2)   He or she also has the right to file a federal complaint of alleged
discrimination on the basis of race, color, national origin, sex, age,
disability, and reprisal or retaliation for prior civil rights activity (not
all prohibited bases apply to all programs) by contacting the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency.
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
Director of the Office of Civil Rights
Mail Code 1201A
1200 Pennsylvania Ave., NW
Washington, D.C. 20460
202-564-7272 (voice)
202-565-0196 (fax)
Title_VI_Complaints@epa.gov
(Res. 24-11, passed 3-18-2024)
§ 33.012  NONDISCRIMINATION POLICY RELATING TO 40 C.F.R. PARTS 5 AND 7.
   (A)   The city is committed to a policy of nondiscrimination in the conduct
of its business, including meeting its responsibilities under 40 C.F.R. Parts 5
and 7 and other federal and state laws, and to the delivery of equitable and
accessible services.
   (B)   It is the policy of the city to ensure full compliance with federal
nondiscrimination laws in all programs and activities. The city will not
discriminate on the basis of race, color, national origin, disability,
religion, marital status, veteran status, sexual orientation or age in any
programs, services, or activities.
   (C)   Any member of the public who believes he or she has been subjected to
discrimination under 40 C.F.R. Parts 5 and 7 on the basis of race, color,
national origin, disability, religion, marital status, veteran status, sexual
orientation or age and wishes to file a complaint may do so following the
outline below.
      (1)   Any employee of the city who believes he or she has been subjected
to discrimination shall refer to the collective bargaining agreement for
grievance procedures. The complaint shall be in writing and contain information
about the complainant and the alleged discrimination including:
         (a)   The name, address, and phone number of complainant;
         (b)   The name of the department and/or employee(s) against whom the
complaint is filed;
         (c)   The location, date, and description of the alleged violation;
and
         (d)   The signature of the complainant or his or her designee.
      (2)   The complaint shall be submitted as soon as possible, but no less
than ten calendar days after the alleged violation to:
City of Corry, Joanne Smith, City Administrator
100 S Center St, Corry, PA 16407
Phone: (814) 663-7041
Fax: (814) 664-4912
jsmith@corrypa.gov
      (3)   Absent extenuating circumstances, the City Administrator will
provide a written response to the complaint within 45 calendar days after
beginning the investigation. The City Administrator will issue one of three
letters:
         (a)   A closure letter summarizing the allegations and stating that
there was not a violation and that the case will be closed; or
         (b)   A letter of resolution summarizing the allegations and
describing the informal resolution mutually agreed to by the complainant and
the department about which the complaint was submitted; or
         (c)   A letter of finding (“LOF”) summarizing the allegations and the
investigation of the alleged complaint and explaining any remedial action to be
taken by the city.
   (D)   This policy is applicable to EPA funded programs.
(Res. 24-13, passed 4-15-2024)
PLANS AND PROGRAMS
§ 33.020 COUNTY EMERGENCY OPERATIONS PLAN.
   The city adopts, in principle, the recommendations set forth in the County
Emergency Operations Plan.
(Res. 16-08, passed 8-15-2016)
§ 33.021 SECTION 3 PLAN.
   (A)   All contractors and/or bidders awarded contracts and/or bids let by
the city must meet all requirements of the above referenced plan; which is
attached to the resolution codified herein and incorporated herein by
reference.
   (B)   The adoption of the Section 3 Plan, as noted, does hereby authorize
the city and/or the redevelopment authority in the city to reject all bids/
contracts for work funded by the Department of Community and Economic
Development which do not conform to the requirements as noted in the Section 3
Plan.
   (C)   Publicity will include, but not be limited to:
      (1)   The printing and publicizing of this section and other Section 3
information through the local media and community contacts; or
      (2)   Any other means which will bring to the attention of those affected
the knowledge of their respective responsibilities and rights concerning
Section 3.
   (D)   The City Council adopts the Section 3 Plan and requests that the
redevelopment authority in the city take the required actions in implementing
the Plan.
   (E)   The city authorizes the adoption of the updated revisions and
continued implementation of this Section 3 Plan to ensure compliance with
federal law.
(Res. 13-15, passed 11-4-2013; Res. 16-16, passed 10-3-2016)
§ 33.022 MINORITY AND WOMEN’S BUSINESS ENTERPRISE PLAN.
   (A)   Let it be known to all persons that it is the public policy of the
city to promote the opportunity for full participation by minority and women’s
business enterprises, hereinafter referred to as MBE/WBE in all housing and
community development programs receiving funds from the Department of Community
and Economic Development.
   (B)   All contractors and/or bidders awarded contracts and/or bids let by
the city must meet all the requirements of the above referenced plan; which is
attached to the resolution codified herein and incorporated herein by
reference.
   (C)   The adoption of the MBE/WBE Plan, as noted, does hereby authorize the
city and/or the housing authority of the county to reject all bids contracts
for work funded by the Department of Community and Economic Development which
do not conform to the requirements as noted in the MBE/WBE Plan.
   (D)   Publicity will at a minimum include, but not be limited to:
      (1)   The printing and publicizing of this section and other applicable
MBE/WBE information through the local media and community contacts; or
      (2)   Any other means which will bring to the attention of those affected
the knowledge of their respective responsibilities and rights concerning the
Minority and Women’s Business Enterprise (MBE/WBE) Plan.
(Res. 16-13, passed 10-3-2016; Res. 20-16, passed 10-5-2020 ; Res. 22-22,
passed 9-19-2022)
§ 33.023 HAZARD MITIGATION PLAN.
   (A)   The Erie County 2012 Hazard Mitigation Plan is hereby adopted as the
official hazard mitigation plan of the city.
   (B)   The respective officials and agencies identified in the implementation
strategy of the Erie County 2012 Hazard Mitigation Plan are hereby directed to
implement the recommended activities assigned to them.
(Res. 12-05, passed 5-7-2012)
§ 33.024 EMERGENCY OPERATIONS PLAN.
   The Emergency Operations Plan of the city, dated May 2003, is hereby
approved, adopted and placed into immediate effect, and that this Plan shall
supersede all previous city plans developed for response to major emergencies
or disasters. This Plan shall be reviewed on a regular basis (every two years)
and necessary changes shall be made to make certain that it conforms with the
requirements of the County Emergency Operations Plan.
(Res. 03-06, passed 5-5-2003)
§ 33.025 WASTELOAD MANAGEMENT PLAN.
   The City Council adopts a schedule of compliance and its Wasteload
Management Plan as a revision to the city’s Act 557 Plan.
(Res. passed 2-18-1980)
§ 33.026 SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT PLAN.
   The plan prepared for the county, including the city, has been reviewed by
the elected officials of the city and is hereby adopted as the official Solid
Waste Management Plan for the city.
(Res. passed 7-16-1973)
§ 33.027 FIRST WARD REHAB PROGRAM.
   The redevelopment authority in the city is hereby authorized to implement
the First Ward Rehab Program as outlined and attached to the resolution
codified herein.
(Res. passed 5-19-1980)
§ 33.028 RODENT CONTROL PROGRAM.
   The City Council desires that this program continue on a permanent basis by
the County Department of Health.
(Res. passed 11-5-1973)
§ 33.029 COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT BLOCK GRANT PROGRAM.
   (A)   Adoption of plan. The city officially adopts the CDBG Citizen
Participation Plan.
   (B)   Income reutilization. Program income under the Community Development
Block Grant (CDBG) Program is defined as any gross income received by a
grantee, or its recipient, directly generated by the use of CDBG funds. The
city is a CDBG entitlement recipient under the state’s program. Accordingly,
the city hereby adopts the following Program Income Reutilization Plan. This
Plan shall pertain to all program income generated by the grantee or by any of
its subrecipients, unless a separate agreement is developed for that
subrecipient.
      (1)   Program income will be reviewed, not less than annually, through a
public participation process including a formal media notice, a public hearing,
and formal action at a public meeting identifying the total program income, the
activity to which the program income is being committed, and the federal fiscal
year contract to which it is being assigned.
      (2)   All activities for which program income is to be utilized shall
comply with 24 C.F.R. part 570, meeting the federal guidelines for both
eligibility and one of the three national objectives.
      (3)   The city may set aside up to 20% of identified CDBG program income
for the purposes of administration and planning.
      (4)   Program income designated to a project shall be applied to costs
associated with that project before other community development block grant
entitlement funds are drawn down for the purposes of said project activity.
      (5)   Program income shall be reported in all audits and reports prepared
and/or released by the city.
      (6)    Program income shall be reported to DCED in accordance with their
reporting requirements or not less than annually.
(Res.16-14, passed 10-3-2016; Res. 16-15, passed 10-3-2016; Res. 17-16, passed
10-2-2017; Res. 22-23, passed 9-19-2022; Res. 22-24, passed 9-19-2022)
CASH HANDLING PROCEDURES
§ 33.065 PURPOSE.
   (A)   Strong internal controls for cash collection are necessary to prevent
mishandling of funds and are designed to safeguard and protect employees from
inappropriate charges of mishandling funds by defining their responsibilities
in the cash handling process.
   (B)   This policy shall apply to all city departments. Departmental
supervisors shall ensure these policies and procedures are followed.
   (C)   CASH is defined as coin, currency, checks and credit card
transactions.
(Res. 16-07, passed 6-20-2016; Res. 20-27, passed 2-7-2020)
§ 33.066 REQUIRED PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Accounting for cash as is it received;
   (B)   Adequate separation of duties, which includes cash collecting,
depositing and reconciling;
   (C)   Proper pre-numbered receipts given for any cash received;
   (D)   Approval of any voided cash receipts by the City Business Manager or
the person appointed in his or her stead;
   (E)   Reconciliation of validated deposit forms to support documentation and
to the account statement; and
   (F)   Proper safeguarding of cash.
(Res. 16-07, passed 6-20-2016; Res. 20-27, passed 2-7-2020)
§ 33.067 APPLICATION.
   Any official or administrator with responsibilities for managing cash
receipts and those employees who are entrusted with the receipt, deposit and
reconciliation of cash.
(Res. 16-07, passed 6-20-2016; Res. 20-27, passed 2-7-2020)
§ 33.068 PROCEDURE.
   (A)   A description of the reconciliation process, including frequency of
reconciliation;
   (B)   A description of the process for safeguarding cash until it is
deposited; and
   (C)   A schedule of how often cash deposits will be made.
(Res. 16-07, passed 6-20-2016; Res. 20-27, passed 2-7-2020)
§ 33.069 CASH RECEIVED IN PERSON.
   (A)   A receipt must be issued for each cash payment received. At a minimum,
manual pre-numbered receipts must include the date, mode of payment (cash) and
the identification of the department and the person issuing the receipt.
   (B)   Checks must be made payable to “The City of Corry”, “City Treasurer”,
or “Corry Water” as is appropriate for the services for which payment is being
made, and must be endorsed promptly with a restrictive endorsement stamp
payable to “The City of Corry”.
   (C)   During business hours, all forms of cash shall be stored in locking
drawers, cash registers, cash boxes or the safe.
   (D)   Only the cashier collecting these monies shall have control over this
cash, and must make sure that the cash is securely locked when they leave their
desk no matter how briefly or to take lunch or break. This must be verified by
a second person. The City Business Manager shall determine maximum the number
of people in a cash drawer during the day. He or she shall be guided by the
principle to minimize risk of loss.
   (E)   The cashier shall have complete control and responsibility for the
cash he or she collects during business hours.
   (F)   To reduce the risk of error, all cash shall be separated according to
the denomination, and shall face the same direction.
   (G)   Checks shall be kept together but kept separately from cash and credit
card receipts. Any other documentation should also be kept together with above,
but separately.
   (H)   Credit card machines and the receipts should not be left unattended.
They shall be kept in an inaccessible area.
   (I)   The funds received must be reconciled to the cash register or to the
pre-numbered receipts at the end each day. Cash must be reconciled separately
from checks/credit cards by comparing actual cash received to the cash total
from the manual receipts.
   (J)   When possible, areas that store cash should always be locked.
   (K)   All types of cash and other receipts shall be deposited daily. Cash
received late on Friday afternoon or on a holiday shall be deposited on the
next banking business morning after processing and reconciliations, depending
on the amount of daily receipts. At 4:30 p.m. daily, after all doors are locked
and non-city employees have left the premises, all cash shall be taken out of
the drawers and only contain daily start-up money. The City Business Manager
shall determine whether a night deposit shall be made that evening.
   (L)   Refunds or expenditures must be paid through the appropriate budget
with a city generated check.
   (M)   The cashier’s office will issue a receipt of deposit to be used for
reconciliation of the supporting documentation to the deposit and to the
monthly statements of account.
   (N)   All voided transactions shall be approved and initialed by the City
Business Manager or the designated person in his or her stead. There are no
exceptions.
   (O)   Cash, checks and payment cards must be kept in a safe or a secure
place locked/combination vault or safe until it is deposited. A secure area for
processing and safeguarding funds received is to be provided and restricted to
authorized personnel. Access to areas where cash is stored shall be limited
only to those employees who need access, and have been previously designated to
have access.
(Res. 16-07, passed 6-20-2016; Res. 20-27, passed 2-7-2020)
§ 33.070 ACCEPTING PAYMENTS.
   (A)   All types of payments should be input into an electronic device, such
as computer terminal, or tracked manually with pre-numbered receipts to ensure
that all payments are documented.
   (B)   Payments for goods or services may be accepted in the form of cash and
coin, checks and credit card, when appropriate arrangements and measures have
been made.
   (C)   Payments may be received in-person or by mail.
   (D)   In-person cash and coin, and check payments accepted manually:
payments accepted by departments without an electronic device must be tracked
by pre-numbered receipts.
   (E)   When cash and coin payments are accepted as payment, they shall always
be recounted in front of the customer to confirm the amount received from the
customer.
   (F)   If change is given back to the customer, the change should be counted
back to customer to confirm that the correct amount is given back.
   (G)   A receipt must always be given to the customer for cash payments.
   (H)   Checks shall be endorsed immediately.
   (I)   A copy of completed receipts must be retained by the department.
   (J)   Cash payments without a receipt are not allowed. Each shall be input
into a computer terminal at the same time they are received.
   (K)   A log shall be kept of all daily deposits received.
   (L)   All deposits shall be counted daily and input into a computer
terminal, daily when they are received.
(Res. 16-07, passed 6-20-2016; Res. 20-27, passed 2-7-2020)
§ 33.071 BALANCING OF CASH RECEIPTS.
   (A)   All funds collected must be balanced daily, both by mode of payment
and by comparing the total of the cash, checks, and credit cards to the cash
register totals, and to the pre-numbered receipts totals and to the totals of
the money received by mail.
   (B)   Over/short amounts must be separately recorded, and investigated and
resolved to the extent possible. All shortages of $25 must be reported in
writing to the City Business Manager and the city’s Chief of Police.
(Res. 16-07, passed 6-20-2016; Res. 20-27, passed 2-7-2020)
§ 33.072 PREPARATION OF DEPOSITS.
   (A)   Checks must be made payable to “The City of Corry”, “City Treasurer”,
or “Corry Water”, as is appropriate. A calculator tape of the checks shall be
included with the checks bundled together.
   (B)   Cash must be recorded on the deposit slip in the appropriate spaces.
   (C)   Attach a copy of the “transmittal batch” showing transaction totals
for credit card receipts and record the total on the deposit slip.
   (D)   The appropriate account number(s) and sub-code(s) must be included on
the deposit slip.
   (E)   Cash must also be reconciled by a second employee.
   (F)   Dual controls should be established by departments to ensure that two
employees count the cash, together, and deliver deposits to the City Business
Manager.
(Res. 16-07, passed 6-20-2016; Res. 20-27, passed 2-7-2020)
§ 33.073 RECONCILIATION OF CASH COLLECTED.
   (A)   Compare the receipt to the supporting documentation (copy of deposit
slip) and resolve any discrepancies.
   (B)   Compare the receipts to the monthly account statements.
(Res. 16-07, passed 6-20-2016; Res. 20-27, passed 2-7-2020)
§ 33.074 PRE-NUMBERED RECEIPTS.
   Pre-numbered receipts and a log will be maintained that will include the
number(s) of the receipts, and the date and name of the person receiving the
receipts. The issuing unit shall retain one copy of all voided receipts.
(Res. 16-07, passed 6-20-2016; Res. 20-27, passed 2-7-2020)
§ 33.075 RECORD RETENTION.
   (A)   All cash receipts and related documents must be maintained in
accordance with record retention schedules. Cash register tapes, deposit slips,
credit card receipts, copies of manual cash receipts and the like shall be kept
for seven years.
   (B)   At no time will money ever be left unattended.
(Res. 16-07, passed 6-20-2016; Res. 20-27, passed 2-7-2020)
§ 33.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person violating any of the terms of §
33.008 may, on conviction in a summary proceeding, be subjected to a fine of
not less than $50 nor more than $1,000 for each offense, and in default of
payment thereof, imprisonment in the county jail for a term not in excess of 30
days.
(Ord. 1023, passed 12-7-1964)
CHAPTER 34: POLICE
Section
General Regulations
   
34.01   Dispatch services
   
34.02   Arrests without a warrant
   
34.03   State regulations
Cross-reference:
   City organization, see
Ch. 31
   Firefighters, see
Ch. 35
GENERAL REGULATIONS
§ 34.01 DISPATCH SERVICES.
   (A)   The conditions of agreement with respect to delegation and assignment
by the city to the county of responsibility for providing emergency
communications dispatch services are as follows.
      (1)   It is the intention of the city that responsibility for provision
of such duties shall be delegated and assigned to the county permanently.
      (2)   Responsibility for provision of emergency communications service
shall be delegated as the county becomes fully capable of providing such
services. The county first shall assume responsibility for provision of fire
dispatch services. Once the county has established a proper database,
including, but not limited to, background information, prior criminal records
and the like, responsibility for police and other emergency dispatch services
shall be transferred to the county.
      (3)   The county shall retain all funds paid by owners and users of land
line and cellular telephones pertaining to assistance to 911 and emergency
services. These funds shall be used to finance the agreement.
      (4)   The duration of the term of the agreement is intended to be
permanent. The agreement(s) may not be terminated or modified absent the
written agreement of the city.
      (5)   The city is not obligated to establish any structural organization
to implement the agreement. The county shall be responsible for establishing
such structural organization as it is required.
      (6)   The county will determine and acquire such real and personal
property to be managed, licensed or disposed of in performance of the agreement
(s). The city reserves the right to communicate suggestions and/or concerns
deemed by City Council to be necessary or appropriate to ensure or improve
efficient and high quality dispatch services.
   (B)   City Council shall also have authority to enter into inter-
governmental cooperation agreements with the county for provision by the county
of emergency communications services as to facilities or alarms of the city or
its authorities which would transfer such functions to the county. Such
agreement(s) would provide that the city would reroute existing alarms to the
county’s dispatch center and change such telephone numbers as are necessary to
accomplish the objective.
   (C)   City Council shall also have authority to enter into inter-
governmental agreements with the county for repair of radios and/or other
communications devices of the city on such terms as are mutually agreed.
   (D)   The 911 dispatch services agreement, and any addendum thereto, between
the county and the city, and to be approved by City Council on the date of
enactment of the ordinance, are approved.
   (E)   City Council and the appropriate city officials are authorized to
negotiate and approve additional agreements and/or to amend existing agreements
pertaining to provisions of emergency, fire, police and other communications
services and/or to authorize purchase or joint purchase of equipment and
software consistent with this section as are deemed necessary to ensure
provision of efficient and quality emergency communications services and the
proper delegation of such functions to the county.
(Ord. 1497, passed 5-4-2009)
§ 34.02 ARRESTS WITHOUT A WARRANT.
   (A)   Arrests without warrant for certain offenses. Act No. 25 of 1995, 42
Pa.C.S.A. § 8902 (the “Act”), authorizes police officers within the state to
make an arrest without warrant upon probable cause for, inter alia, the
following enumerated offenses when there is ongoing conduct that imperils the
personal security of any person or endangers public or private property:
      (1)   Violation of 18 Pa.C.S. § 5503 (relating to disorderly conduct);
      (2)   Violation of 18 Pa.C.S. § 5505 (relating to public drunkenness);
      (3)   Violation of 18 Pa.C.S. § 5507 (relating to obstructing highways
and other public passages); and
      (4)   Violation of 18 Pa.C.S. § 6308 (relating to purchase, consumption,
possession or transportation of liquor or malt or brewed beverages).
   (B)   Procedures to be followed in making warrantless arrests. When making a
warrantless arrest pursuant to Act 25 of 1995, 42 Pa.C.S.A. § 8902 for
violation of the offenses enumerated therein, city police officers shall follow
the guideline attached to the resolution codified herein as Exhibit A entitled
Policy for Warrantless Summary Arrests, which guidelines are incorporated
herein as though fully set forth at length.
(Res. 96-08, passed 5-20-1996)
§ 34.03 STATE REGULATIONS.
   The city hereby agrees that while receiving any funds from the state
pursuant to said Act, the city shall adhere to the rules, regulations and
training standards established by the Municipal Police Officers Education and
Training Commission.
(Res. passed 5-5-1986)
CHAPTER 35: FIREFIGHTERS
Section
General Provisions
   
35.01   Age limitations
   
35.02   Fire and emergency services billing
   
35.03   False alarms
   
35.04   Ambulance service
Rules and Regulations
   
35.20   General notice
   
35.21   Organization
   
35.22   Fire Chief
   
35.23   Deputy Chief
   
35.24   First Assistant Chief
   
35.25   Assistant chiefs
   
35.26   Captains
   
35.27   Lieutenants
   
35.28   Career firefighters
   
35.29   General rules
Cross-reference:
   Fire regulations, see
Ch. 92
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 35.01 AGE LIMITATIONS.
   (A)   Minimum age.
      (1)   The minimum age for a career firefighter for the city is fixed at
18 years of age.
      (2)   It shall be one of the duties of the city’s Fire Chief to designate
in writing to City Council one full-time city firefighter for appointment at
its annual reorganization meeting, who shall thoroughly train, test and
actively monitor any firefighter engineer driver candidates and current
employees as may be required to protect the firefighters and the general
public, and to protect and preserve the specialized equipment and vehicles of
the Fire Department and the city.
   (B)   Maximum age.
      (1)   The maximum age for a career firefighter for the city is fixed at
65 years of age.
      (2)   In addition to the other federal, state and local statutes, laws
and ordinances, including those criteria established by the Civil Service Board
concerning physical and mental testing and evaluation, the physical fitness of
any new career candidate shall consider and reflect an evaluation specifically
considering the criteria set forth in NFPA § 1582, Section 6, concerning the
Standard on Comprehensive Occupational Medical Program for Firefighters, as
same may amended.
      (3)   It shall be one of the duties of the city’s Fire Chief and all
other fire company executive chief officers to thoroughly train, test and
actively monitor any and all firefighter driver candidates and current
employees as may be required to protect the firefighters and the general
public, and to protect and preserve the specialized equipment and vehicles of
the Fire Department and the city.
(Ord. 1535, passed 9-15-2014; Ord. 1544, passed 5-18-2015)
§ 35.02 FIRE AND EMERGENCY SERVICES BILLING.
   (A)   Billing for reimbursement authorized. The Fire Department is hereby
authorized and directed, by and through its Fire Department officers, city
administration, and authorized representatives, to ascertain what insurance
coverages may be applicable and available under any given circumstance, and to
take all necessary and affirmative steps to apply for and receive reimbursement
from any insurance carriers where a property owner or occupant thereof is or
may be insured to reimburse the Fire Department for any costs and/or expense
incurred for fire, rescue, and medical services, supplies and/or equipment used
for or provided to or for the benefit of the property owner or occupant or one
who is involved in any other kind of accident or incident requiring emergency
services by the Fire Department.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      ADMINISTRATIVE COSTS RECOVERABLE. Costs shall include a reasonable amount
for the administrative cost of administering the billing program.
      COSTS REIMBURSEMENT. A rate schedule of costs for the aforementioned
tools, equipment, materials, and hourly rates for personnel shall be set forth
by the Fire Department and reviewed/updated from time to time, and shall only
be applied to the recovery of costs arising out of firefighting, other
emergency services rendered, and incidents that occurred subsequent to the
setting of the rate schedule in this section.
      EXPENDABLE ITEMS. Any items used for an emergency response action which
cannot be reused, replaced, or replenished without cost after use or employment
in an emergency response action.
      RATE SCHEDULE. The costs incurred by the city pursuant to the rate
schedule in this section for recovery of costs for the Fire Department. A copy
of the rate schedule shall be on file for review at the business offices of
city located at 100 South Center Street, Corry, PA 16407 during normal business
hours. The costs or expenses on the rate schedule may from time to time be
adjusted by City Council.
      RESPONSIBLE PARTY. A person who is responsible for causing an emergency
response action.
      SCOPE OF RECOVERABLE COSTS. Such costs incurred shall include those
incurred by the Fire Department, its employees, agents, and contractors,
including overtime costs for paid personnel and expendable items, but shall
exclude costs to pay volunteer responders.
   (C)   Costs recovery.
      (1)   Any person or entity, as opposed to his, her, or its insurance
company, shall be liable for the reimbursement of reasonable costs incurred by
the city, as outlined in this section.
      (2)   In the event that any insurance carrier or person or persons should
fail to pay any bill or invoice within 30 days of the mailing or delivery of
such notice of charges, the city, attorney or the third-party billing agency
who mailed or delivered the bill or invoice may, at the city’s exclusive option
and direction, enforce the provisions of this section by turning over to a
third-party collection agency or, if deemed appropriate, may be enforced by
filing a civil action at law in a court of competent jurisdiction for the
collection of any amounts due to the city, together with statutory interest,
court costs, collection fees, and all associated reasonable attorney’s fees.
      (3)   The reasonable costs may be recovered from any identified insurance
carrier or person or persons, directly by the city or by an attorney, or
through a third-party billing service acting as a contracted authorized agent
for the collection of such costs. In addition to the reasonable costs as set
forth in the rate schedule, the city, attorney, or the third-party billing
service shall hereby be authorized to collect, in addition to the reasonable
costs, reasonable interest, legal, administrative and any other collection fees
associated for collecting the said costs and fees.
      (4)   The city may, in its sole discretion, but shall not be obligated
to, pursue collection efforts against individual person, firm, or entity in the
event that the city reasonably determines that collection efforts will not be
successful or that the costs of collections will exceed the amount due
hereunder.
   (D)   Deposit of funds received. All funds received pursuant to this section
shall be deposited in the general fund of the city.
   (E)   Reports to City Council. The Fire Chief shall forward to City Council
each month if received from the approved third party billing service, a fire
report itemizing all amounts billed and all funds actually received during the
preceding calendar month. If no such accounting is received, the City Treasurer
shall timely provide for the monthly budget session a list of all funds
actually received during the preceding calendar month.
   (F)   Liberal construction. This section, which shall be referred to as the
Fire and Emergency Services Billing Ordinance, shall be liberally construed to
accomplish its purpose to reimburse the Fire Department from insurance proceeds
or otherwise for costs and expenses incurred while providing fire and emergency
services to the citizens of the city and surrounding communities.
   (G)   Emergency services not to be refused. Nothing in this section shall
authorize any city department or city staff member to refuse or delay any
rescue service to any person, firm, organization or corporation, due to the
lack of insurance coverage or ability to pay for said rescue services.
   (H)   Rate schedule. The rate schedule is as follows (see also city fee
schedule).
Billing List
Billing List
Apparatus
Aerial/ladder:                                   $400 per hour
Engine:                                          $350 per hour
Rescue:                                          $300 per hour
Squad/utility/support:                           $150 per hour
Tanker/tender:                                   $300 per hour
Equipment/Service
Cribbing:
- Class B (each)                                 $200
- Passenger (each)                               $100
- Trucks - Class A (each)                        $500
Debris cleanup/removal                           $250
Deodorizer (per use)                             $25
Extinguisher (per use, any class)                $50
Fire line tape (per foot)                        $0.25
Fire police services (per hour)                  $100
Flares (each)                                    $8
Foam (per gallon)                                $60
Gas/CO detector/heat gun (per use)               $50
Generator (per hour)                             $50
Hand lights (per use)                            $5
Hand tools (each)                                $15
Hose (per 50’)                                 $25
Hydraulic rescue tools (each)                    $200
IR camera (each)                                 $100
Ladders (per use)                                $35
Latex gloves (per pair)                          $2
Manpower (per man, per hour)                     $30
Medical extrication (w/hydraulics) (per patient) $1,500
Oil absorbent sheets (each)                      $10
Oil booms (each)                                 $20
Oil dry (bucket)                                 $35
Portable pond (per use)                          $150
Portable pumps (per hour)                        $30
Power tools (each)                               $50
Road closing/traffic control (per hour)          $100
Salvage covers (each)                            $35
SCBA (each)                                      $50
Scene lighting (per hour per light)              $75
Stabilization struts (per use)                   $50
Ventilation fans (each)                          $50
Wetting agent (per unit)                         $25
Administration Fees
Fire investigation                               $100
Fire report                                      $50
Testimony fee in any litigation (per hour)       $60
 
(Ord. 1570, passed 6-19-2017)
§ 35.03 FALSE ALARMS.
   (A)   There is hereby established a $150 service charge for each Fire
Department response to a false electronic, alarm service or notifier alarms,
except as provided in division (B) below.
   (B)   There shall be no service charge for Fire Department response to the
first three false alarms in any calendar year.
   (C)   There shall be no service charge when there has been no Fire
Department response to the alarm.
   (D)   The service charge may be waived by the Director of Public Safety in
cases where it can be shown the false alarms are attributable to conditions
outside the reasonable control of the alarm subscriber or the building owner or
their equipment. The service charges shall be assessed against the owner of the
property on which the faulty alarm system is located.
   (E)   The service charge(s) shall be collectible by the city, as provided by
law, which collection shall include, but not be limited to, the filing of liens
against the real estate at which the faulty alarm system is located.
(Ord. 1427, passed 11-19-2001)
§ 35.04 AMBULANCE SERVICE.
   (A)   The city may hire an independent contractor to furnish ambulance
service to the city at an annual expenditure not to exceed $5,000.
   (B)   The Mayor and the City Clerk are hereby authorized to execute a
contract with an independent contractor for the furnishing of said ambulance
service.
   (C)   Any contract for ambulance service shall not exceed two years in
duration.
(Ord. 1106, passed 5-20-1968; Ord. 1165, passed 4-17-1972)
RULES AND REGULATIONS
§ 35.20 GENERAL NOTICE.
   (A)   The following rules and regulations are hereby adopted and issued to
the Corry Fire Department of the City of Corry and govern the organization,
officers, all firefighters and all members, their respective duties and
conduct, the execution and enforcement of the same, and miscellaneous
provisions for promoting the general welfare of said organization and
protecting the City of Corry and the residents and property in our community.
   (B)   (1)   The Director of Public Safety, by virtue of the authority vested
in that office by law and by Council, hereby adopts and issues to the Fire
Department the following rules and regulations for its governance, reserving
the right to make such changes in said rules and regulations at such times as
the good of the Department and its service may require.
      (2)   The efficiency with which the execution and enforcement of these
rules is carried out will be judged primarily by the protection of the lives
and property of citizens from fire.
      (3)   Rules cannot be made covering every possible contingency that may
arise. It is therefore the duty of every member of the Corry Fire Department to
carefully study the instructions of his or her superiors. Subordinates must
largely depend upon their superiors in rank for instructions and guidance. The
Director of Public Safety hereby enjoins upon those superiors the instruction
of men under them.
      (4)   Firefighters who have the good of the Department at heart will not
only comply with the letter of the rules but will, by zeal, activity, and
careful thinking, aid in promoting the efficiency of the Department and the
protection of our city and fellow citizens and the other areas in which we may
serve.
      (5)   All personal pronouns used in this subchapter shall include all
genders, whether used in the masculine or feminine or neuter gender, and the
singular shall include the plural and the plural shall include the singular
whenever and as often as may be appropriate.
      (6)   The term FIRE as used in this subchapter may be construed to
include in its meaning such other incidents as may fall within the normal
responsibility of a fire/emergency response agency.
(Ord. 1591 , passed 3-18-2019; Ord. 1641, passed 12-18-2023)
§ 35.21 ORGANIZATION.
   (A)   The career and part-time firefighters of the City of Corry, the
volunteer fire company of the City of Corry, and the fire equipment of said
city, are organized into a department known as the "Corry Fire Department," and
the organization, rules, and regulations of said Department shall be as herein
provided. Such policies and procedures as may be necessary for the orderly
administration of the Corry Fire Department shall be separately provided as
standard operating procedures (SOPs) or fire bureau policies, but shall have
the same force and effect as if herein promulgated.
   (B)   The organization and rank of the officers of the Corry Fire Department
shall consist of the following: Fire Chief, Deputy Chief, Assistant Chiefs,
Captain(s), and Lieutenant(s).
   (C)   The position of career Fire Chief and Deputy Chief shall be non-union.
The Mayor of the City of Corry, by and with approval of City Council, shall
appoint the career Fire Chief from the union ranks. In the event that no
qualified employee of the Fire Bureau union has applied for the appointment,
the Fire Chief shall be appointed by the Mayor, by and with approval and
consent of Council, from outside the union ranks, all pursuant to Third Class
City Code, 11 Pa.C.S. § 12101.1, as amended.
   (D)   After appropriate testing and ranking of eligible and qualified
promotional candidates by the Corry Police & Fire Civil Service Board, an
Interview Committee made up of the Director of Public Safety, Fire Chief, and
City Administrator shall select according to law from among the top three
candidates, or those ranked and not disqualified, a Deputy Chief, a Captain,
and up to two Lieutenant(s), as said officers may be approved by City Council,
who shall serve after formal appointment by the Corry City Council. If any one
of the three referenced committee members cannot serve, the remaining members
shall pick the third member by agreement.
   (E)   Upon strict compliance with Civil Service laws regarding promotions,
and upon the recommendation of the Director of Public Safety, by and with the
approval of City Council, the career Deputy Chief, Captain, and Lieutenant(s)
shall be appointed as otherwise provided by law regarding Civil Service. City
Council shall determine such additional compensation to which each such officer
is entitled, as it deems appropriate and commensurate with the work required.
   (F)   The organization of the volunteer fire company officers shall include
a First Assistant Chief and such other assistant chiefs and other officers as
deemed appropriate and meeting the mandated qualifications as approved by the
Director of Public Safety.
   (G)   The volunteer organization shall consist of not less than 25 active
members, not fewer than half of whom shall have completed a minimum of the
following three state certifications: interior firefighter, hazmat operations,
and vehicle rescue technician.
   (H)   A line officer of the Corry Fire Department is prohibited from serving
as a line officer in any other fire department, career or volunteer.
   (I)   The residency requirement to reside within a 12-air-mile radius of the
Corry Fire Station # 1 for the Fire Chief, Deputy Chief, and Assistant Chief(s)
shall apply to anyone promoted/elected after the adoption of Ordinance 1641. In
the event a volunteer fire department outside of the 12-mile radius merges with
the volunteer fire company of the City of Corry, they shall be authorized at
least one Assistant Chief to reside in their previous first due coverage area.
(Ord. 1591, passed 3-18-2019 ; Ord. 1641, passed 12-18-2023)
§ 35.22 FIRE CHIEF.
   (A)   The Fire Chief, Deputy Chief, Captain, and Lieutenant(s), if
applicable, along with the officers of the volunteer fire company, shall be
responsible to the Director of Public Safety for the conduct and management of
the Corry Fire Department.
   (B)   The Fire Chief shall:
      (1)   Devote his or her time to the discharge of the duties of his or her
office, and shall have and exercise supreme command at all fires and other
emergency events, which may arise, and at all times when on duty over the
officers and men of the Department.
      (2)   Keep an accurate record in convenient form of the reference of all
business transacted in the Department and of all fires occurring in this city
and when called out of the city. He or she shall make available to the City
Council a copy of all annual and monthly summary fire reports except
confidential information.
      (3)   As often as possible assure himself or herself by personal
inspection that the Department is kept at the highest point of efficiency and
that each fire station is being properly conducted and kept in good order. It
shall be his or her duty to know the condition of all equipment in the
Department at all times, and to know that each apparatus is fully equipped and
prepared to respond to all emergencies.
      (4)   Promptly report to the Director of Public Safety any officer or
member of the Department who, by reason of age, disease, accident or other form
of temporary or permanent disability does not or cannot duly, promptly, and
properly perform full duty in the Fire Department.
      (5)   Have the power to suspend at any time from duty any person under
his or her command, for a flagrant violation, disregard of law, ordinance, rule
regulation, or direction, in all cases where the interest of the people or the
reputation of the Department would suffer. The Director of Public Safety will
be notified immediately in writing, giving complete details of the violation
and suspension.
      (6)   Ensure that all laws, ordinances, rules, regulations, sops,
policies, orders, and directions applicable to the Fire Department and from the
Director of Public Safety are promptly and implicitly enforced and obeyed, and
that all dereliction or transgressions that may come to his or her knowledge
are promptly investigated and reported to the Director of Public Safety by
proper and well sustained charges.
      (7)   Condemn all unserviceable property and shall report it to the
Director of Public Safety. All reports and recommendations shall have his or
her approval or disapproval before being placed before the Director.
      (8)   At the scene, he or she shall have police power at all times as ex
officio Fire Marshall. He or she will also have full charge and absolute
control, authority, and command over the Fire Bureau members and City Police or
any officer thereof during the time and continuance of any emergency, and all
orders issued to the Police Forces or officers thereof shall be explicitly
obeyed and performed.
      (9)   If it shall appear necessary to tear down a building before it
catches fire in order to save other property, before acting in such cases, the
Fire Chief shall first consult the Safety Director. In the Chief’s absence, the
Deputy Chief or an Assistant Chief shall consult other senior responsible
members of the Fire Department and the Safety Director.
      (10)   Report all accidents by fire that happen within the city along
with the causes thereof, as can be ascertained, and the name of the owners and
occupants of the property destroyed.
      (11)   Cause each new member of his or her command to be thoroughly
instructed and appropriately trained in the use of all equipment used in rescue
work, firefighting, traffic control, and communications.
      (12)   Preserve order and discipline at all times and not allow stations
to be used for storage of any automobile or other property not owned, leased,
hired, or loaned to the City of Corry.
      (13)   Not allow beds in the fire stations to be occupied between 0700
hours (7:00 a.m.) and 2100 hours (9:00 p.m.) except when illness, injury, or
excessive hours worked in the department, and only with the Fire Chief's or
Officer in Charge's (OIC) prior permission shall this be permissible.
      (14)   Perform such duties as may be assigned to him by the Director of
Public Safety and keep headquarters advised where he or she can be reached if
needed.
      (15)   Provide City Council a summary quarterly fire report on the
previous quarter's activities. At the beginning of each year, he or she shall
file with the Director of Public Safety the previous year's fire report, the
activities of the year and a full inventory of all city property in his or her
charge. By September 1 of each year, he or she shall submit a proposed budget
for the coming year and any request for purchasing large items to the Director
of Public Safety/City Administrator to allow for budgeting in the following
year.
      (16)   Be an active member of the existing volunteer company of the City
of Corry and remain an active member during his or her tenure as Chief and
shall reside within a 12-air-mile radius of the Corry Fire Station # 1. He or
she shall have a minimum of ten years of interior firefighting experience,
served at least ten years as a full-time career firefighter with the City of
Corry Fire Department with at least three years as a fire officer with
progressively increasing responsibilities. He or she shall possess certified
training in the following areas:
         (a)   Incident command;
         (b)   Fire suppression;
         (c)   Rescue;
         (d)   Hazardous materials;
         (e)   Officer training;
         (f)   Building construction; and
         (g)   A valid PA state EMS certification.
(Ord. 1591, passed 3-18-2019 ; Ord. 1641, passed 12-18-2023)
§ 35.23 DEPUTY CHIEF.
   (A)   The Deputy Chief shall be next in rank to the Fire Chief and, in the
absence of the Chief, shall assume command as well as the responsibilities, of
the Fire Chief in a fire or other emergency situation.
   (B)   In the absence of the Chief, the Deputy Chief shall assist with
ensuring the daily tasks, orders, administrative duties are carried out, and
that all reports and records are completed correctly and prepared timely. In
the absence of the Chief, he or she shall have direct authority over career
personnel to direct them with daily duties and task. Any issues that arise and
call for disciplinary action will be forwarded to the Fire Chief for his or her
action.
   (C)   The Deputy Chief shall be appointed as Deputy Code Official and assume
all responsibilities as outlined in city ordinances.
   (D)   The Deputy Chief shall perform additional duties assigned by City
Council, the Fire Chief and/or the City Administrator.
   (E)   The Deputy Chief shall reside within a 12-air-mile radius of the Corry
Fire Station # 1. He or she shall have at least ten years of interior
firefighting experience, served at least ten years as a full-time firefighter
with the City of Corry Fire Department and shall have served as a career
officer for at least three years with progressively increasing
responsibilities, unless waived by Council by recommendation of Fire Chief and
City Administrator.
   (F)   The Deputy Chief shall possess certified training in the following
areas:
      (1)   Incident command;
      (2)   Fire suppression;
      (3)   Rescue;
      (4)   Hazardous materials;
      (5)   Officer training;
      (6)   Building construction; and
      (7)   A valid PA state EMS certification.
(Ord. 1591, passed 3-18-2019 ; Ord. 1641, passed 12-18-2023)
§ 35.24 FIRST ASSISTANT CHIEF.
   (A)   The volunteer First Assistant Chief will be next in rank after the
Fire Chief and Deputy Chief, and in the absence of the Fire Chief and Deputy
Chief, shall assume command, as well as the responsibilities of the Chief in a
fire or other emergency.
   (B)   The First Assistant Chief shall be an active member existing volunteer
company of the City of Corry Fire Department and remain an active member during
his or her tenure as First Assistant Chief; he or she shall reside within a 12-
air-mile radius of the Corry Fire Station #1. He or she shall have a minimum of
seven years of interior firefighting experience, at least three years as a fire
officer with progressively increasing responsibilities. He or she shall possess
certified training in the following areas:
      (1)   Incident command;
      (2)   Fire suppression;
      (3)   Rescue;
      (4)   Hazardous materials;
      (5)   Officer training; and
      (6)   First aid.
(Ord. 1591, passed 3-18-2019 ; Ord. 1641, passed 12-18-2023)
§ 35.25 ASSISTANT CHIEFS.
   (A)   Other volunteer Assistant Chiefs, if any, will be next in rank to the
Fire Chief and Deputy Chief, and First Assistant Chief, and in their absence,
shall assume command as well as the responsibilities of the Fire Chief in a
fire or other emergency.
   (B)   Assistant Chiefs shall be active members of the volunteer fire company
of the City of Corry and remain an active member during their tenure as an
Assistant Chief and shall reside within a 12-air-mile radius of the Corry Fire
Station # 1. He or she shall have a minimum of seven years of interior
firefighting experience, at least three years as a fire officer with
progressively increasing responsibilities. He or she shall possess certified
training in the following areas:
      (1)   Incident command;
      (2)   Fire suppression;
      (3)   Rescue;
      (4)   Hazardous materials;
      (5)   Officer training; and
      (6)   First aid.
(Ord. 1591, passed 3-18-2019 ; Ord. 1641, passed 12-18-2023)
§ 35.26 CAPTAINS.
   (A)   The Captains shall be next in rank after the Fire Chief, Deputy Chief,
and Assistant Chiefs shall assume command, as well as the responsibilities of
the Chief in a fire or other emergency. There shall be one Captain for the
career side and, if so qualified, as many volunteer Captain(s) as deemed
necessary or recommended by the Fire Chief with approval of the Director of
Public Safety.
   (B)   The Career Captain shall assist the Chiefs with ensuring the daily
task, orders, and duties are carried out, and that all reports and records are
completed and correct. He or she will have authority over career personnel to
direct them with daily duties and task. Any day-to-day issues that arise will
be forwarded to the Fire Chief or Deputy Chief for action. He or she will
assist with the training of personnel by working with other officers to
establish an annual training schedule approved by the Fire Chief for each year.
He or she shall also maintain records of all personal equipment issued, and
that on hand belonging to the Department or its volunteer company.
   (C)   The Career Captain shall be a member of the career force. He or she
shall remain employed during his or her tenure as Captain and shall reside
within a 12-air-mile radius of the Corry Fire Station # 1. He or she shall have
at least five years of interior firefighting experience, served at least two
years as a full-time career firefighter with the City of Corry Fire Department,
and shall have served as a Career Lieutenant for at least two years, unless
waived by Council by recommendation of the Fire Chief and City Administrator.
   (D)   The Career Captain shall possess certified training in the following
areas:
      (1)   Incident command;
      (2)   Fire suppression;
      (3)   Rescue;
      (4)   Hazardous materials;
      (5)   Officer training; and
      (6)   Valid Pennsylvania State EMS certification.
   (E)   The Volunteer Captain(s) shall be elected by the city's volunteer
company from those meeting their specific requirements. He or she shall assist
the Chief Officers in carrying out orders and directing members. He or she will
assist with the training of personnel by working with other officers and shall
maintain records of all personal equipment issued, on hand belonging to the
Department or its volunteer company.
(Ord. 1591, passed 3-18-2019 ; Ord. 1641, passed 12-18-2023)
§ 35.27 LIEUTENANTS.
   (A)   Lieutenants shall be included in the ranks as line officers used to
direct members at emergencies, and assist the Chief, Officers and Captains in
seeing all rules, orders and task are carried out at all times.
   (B)   Lieutenants shall assist with any work assigned by superior officers
ensuring it is completed and correct. They will ensure all daily task and work
assigned are completed. Assist with record keeping and ensuring all equipment
is maintained and ready for use.
   (C)   Career Lieutenant(s) shall be a current member of the career force. He
or she shall remain employed during his or her tenure as lieutenant. He or she
shall reside within a 12-air-mile radius of the Corry Fire Station # 1 and
shall have five years interior firefighting experience and have served a
minimum of two years as a full-time career firefighter with the City of Corry
Fire Department, if the interior firefighting experience was not all with the
City of Corry Fire Department, he or she will provide notarized documents of
previous service and training. He or she shall possess certified training in
the following areas:
      (1)   Incident command;
      (2)   Fire suppression;
      (3)   Rescue;
      (4)   Hazardous materials;
      (5)   Officer training; and
      (6)   Valid Pennsylvania State EMS Certification.
   (D)   Volunteer Lieutenants shall be elected from the city's Volunteer
Department upon meeting their requirements.
(Ord. 1591, passed 3-18-2019 ; Ord. 1641, passed 12-18-2023)
§ 35.28 CAREER FIREFIGHTERS.
   (A)   The career firefighters shall reside within an 18-air-mile radius of
the Corry Fire Station # 1 and at all times hold a valid driver's license.
   (B)   Under the direction of the hereinabove mentioned superior officers,
each career firefighter shall have immediate charge of the apparatus, which has
been assigned to him or her, and he or she shall be responsible for its
efficiency and cleanliness and, upon return after a call or use, he or she
shall make a careful inspection of the apparatus and its equipment. He or she
then shall immediately report the result of such inspection to the superior OIC
of call or detail.
   (C)   They shall keep all apparatus at all times in a state of readiness,
ensuring it and its equipment are always ready for use. He or she shall know
the locations of all hydrants and how to hook the apparatus to them in the
quickest and proper way.
   (D)   They shall become knowledgeable of the operating procedures as set
forth in the manufacturers operating manual, for each piece of equipment or
apparatus assigned to him or her. Such knowledge shall include but not be
limited to the proper and safe operation of engines, pumps, valves, reserve
water tanks, communication equipment, SCBAs, thermal imagers, how to operate on
inclines, all driver maintenance and checklists, keeping safety first in all
operations of such equipment.
   (E)   While operating the apparatus, he or she shall carefully keep the
equipment under full control at all times, and obey all state and local laws
pertaining to emergency apparatus. If the emergency is a priority, he or she
shall use the appropriate visual and audible warnings, especially when
overtaking another vehicle from the rear, at intersections, and entrances and
exits off the same roadway. He or she shall never race or attempt to race
another apparatus or vehicle, nor shall he or she attempt to pass another
apparatus traveling in the same direction unless instructed to do so by the
lead apparatus. All operators shall keep at least 200 feet between responding
apparatus and never tailgate a vehicle that fails to yield the right- of-way.
(Get license number and OIC will handle issues after the emergency.)
   (F)   Upon dispatch, he or she shall respond according to the procedures
outlined in the Corry Fire Department standard operating procedures. Upon
arrival if command has not already been established he or she will radio
accurate size up to dispatch, which information shall include size, type,
number of injured, and condition of emergency, request any additional resources
needed and establish command as per the national incident command model.
   (G)   Should a driver of an apparatus have a breakdown or become disabled,
he or she shall attempt to pull to the side of the road, and notify dispatch
the apparatus is out of service and unable to respond. He or she must ensure
the responding OIC is aware of his or her situation, shut down emergency
lights, and activate four-ways and caution devices (cone or triangles). Traffic
control should be conducted to allow other responding apparatus to pass
immediately. He or she shall await the arrival of a mechanic or OIC.
   (H)   Should the apparatus become involved in an accident with another
vehicle or result in property damage or injury to a pedestrian, other drivers,
or passenger, the driver shall stop at the scene of the accident, radio
dispatch what has happened, give a size up of the accident, request any
additional resources, and advise them to send another apparatus to the original
call. He or she must make sure the responding OIC is aware of the accident. The
driver will render aid to any victims, establish command if needed and remain
at the scene until released by the police officer investigating the accident.
   (I)   The career personnel assigned to the station and its apparatus for the
given duty will be responsible for the cleanliness and maintenance of the
apparatus and its equipment. At the beginning of each shift, the oncoming
personnel are responsible to check each apparatus and its equipment to ensure
it is in proper working order. If an apparatus is dirty, it will be washed at
the discretion of the OIC. All equipment used will be cleaned and put back in
service after each call. Failure to clean the apparatus is a failure in daily
duties and will be addressed by superiors. Any minor repairs will be completed
by duty personnel as soon as possible. All other repairs, a vehicle repair memo
will be completed and sent to the appropriate superior to be addressed. If the
apparatus is inoperable, the Chief shall be immediately notified, and then will
be removed from service and reserve apparatus will be used.
   (J)   The career personnel on duty are responsible for the cleanliness and
maintenance of their stations both inside and outside at all times. The
oncoming duty personnel will ensure the station is clean and report any
problems to the appropriate superior. If station maintenance is needed, the
duty personnel will handle any small issue with supplies available. If a
purchase is needed, they will follow the department procedure. For required
larger repairs, they will use the city maintenance slips at each station. Any
missing items will be reported to the appropriate supervisor. Volunteer members
using the buildings shall be jointly responsible to clean up after themselves
and their guest(s) and keep station premises clean.
   (K)   The duty personnel will be responsible to insure all radios, phones,
bells, alarms, and indicators are in proper working order at the start of each
shift. Any repairs or alterations to be made to the station or apparatus shall
have the Fire Chiefs approval. They shall not incur any expense without prior
approval from the Fire Chief.
   (L)   The career firefighter shall make such reports and perform such other
duties as the superior officers may require.
   (M)   The City of Corry recognizes the International Association of
Firefighters Local 2102 AFL-CIO as the bargaining organization for the career
firefighters of the City of Corry Fire Department, and the contract agreed upon
for the corresponding years will be binding.
   (N)   All career firefighters are subject to call for extra duty if the need
should arise (example: special orders), the need to be determined by the Fire
Chief or OIC at the time.
   (O)   In the event of a second alarm is sounded (recall) for a fire or other
emergency in the city, all city employees who are members of the Department
shall be immediately released without penalty and allowed to report to the
scene.
   (P)   The Chief may designate certain volunteers as drivers of Department
vehicles. All volunteers so appointed must be properly trained and assume all
the duties and responsibilities of the regular drivers. Before a volunteer will
be authorized to drive a Fire Department vehicle, he or she must be checked out
and certified by the Fire Chief or his trained designee. Volunteer drivers must
be 18 years of age, have a valid Pennsylvania driver's license, and be an
active member in good standing with the city's volunteer company. A list of
qualified drivers will be submitted to, approved by the Director of Public
Safety, kept on file at the city building, and posted in the fire stations. All
volunteer drivers must meet the requirements set by the Department SOPs.
   (Q)   The career firefighters of the Department will wear uniforms as
designated by the Fire Chief. Uniforms will be kept clean and neat at all
times, Fire Department insignias will be worn on all uniforms and caps as
designated by the Fire Chief. Any uniform must be replaced when deemed
necessary by the Fire Chief.
(Ord. 1591, passed 3-18-2019 ; Ord. 1641, passed 12-18-2023)
§ 35.29 GENERAL RULES.
   (A)   All members of the Fire Department shall have a full knowledge of, and
abide by, the rules, regulations and policies for the government of the
Department and it shall be the duty of the Fire Chief to ensure each member is
informed.
   (B)   All officers and members of the Department are only permitted to make
purchases as per the city's purchasing guideline.
   (C)   All personal vehicles going to or from an emergency must abide by all
federal, state and local laws. Any member going to or coming from an emergency
shall not behave in any way unbecoming a firefighter. It shall be the duty of
any firefighter or aggrieved person to report such conduct to the Fire Chief.
   (D)   Any member of the Department having in his or her possession any
property of the Fire Department or the city shall, on demand, return the same
to the Fire Department or the city, and should he or she refuse, shall be
subject to arrest and held until the property is returned.
   (E)   Members of the Fire Department who take equipment from engines trucks
at emergency scenes shall notify the operator or officer in charge and shall
return such equipment as soon as possible when done with the equipment. If the
apparatus returns prior to the end of equipment use, it is the members
responsibility to ensure the equipment is returned back to the appropriate
apparatus in its proper place.
   (F)   In order to be eligible to display flashing or revolving blue lights
on a private vehicle (POV), the individual must be an active member of the
Department, must receive approval from the Fire Chief, and register with the
Pennsylvania State Police through the Fire Chief prior to installation of such
light. The light(s) shall be removed within ten days after termination of the
person's status as an active member or by an order by the Fire Chief.
Permission to use such lights does not relieve the driver from the duty to
drive with due regard for the safety of all persons and property. Prior to
installing such light, the person shall become familiar with all state and
local laws pertaining to the use of such lights. The use of sirens, flashing
red or blue lights while returning from a call on apparatus or private vehicles
is forbidden. All members using such equipment shall observe all other laws as
described in the Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code. The use of, and compliance
with, all existing laws is mandatory. In the event complaints of reckless
driving are received, the Fire Chief will advise all complainants to file a
complaint with the law enforcement agency having jurisdiction where the alleged
incident occurred in order to ensure compliance, safety, and avoid personnel
conflicts.
   (G)   All equipment used at emergencies shall be cleaned and returned to
ready status immediately upon return from a call, ensuring all equipment is
free from hazardous chemicals and grime. All damaged or missing equipment shall
be reported to the Fire Chief or officer in charge immediately.
   (H)   All hose shall be thoroughly washed and cleaned after being used. Any
damaged hose shall be reported to the Fire Chief or officer in charge
immediately.
   (I)   It shall be the duty of all available members to respond with little
delay upon receipt of emergency, and on arrival report to the officer in
charge. Apparatus and members responding shall not return until told to do so
by officer in charge.
   (J)   All member of the Department shall conduct all activities with the
utmost safety, always keeping safety for all members and civilians they serve
in mind. Any member who is found to be operating in a way that risk the safety
of other members or citizens will be reported to the Fire Chief or officer in
charge, who shall deal with the issue accordingly to ensure it does not
reoccur.
   (K)   Any member of the Fire Department who may resign or leave the company
for any reason whatsoever shall turn over to the proper officers all money,
books, papers or other property of the city or company which he or she may have
in his or her possession.
   (L)   All officers and members not on shift shall respond promptly to any
call for any duty issued by the Chief or by his or her authority, or by a
general alarm or call for a second alarm.
   (M)   All members, both career full-time and part-time (on or off duty) and
volunteers, while in the Department buildings shall be responsible to keep the
buildings clean and presentable.
   (N)   When answering an alarm outside the primary response area, there will
always remain at least one engine company available within the City of Corry.
The Director of Public Safety or Fire Chief must approve any exception to this
firm policy.
   (O)   In cases of parades, training sessions, mutual aid drills and the
like, no more than two trucks will be permitted outside the city at any one
time and shall be approved by the Fire Chief and shall be approved by the
Director of Public Safety, when beyond a 15-mile radius of the city.
   (P)   No information relating to the business, operations, or other affairs
of the Department shall be disclosed or furnished to persons not connected with
the Department. All information released to the media shall only be done by a
Department news release issued by Director of Public Safety, officer in charge
or his or her designee. Incident reports shall be issued according to standard
operating procedure.
   (Q)   All members of the Department shall promptly report to the Chief if
any municipal department, city employee or other individual has interfered or
refused to cooperate with the work of the Department.
   (R)   All members of the Fire Department shall set an example in the matter
of due regard and respect for the rules of discipline. Any infraction of
regulations, neglect to enforce rules or orders or other acts of indifference
that may tend to operate against the good reputation of the Fire Department
will be considered as an aggravated offense and will be treated with
corresponding severity.
   (S)    Officers shall attend at least 50% of Department trainings, maintain
a call volume of 5% when available. Availability shall be pre-arranged. Any
officer unable to meet these attendance requirements will be brought before the
Fire Chief or Director of Public Safety.
   (T)   No member of the Fire Department shall respond to an emergency call in
an intoxicated condition. Such person shall be immediately suspended from duty
and shall remain suspended until otherwise notified by the Director of Public
Safety.
   (U)   When any department member is suspended from the service, he or she
shall be notified in writing by the Director of Public Safety or the Fire
Chief. He or she shall not attend any Department function and shall turn over
all Department equipment and cease to wear the uniform of the Department during
the time of suspension. He or she shall also remove all red/blue lights from
their POV during that time.
   (V)   All members of the Fire Department must have their helmet, coat, boots
and other issued equipment in readiness to wear, prepared to fight fire or any
other emergency that might arise.
   (W)   All occupants on apparatus, whether driving or riding, will have seat
belts fastened at all times while the vehicle is in motion. The driver of
apparatus shall be in charge for all passengers and their safety while the
vehicle is in motion. There will be no smoking in any city-owned vehicle.
   (X)   All members of the Fire Department shall read and become familiar with
laws, ordinances, rules, SOPs, policies and general orders relating to the
service.
   (Y)   The following are the signals to be used by the Department:
      (1)   First tap of an alarm:
         (a)   The duty firefighters and available personnel are to report; and
         (b)   The dispatch shall advise priority of response:
            1.   Priority 1 - an emergency response; or
            2.   Priority 2 - a non emergency response (no lights or sirens).
      (2)   On second tap of an alarm within the city or upon specific request
of the officer in charge will initiate an automatic recall of all off-duty
career firefighters and any volunteer who, with employer permission, can leave
work.
   (Z)   Any Fire Department member in good standing who is employed by the
city shall, upon second alarm, be released without penalty or lose of wage.
   (AA)   The Volunteer Fire Department of the city shall have and receive
annually as full compensation for its services rendered or to be rendered such
sum as may be appropriated for that purpose by the City Council. Such sum shall
be for the use of said company to be disbursed as directed by the membership of
the existing hose company.
   (BB)   The city agrees with and shall follow the prescribed incident command
system as currently accepted practice within the emergency response community.
(Ord. 1591, passed 3-18-2019 ; Ord. 1641, passed 12-18-2023)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
   Chapter
      
50.   REFUSE
      
51.   WATER
      
52.   SEWER
CHAPTER 50: REFUSE
Section
Residential Resource Recovery Program
   
50.01   Definitions
   
50.02   Program
   
50.03   Separation of recyclables and placement for removal
   
50.04   Collection by unauthorized person
   
50.05   Additional recyclable materials
Collection and Disposal of Garbage
   
50.20   Title
   
50.21   Definitions
   
50.22   Collection by city
   
50.23   Collection supervision
   
50.24   Pre-collection practices
   
50.25   Collection practices
   
50.26   Charges for service
   
50.27   Hours of collecting and hauling refuse over city streets
   
50.28   Non-compliance notices
 
   
50.97   Unlawful disposition of refuse and recyclables
   
50.98   Dumping/litter
   
50.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   City policies,
Ch. 33
   Fire prevention,
Ch. 92
   Property maintenance, see
Ch. 93
RESIDENTIAL RESOURCE RECOVERY PROGRAM
§ 50.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   GLASS CONTAINERS. All clear , green or brown bottles and jars which are not
broken, and which are made from silica or sand, soda ash and limestone, the
product being transparent or translucent and being used for packaging or
bottling of various substances.
   METAL CANS. All aluminum, steel, tin and bi-metal cans.
   PLASTIC BOTTLES. All soft drink and beverage bottles, milk, juice and water
jugs, detergent and bleach bottles, which are made from polyethylene and known
as PET, HDPE, LDPE and PVC plastic.
   RECYCLABLES. Material having an economic value in the secondary materials
market. The following materials have such economic value and are included as
part of the city’s Residential Resource Recovery Program: glass containers;
metal cans; and plastic bottles.
(Ord. 1349, passed 6-17-1991)
§ 50.02 PROGRAM.
   There is hereby established a Residential Resource Recovery Program for the
mandatory separating of recyclables from garbage and rubbish in the city.
(Ord. 1349, passed 6-17-1991)
§ 50.03 SEPARATION OF RECYCLABLES AND PLACEMENT FOR REMOVAL.
   (A)    Recyclables shall be kept separate from other refuse and shall be
collected by the city or its designated agent. Individual household units shall
separate recyclables and prepare them for collection in the following manner.
      (1)   Glass containers shall be emptied and cleaned; tops shall be
removed; the material shall be placed in toters provided by the city or its
designated contractor, or other approved containers.
      (2)   Metal cans shall be emptied and cleaned; tops shall be removed and
cans crushed; the material shall be placed in toters provided by the city or
its designated contractor, or other approved containers.
      (3)   Plastic bottles shall be emptied and cleaned; tops shall be removed
and bottles crushed; the material shall be placed in toters provided by the
city or its designated contractor, or other approved containers.
   (B)   Recyclables may be comingled in one container and shall be placed at
the curbside in the container provided by the city or the city's designated
contractor to be collected at times designated by the city. Recyclables, as
defined in this subchapter, shall not be placed in the same container with
garbage and shall not otherwise be mixed with other forms of solid waste placed
for collection, removal or disposal under the city refuse contract.
(Ord. 1349, passed 6-17-1991; Ord. 1631, passed 12-19-2022)
§ 50.04 COLLECTION BY UNAUTHORIZED PERSON.
   (A)   From the time recyclables are placed at the curb, for collection in
accordance with the terms of this subchapter, recyclables shall be and become
the property of the city or its authorized agent. It shall be a violation of
this subchapter for any person unauthorized by the city to collect or pick up,
or cause to be collected or picked up, any such items. Any and each such
collection in violation hereof, from one or more locations, shall constitute a
separate and distinct offense punishable as hereinafter provided.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for a person to collect, remove or dispose of
solid waste which contains glass containers, metal cans or plastic bottles
(recyclables) combined with other forms of solid waste.
   (C)   The City Council, or its agent, is empowered to designate the day(s)
of the month on which recyclables shall be collected, removed and disposed of
from a particular area.
(Ord. 1349, passed 6-17-1991) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.05 ADDITIONAL RECYCLABLE MATERIALS.
   City Council may, by resolution, add to or change the recyclables designated
for mandatory separation and collection by the city or its designated agent.
(Ord. 1349, passed 6-17-1991)
COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL OF GARBAGE
§ 50.20 TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Municipal Refuse
Ordinance of the City of Corry”.
(Ord. 1224, passed 2-7-1977)
§ 50.21 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this subchapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with
the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the
plural number include the singular number and words in the singular number
include the plural number. The word “shall” is always mandatory and not merely
directory.
   ASHES. The residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke or other combustible
materials.
   CITY. The City of Corry, Erie County, Pennsylvania.
   COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL ESTABLISHMENTS. Those places, buildings or
properties which are used for purposes other than residential uses, and which
are located within areas that are zoned commercial or industrial according to
the official zoning map. Also included are such establishments located in
residentially zoned areas if such establishments are classified as non-
conforming uses under the zoning ordinances and employ more than one full-time
employee. Hotels and motels are included under the classification of COMMERCIAL
AND INDUSTRIAL ESTABLISHMENTS. Churches, tabernacles, public utility company
properties and other tax exempt properties are excluded from COMMERCIAL AND
INDUSTRIAL ESTABLISHMENTS.
   CONTRACTOR. Such contractors as the city may legally designate to collect
garbage, rubbish, dead animals and household rubbish within the city.
   DEAD ANIMALS. Includes all dead animals, or parts thereof, not intended to
be used as food for human beings, but not including dead horses and cows.
   DWELLING UNIT. Any group of rooms located within a dwelling forming a single
habitable unit and facilities which are used or intended to be used for living,
sleeping, cooking and eating. A group of rooms in one building, other than a
hotel, in which part or parts are kept, used and held to be a place where
sleeping accommodations are offered for hire and which share a common cooking
and sanitary facility shall be considered as one unit for refuse billing
purposes.
   GARBAGE. All animal and vegetable waste attending or resulting from the
handling, dealing in, storing, preparation, cooking and consumption of foods;
all refuse of animal or vegetable matter which has been used for food of
humans, or which was intended to be so used, and all packaging material used in
the preparation and handling of food.
   HOUSEHOLD RUBBISH. Includes household goods, household refuse, furniture,
springs and mattresses, tin cans, bottles, crockery, broken glass, rags, grass
clippings and other similar debris; hedge cuttings and shrubbery trimmings,
bundled, boxed or otherwise contained; paper, newspaper, magazines tied in
bundles, boxed or otherwise contained; furnace pipe, stoves, water boilers,
trunks, incinerator refuse and ashes of all kinds and descriptions; wood not
over 36 inches in length; all rubbish, trash, debris, waste, litter, scraps,
packings, excelsior, straw, metal cooking utensils, toys, porcelain, carpeting,
leather, rubber, shoes, clothing, cardboard, household appliances, tree
trimmings, trees and tree limbs under 36 inches in length. Excluded will be
broken concrete and other refuse from repairs, alterations and new construction
of buildings and sidewalks totaling more than 200 pounds at one collection or
75 pounds in one receptacle; tree limbs and trunks over 36 inches in length and
material from commercial or industrial establishments. Garbage is excluded.
Also excluded are appliances, furniture and other one piece objects which weigh
in excess of 200 pounds per object. Old pipe, eave spouts and the like shall
not exceed four feet in length.
   PERSON. Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company
organization or entity of any kind.
   REFUSE. Garbage, rubbish or household rubbish.
   REFUSE DISPOSAL SERVICE. The service provided by the city or contractor in
accordance with this subchapter.
   RUBBISH. All rags, broken glass, crockery, bottles, tin cans, waste basket
debris, grass cuttings and small household refuse placed in approved
containers, generally including incinerator ashes and refuse from paper
burners, exclusive of ashes from heating plants and coal stoves and refuse
caused by repairs, alterations and new constructions of buildings, sidewalks
and other building appurtenances. Stones and dirt are excluded, except where
the quantity is five pounds or less per refuse container.
(Ord. 1224, passed 2-7-1977; Ord. 1315, passed 7- -1986)
§ 50.22 COLLECTION BY CITY.
   (A) General. All garbage, rubbish and household rubbish accumulated in the
city shall be collected, conveyed and disposed of by the city or contractor. No
other persons shall collect, convey over any of the streets or alleys of the
city or dispose of any refuse accumulated in the city.
   (B)   Exception for actual producers. This subchapter shall not prohibit the
actual producers of refuse or the owners of premises upon which refuse has
accumulated from personally collecting, conveying and disposing of such refuse,
provided such producers or owners comply with the provisions of this subchapter
and with any other governing laws or ordinances.
   (C)   Interfering with receptacle. It shall be unlawful for any person,
other than the city or contractor while in the process of collecting refuse, to
interfere in any manner with any receptacle for the storing of garbage, rubbish
or household rubbish, or the contents thereof, or to remove such receptacle or
the contents thereof from the location where the same is placed by the owner
thereof.
(Ord. 1224, passed 2-7-1977) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.23 COLLECTION SUPERVISION.
   (A)   All refuse accumulated in the city shall be collected, conveyed and
disposed of by the city or contractor under the supervision of the City
Administrator.
   (B)   The City Administrator may prepare, establish and publish reasonable
rules and regulations, consistent with the provisions of this subchapter, for
the effective administration and enforcement of the provisions of this
subchapter.
   (C)   The City Administrator and the contractor shall divide the city into
collection zones and designate the days on which garbage, rubbish and household
rubbish shall be collected in the various zones.
   (D)   Any person aggrieved by a regulation of the city or the fee charged by
the city or contractor shall have the right of appeal to the City Council.
Council shall have the authority to confirm or modify any interpretation of
these regulations made by the contractor or the City Administrator.
(Ord. 1224, passed 2-7-1977)
§ 50.24 PRE-COLLECTION PRACTICES.
   (A)   General. It shall be the duty of every owner or person in possession,
charge or control of any dwelling or place of business where garbage, rubbish
and household rubbish are produced and accumulated, and of every resident,
householder, tenant and person occupying a dwelling, apartment or place of
business within the city:
      (1)   To provide and at all times to keep, as in this subchapter
prescribed, on his or her premises a sufficient number of containers to hold
all garbage and rubbish which may accumulate on the premises of said person
during the intervals herein prescribed between the collection of the same by
the contractor;
      (2)   To keep and maintain all receptacles for the storage of garbage and
rubbish in good and sanitary condition and to replace any such receptacles
which may have ragged or sharp edges, holes or other defects;
      (3)   To deposit all garbage and rubbish which may be produced or
accumulated daily on the premises in a proper receptacle therefor as herein
provided;
      (4)   To drain garbage so it is reasonably free of liquids and to wrap
garbage that is loose and of such a nature that it may stick to the container,
or cause odor or attract maggots;
      (5)   To deposit and store all rubbish in the same containers as garbage,
no separation of garbage and rubbish being necessary;
      (6)   To keep all receptacles for the storing of garbage and rubbish
securely covered to prevent any of the contents from being scattered about and
to prevent the propagation of rats, flies and other insects or vermin;
      (7)   To place all receptacles for the storage of garbage and rubbish and
all household rubbish at the curb line, in front of the premises, on the
prescribed collection day prior to 6:00 a.m.;
      (8)   Curb line shall be construed to mean the are between the walk and
curb, or, if one or both do not exist, curb line shall mean the area outside
the traveled street which is in the street right-of-way. On streets with a 30-
foot right-of-way, the area five feet outside the right-of-way may be used; and
      (9)   Trimmings and clippings, tree trimmings, hedge clippings and
similar materials shall be cut to lengths not to exceed three feet and shall be
placed in cans and containers or securely tied in bundles not more than two
feet thick before being deposited for collection. Bundles shall not weigh more
than 75 pounds.
   (B)   Containers. All receptacles required by this subchapter for the
storage of garbage and rubbish shall be provided by the city and/or its
designated contractor. The containers shall conform to the following standards
and shall be maintained as follows:
      (1)   All such receptacles shall be of substantial construction made of
metal or plastic, equipped with tight-fitting lids and strong handles.
      (2)   All receptacles for the storage of garbage and rubbish shall be of
standard type of toter and shall have a capacity not exceeding 95 gallons. The
city or its designated contractor may elect to offer toters with smaller
capacities for individuals that may have difficulty with the 95 gallon toter.
      (3)   Containers shall be furnished by the city or its designated
contractor and shall be maintained in a sanitary condition by the occupant.
      (4)   Approved detachable paper or plastic bags designed expressly for
garbage or rubbish will be permitted.
   (C)   Containers at curb. In no case, except for missed collections, shall
refuse containers be left at the curb line other than on the day of collection,
or after 1:00 p.m. on the day proceeding the day of collection.
(Ord. 1224, passed 2-7-1977; Ord. 1631, passed 12-19-2022)  Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.25 COLLECTION PRACTICES.
   (A)   Frequency of collection, residential. Garbage, rubbish and household
rubbish shall be removed from the curb line only at dwellings once each week on
a regularly scheduled day. No collection will be made on Sundays.
   (B)   Frequency of collection, commercial and industrial establishments.
Garbage and rubbish shall be collected and removed by the city or contractor
twice each week from all commercial and industrial establishments on regularly
scheduled days. No collections will be made on Sundays.
   (C)   Limitations on quantity.
      (1)    Each collection of garbage and rubbish as hereinabove set forth
shall be limited to one 95-gallon toter or one 36-gallon toter provided by the
city or its designated contractor for the collection of refuse. Commercial and
industrial collections shall be limited to a weekly total, per establishment,
which is based on the net area used for commercial or industrial purposes.  
      (2)   The total weekly collection shall be as follows.
 
0 - 5,000 square feet of floor space used eight cans (one cubic yard) per week
for commercial or industrial purposes
5,000 - 10,000 square feet                two cubic yards per week
10,000 - 15,000 square feet               three cubic yards per week
15,000 - 20,000 square feet               four cubic yards per week
Over 20,000 square feet                   five cubic yards per week
All quantities are for refuse that is not mechanically compacted
 
   (D)   Additional quantities. Commercial establishments and industrial
establishments, and such other business and institutions as deem it necessary
may enter into an agreement with the city or contractor for a greater frequency
of collection or larger quantities per collection. Where necessary to protect
the public health, the Director of Safety shall have the authority to require
that more frequent collections be made.
   (E)   Tax exempt properties. Collections from churches, tabernacles, public
utility buildings and such other properties that are exempt from the payments
of local real estate taxes shall enter into an agreement with the city or
contractor for the collection of garbage, rubbish and household rubbish, or
shall provide for collection by other means as may be permitted under this
subchapter. Such collection shall be provided for as shall be necessary for the
proper protection of the public health, and as shall be required by any
ordinance or state law.
   (F)   Storing of refuse.
      (1)   Public places. No person shall place any refuse in any street,
alley or other public place or upon any private property, whether owned by such
person or not, within the city, except that it be in proper containers for
collection or under express approval granted by the Director of Safety. Nor
shall any person throw or deposit any refuse in any stream or other body of
water.
      (2)   Unauthorized accumulation. Any unauthorized accumulation of refuse
on any premises is hereby declared to be a nuisance and is prohibited.
      (3)   Scattering of refuse. No person shall cast, place, sweep or deposit
anywhere within the city any refuse in such a manner that it may be carried or
deposited by the elements, animals or other persons, upon any street, sidewalk,
alley, sewer, parkway, street or other public place, or into any occupied
premises within the city.
   (G)   Points of collection. Refuse containers for all residential
collections shall be placed for collection at the curb line. Containers for
commercial and industrial collections shall be in one location at ground level
on the property outside any building and no more than 120 feet from the access
property line. Provided, never the less, that containers may be placed for
collection inside a building and at other than ground level for commercial and
industrial establishments when an additional payment to the collector for extra
service is agreed upon by both parties, or when there is mutual agreement for
different storage for other reasons.
   (H)   Fees.
      (1)   (a)   The city or contractor shall be responsible for the
collections set forth in this subchapter and each such collection shall be
limited as hereinbefore specified.
         (b)   The Director of Safety shall have the authority to order that
collections be made with such frequency as may be necessary for the
cleanliness, general health and welfare of the city. The city or contractor,
with the approval of the Director of Safety, shall have the authority to make
an additional charge, other than the normal contract charge, for such
additional amounts or additional collections of refuse.
      (2)   The city shall let such contracts as are necessary for proper
refuse collection in the city in accordance with this subchapter. Payments
according to the terms of said contract shall be made from annual city revenue.
      (3)   Maximum rates for additional collections over and above that
provided in the normal refuse disposal service as herein specified shall be
negotiated between the contractor and the customer, but shall not exceed those
specified in the bid for the collection contract. If a contract is not secured,
maximum rates for such collection shall be defined by resolution.
   (I)   Special refuse problems.
      (1)   Contagious disease refuse. The removal of clothing, bedding or
other refuse from homes or other places where highly infectious or contagious
diseases have prevailed shall be performed under the supervision and direction
of the County Health Officer. Such refuse shall not be placed in containers for
regular collections.
      (2)   Inflammable or explosive refuse. Highly inflammable or explosive
material shall not be placed in containers for regular collection but shall be
disposed of as directed by the Director of Safety at the expense of the owner
or possessor thereof.
   (J)   Collection by actual producers.
      (1)   Requirements for vehicles. The actual producers of refuse or the
owners of premises upon which refuse is accumulated who desire personally to
collect and dispose of such refuse shall use a water- tight vehicle provided
with an adequate cover and so operated as to prevent any offensive odors
escaping therefrom, and to prevent refuse from being blown, dropped, spilled or
deposited in the city. Vehicles of producers shall be provided with a cover
adequate to prevent scattering of contents.
      (2)   Disposal. Disposal of refuse by persons so permitted under division
(J)(1) above shall be made outside the city limits at places and in a manner
approved by the state’s Department of Environmental Resources. Failure to
dispose of refuse at a place and in a manner approved by the state’s Department
of Environmental Resources shall be a violation of this subchapter and any
permission granted for such collection and hauling of refuse may be withdrawn.
   (K)   Dead animals and city trash cans. Dead animals and the collection of
refuse in city trash cans may be included in contracts let by the city for a
refuse disposal service.
   (L)   City owned landfill. The city may own and/or operate a landfill. The
city may also operate a transfer station.
   (M)   City owned dump.
      (1)   The city-owned dump shall be operated under the direction of the
City Administrator. Industrial or commercial establishments, contractors and
individuals who wish to deposit acceptable nonorganic fill material in the dump
may be permitted use of the dump if so authorized by the City Administrator.
The depositing of unauthorized material shall be deemed sufficient reason for
the City Administrator to withdraw the privilege from an authorized user. Any
authorized material deposited in the dump shall be removed by the depositor
upon three days’ written notice by the City Administrator. Failure to do so
shall constitute a violation of this subchapter. Unauthorized use of the dump
shall constitute a violation of this subchapter.
      (2)   In general, acceptable materials for deposit in the city dump shall
include masonry, dirt, sand, tree stumps, leaves and such other materials as
the City Administrator may from time to time designate.
      (3)   There shall be no charge made for the use of the city dump, but a
deposit may be required for the use of a key to the dump.
(Ord. 1224, passed 2-7-1977; Ord. 1631, passed 12-19-2022)  Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.26 CHARGES FOR SERVICE.
   Each person producing garbage, rubbish, household rubbish and recyclable
materials in the city, or being responsible for the disposal of, or the
existence of such garbage, rubbish, household rubbish and recyclable materials,
or for whom such garbage, rubbish, household rubbish and recyclable materials
are removed by the city or its authorized agent, shall pay to the city a fee or
charge as hereinafter provided for its services of collecting, hauling and
disposing of such garbage, rubbish, household rubbish and recyclable materials.
   (A)   Residential and commercial. Each single-family dwelling unit,
apartment unit or commercial unit (as defined in this subchapter), shall pay a
fee at the rate of $36.84 per month for weekly collection of refuse and bi-
weekly collection of recycling service.
   (B)   Recycling Ewaste and household hazardous waste fee. Each residential
refuse account is to be charged a fee of $1.87 per account per month for
recycling of electronic and household hazardous waste.
   (C)   Senior citizen rate. Each residential dwelling unit in which all
occupants residing therein have passed their sixty-fifth birthday (as defined
in this subchapter), shall pay the residential rate of $36.84 less a discount
of $3.00 per month for refuse service.
   (D)   Additional toter. Each additional refuse or recycling toter shall be
charged a fee at the rate of $8.73 per toter per month.
   (E)   Late charges. If the bill for refuse and recycling services are not
paid by the fifteenth day of the month a penalty of 10% will be added per
service, with a minimum penalty of $0.10 per service for any one bill. If the
fifteenth day of the month falls on a Saturday, Sunday or holiday, bills may be
paid without penalty on the next business day.
(Ord. 1558, passed 12-21-2015; Ord. 1589, passed 12-17-2018; Ord. 1603, passed
2-3-2020 ; Ord. 1608, passed 12-7-2020; Ord. 1615, passed 12-20-2021; Ord.
1631, passed 12-19-2022; Ord. 1635, passed 3-20-2023; Ord. 1649, passed 12-18-
2023; Ord. 1657, passed 12-16-2024)
Editor’s Note:
   See also city’s fee schedule
§ 50.27 HOURS OF COLLECTING AND HAULING REFUSE OVER CITY STREETS.
    No collection of refuse shall be permitted in the city and no hauling of
refuse shall be permitted on the streets or alleys of the city after the hour
of 6:00 p.m. or before the hour of 6:00 a.m. from Monday through Saturday, and
no hauling of refuse shall be permitted on Sunday, except for emergency
conditions, if authorized by the city.
(Ord. 1224, passed 2-7-1977; Ord. 1631, passed 12-19-2022)
§ 50.28 NON-COMPLIANCE NOTICES.
   Notice of non-compliance with the provisions of this subchapter shall be
given in writing to the owner, lessee or person in charge of the property where
refuse has collected at the direction of the Director of Safety. Such notice
shall specify the matter or matters in non-compliance and shall specify the
time within the non-compliance shall be corrected. Failure to comply within the
time specified in said notice shall be a violation of this subchapter.
(Ord. 1224, passed 2-7-1977) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.97 UNLAWFUL DISPOSITION OF REFUSE AND RECYCLABLES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to bring any refuse or recycling into
the city or to transport refuse or recycling from one address to another within
or outside the city for the purpose of taking advance of the collection service
or to avoid the cost of collection. No person shall place upon any other
property refuse or recyclable not generated upon that property, except for
placement of recyclable materials for collection upon one's own property and/or
placement of materials at a licensed recycling or composting facility.
(Ord. 1631, passed 12-19-2022)
§ 50.98 DUMPING/LITTER.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to store, dump discard or deposit, or to
permit the storage, dumping, discharging or depositing of any refuse or
recyclables upon the surface of the ground or underground within the city,
except in property containers for the storage and collection in conformance
with this chapter. It shall be unlawful for any person to dump or deposit any
refuse or recyclables in any stream or body of water in the city.
(Ord. 1631, passed 12-19-2022)
§ 50.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person who shall violate any provision of §§
50.01 to
50.05 shall, upon conviction, before a District Justice, be guilty of a summary
offense and shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $300 and costs of
prosecution or, in default of payment of such fine and costs, to undergo
imprisonment for not more than 30 days; provided, each violation of any
provision of §§
50.01 to
50.05, and each day the same is continued shall be deemed a separate offense.
   (C)   Any person violating any of the provisions of §§
50.20 to
50.28 may, on conviction in a summary proceeding, be subjected to a fine of not
less than $10 nor more than $300 for each offense together with costs of
prosecution, and in default of payment thereof undergo imprisonment in the
county jail for a term not in excess of 30 days.
(Ord. 1224, passed 2-7-1977; Ord. 1349, passed 6-17-1991)
CHAPTER 51: WATER
Section
   
51.01   Title
   
51.02   Definitions
   
51.03   Metered rates
   
51.04   Flat rates
   
51.05   Special rates
   
51.06   Application for service
   
51.07   Service connections
   
51.08   Building connections
   
51.09   Fire service
   
51.10   Meters
   
51.11   Discontinuance of service
   
51.12   Construction by city forces
   
51.13   Payment for service
   
51.14   Main extensions
   
51.15   Credits for main extensions; existing streets and roads
   
51.16   Credits for main extensions, new developments
   
51.17   Computation of credits
   
51.18   Water service, general
   
51.19   Additional fees and charges
 
   
51.99   Penalty
Editor’s Note:
   See also city’s fee schedule
§ 51.01 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Water Rate and
Regulation Ordinance of the City of Corry”.
(Ord. 1179, passed 2-5-1973; Ord. 1626, passed 12-19-2022)
§ 51.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with
the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the
plural number include the singular number and words in the singular number
include the plural number. The word “shall” is always mandatory and not merely
directory.
   CITY. The City of Corry, Erie County, Pennsylvania, and/or its duly
authorized employees.
   CITY PROPERTY. Property owned or leased by the city.
   CONSUMER. The party contracting for water service to a property.
   OWNER. The owner of the real estate to which water is furnished.
   PERSON. Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company,
organization or entity of any kind.
(Ord. 1179, passed 2-5-1973 ; Ord. 1626, passed 12-19-2022)
§ 51.03 METERED RATES.
   (A)    Each metered consumer or owner to which water shall be furnished by
the city, shall pay the city for the same in accordance with the following
schedule of rates and minimum charges, which shall be for each gallon.
   (B)   Residential, commercial, public and industrial:
 
Water Used                                Rate
Base charge for each meter per month      $19.38 flat rate
0-2,500 gallons of water per month        $0.0082 per gallon
2,501 and over gallons of water per month $0.0074 per gallon
 
Size of Meter Minimum per Month Allowance
Size of Meter Minimum per Month Allowance
5/8 inch      $25.53            750 gallons
3/4 inch      $31.68            1,500 gallons
1 inch        $39.88            2,500 gallons
1-1/2 inch    $76.88            7,500 gallons
2 inch        $132.38           15,000 gallons
3 inch        $243.38           30,000 gallons
4 inch        $650.38           85,000 gallons
6 inch        $1,871.38         250,000 gallons
8 inch        $3,721.38         500,000 gallons
 
   (C)   The customer shall pay the minimum charge only when the amount
resulting by applying the meter rate to the quantity of water consumed is less
than the minimum charge. When such amount is greater than said minimum charge,
then that amount shall constitute the bill for service rendered.
   (D)   Residential unit multiplier. 
      (1)   A structure serviced by a single water meter which supplies water
to multiple residential dwelling units shall be charged a multiple of the base
fee established per this section.
      (2)   Examples.
         (a)   A duplex would be billed two times the base fee in addition to
the water usage rate.
         (b)   A structure containing 25 individual residential dwelling units
would be billed 25 times the base fee in addition to the water usage rate.
(Ord. 1565, passed 12-19-2016; Ord. 1574, passed 12-18-2017; Ord. 1587, passed
12-17-2018; Ord. 1599 , passed 12-2-2019; Ord. 1606, passed 12-7-2020; Ord.
1613, passed 12-20-2021; Ord. 1627, passed 12-19-2022; Ord. 1647, passed 12-18-
2023; Ord. 1655, passed 12-16-2024)
§ 51.04 FLAT RATES.
   Each consumer or owner who installs, or has installed, hydrants or fire
service connections to which water shall be furnished by the city, shall pay
the city for the same in accordance with the following schedule; the fee stated
below is the annual rate:
   (A)   Public fire hydrant connection (six inch max): $60 per year;
   (B)   Private fire hydrant connection (six inch max): $50 per year; and
   (C)   Fire connection lines for standpipes and sprinklers:
 
Connection                         Rate
4 inch diameter service connection $60 per year
6 inch diameter service connection $155 per year
8 inch diameter service connection $225 per year
Other connections                  As negotiated
 
   (D)   All rates shown in this section are for furnishing water or making
water available, and for maintenance of the connection within the public right-
of-way. The cost of installation is not included.
   (E)   Since the Fire Department is neither a “consumer” or “owner”, as those
terms are defined in this chapter, neither the city or any of its departments
nor any affiliates or authorities thereof, may charge the Fire Department any
fees in connection with any public fire hydrant connections.
(Ord. 1348, passed 5-20-1991; Ord. 1574, passed 12-18-2017)
§ 51.05 SPECIAL RATES.
   (A)   Construction work. For water furnished for construction work, where,
in the opinion of the city, it is not practical to install or use meters, the
rate to be charged for water shall be fixed by resolution of City Council. The
per diem rate shall not include any required tapping fees or the costs of
running a service to the point within the premises where a meter would normally
be installed, but shall include the connection and disconnection of the
temporary service, which shall only be done by city forces.
   (B)   Circus, bazaar or fair.
      (1)   A circus, bazaar, fair or other type of business which will
temporarily exist at a location from one to ten days, and where the city deems
such charge applicable, and where the city deems it not practical to install or
use meters, shall pay in advance on a per diem basis for water supplied. Such
charges shall be in the amount fixed by resolution of City Council. The per
diem rate shall not include any required tapping fees or the costs of running a
service to the point within the premises where a meter would normally be
installed, but shall include the connection and disconnection of the temporary
service, which shall only be done by city forces.
      (2)   Temporary water: construction, circus, bazaar or fair:
 
Size of Service First Day Each Additional Day
2 inch or less  $32       $18
3 inch          $50       $30
 
   (C)   Non-fire hydrant use.
      (1)   For water furnished from a hydrant for purposes other than fighting
a fire, when the city’s Water Department shall approve such use, and when the
city deems it not practical to install or use a meter for such use, the rate to
be charged shall be fixed by resolution of City Council.
      (2)   In addition to the rates provided for herein above, the user shall
pay the current hourly rate of pay for the services of an employee of the city
to operate the hydrant. This may be waived in cases where the city considers
such use in the public interest, or in cases where the city decides no city
employee is required for hydrant operation.
      (3)   Non-fire hydrant use:
 
Type of Use                           Rate
Metered flow from hydrant             Actual cost of water, plus setup and
                                      teardown labor
Unmetered flow through one 2-1/2 inch $1 per minute
hydrant nozzle
 
   (D)   Deposit required. A deposit, in the amount fixed by resolution of City
Council, to be applied against unpaid bills or damage claims may be required
with each new application for service or renewal of service application. Said
deposits shall be returned to the customer upon termination of the service, or
after 12 consecutive months of billing paid without penalty, if no other
charges remain unpaid. Six percent simple interest (not compounded) shall be
paid on all deposits at the time the deposit is returned. Interest shall start
on the first of the month following the date of deposit and shall end on the
first of the month in which the deposit is returned.
(Ord. 1179, passed 2-5-1973; Ord. 1283, passed 3-1-1982; Ord. 1626, passed 12-
19-2022)
§ 51.06 APPLICATION FOR SERVICE.
   (A)   Application required.
      (1)   Water will be furnished, or service connection made, upon written
application by the property owner, tenant, consumer or agent thereof on a form
furnished by the city for the purpose, and after approval of such application
by the city.
      (2)   Where a water connection has been previously installed and water is
desired, a proper application shall be signed by the owner, tenant, consumer or
agent.
   (B)   New application upon change in ownership or tenancy. A new application
must be made and approved by the city’s Water Department upon any change in
ownership of the property when the owner is the customer, upon any change in
tenancy where the tenant is the consumer or upon any change in the service, as
described in the application. The city may, with five days’ notice, shut off
the service pending an application.
   (C)   Renewal of service. Service will be renewed under a proper application
when the conditions under which such service was discontinued are corrected and
upon the payment of all charges provided in the schedule of rates or tariff of
the city, including the turn-on charge and all bills for labor, supplies and
permits required in shutting off and turning on the water.
   (D)   Deposit required. A deposit of $50 to be applied against unpaid bills
or damage claims may be required with each new application for service. Said
deposits shall be returned to the customer, without interest, upon termination
of service, or after 12 consecutive months of billing paid without penalty, if
no other charges remain unpaid.
(Ord. 1179, passed 2-5-1973; Ord. 1495, passed 4-6-2009 ; Ord. 1626, passed 12-
19-2022)
§ 51.07 SERVICE CONNECTIONS.
   (A)   SERVICE CONNECTION shall mean and include the corporation cock or stop
at the main, the water pipe line from the corporation cock to the curb stop-
cock, the curb stop-cock and curb box.
   (B)   The city shall determine the size of all service connections.
   (C)   (1)   No person except an authorized employee of the city’s Water
Department shall tap any main or distributing pipe. Service connections shall
be tapped and installed by the city from the street main, where a main exists,
to the curb line of the same, including all pipe and stop cock and box, and a
fee shall be charged to the owner of the property with which the connection is
made. The fee for such service connection shall be fixed by resolution of City
Council.
      (2)   Service connection fees are set by the most recent fee schedule, as
amended from time to time and which is on file in the city offices.
   (D)   The entire service connection shall be and remains the property of the
city, and accessible to and under its control, and shall be maintained by the
city. The cost of all permits required for excavation, street opening, or
street or road occupancy, as may be required by the state or local governments,
shall be added to the above fees, if such permits are required.
(Ord. 1179, passed 2-5-1973; Ord. 1256, passed 5-5-1980; Res. 10-02, passed 1-
18-2010 ; Ord. 1626, passed 12-19-2022)  Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.08 BUILDING CONNECTIONS.
   (A)   BUILDING CONNECTION shall mean and include the water pipe line from
(but not including) the curb box and stop to the meter location in the
building, or such other point on the premises where the meter is to be placed.
   (B)   The city shall determine the size of all building connections.
   (C)   (1)   The city shall install and charge for such installation, or may
permit the owner or his or her agent to install at his or her expense, the
building connection for single-family houses on a street where a water main
exists. For two-family housing, multi-family housing, commercial or industrial
users, trailer courts and/or developments, the city may require that the owner
or customer, or his or her agent, install the building connection or
connections, or the city may install said connection. All such installations
shall be made in accordance with city specifications and shall not be less than
four feet below final grade.
      (2)   All connections between the curb stop and the meter for ordinary
single-family domestic installations shall be of three-fourths inch Type K
tubing one-half inch diameter, if approved) and approved fittings for such
tubing. Larger services shall be of such material and of such size as the city
may direct. The building connection shall include an approved shut-off valve at
the meter location. These connections shall be installed in a workmanlike
manner and shall be inspected by the city prior to backfilling of the trench,
and if such installation is not in accordance with good workmanship, the city
may refuse to provide water service. A request for such inspection shall be
made to the city at reasonable hours and with as much advance notice as
practical.
   (D)   The building connection shall be and remains the property of the city,
and accessible to and under its control, and shall be maintained by the owner.
   (E)   The city shall not be liable for defective condition of pipes or
connections. The city shall in no case be liable on account of any defective
condition in any water pipe, or in any trench or ditch dug for the purpose of
laying water pipe by any person or persons desiring to make connections with
any of the city’s mains. It shall always be expressly understood that the
person or persons using such water shall, at all times, keep the pipes and
other connections in a good condition or repair, and shall be liable for all
damages occasioned to any person or property by reason of any defective
condition arising through the want of repair or otherwise, to the water pipe or
the ditches in which the same are laid. The city shall make any repairs in any
building connection when the city deems such repair necessary to conserve water
or because of contamination hazards. Said repair may be made without prior
notice and the cost shall be borne by the owner of the premises.
   (F)   Alterations between the street and the meter due to installation of an
additional meter, relocation of meter, changes of grade, or changes in building
walls will be made at the expense of owner or tenant.
   (G)   No water service line may be laid in the same trench or within three
feet of gas or sewer lines or electrical wires, so that repairs or alterations
can be made without damage to either.
   (H)   All meter pits shall be furnished and maintained by the owner or
tenant where such pits are required by the city, such as for service to
unheated buildings or trailers.
   (I)   The owner shall give prompt notice in the case of leakage, and afford
access to the line at any reasonable time. The applicant’s connections and
fixtures shall be maintained in good order, avoiding waste.
   (J)   All plumbers or workers, working on any piping connected to, or to be
connected to, any part of the city water system, shall observe the following
regulations and requirements.
      (1)   No plumber or workman shall do any work that would result in a
violation of any of the provisions of these regulations.
      (2)   Every plumber or worker shall, within 24 hours after the completion
thereof, report to the city of all work done by him or her that might in any
way effect a change in the water rate on the premises on which such work is
done. He or she shall also report any plumbing installation or use of water
that is contrary to any of the provisions of these regulations which might come
to his or her notice.
   (K)   All pipes, meters and fixtures shall at all reasonable hours be
subject to inspection by employees of the city with proper identification.
(Ord. 1179, passed 2-5-1973 ; Ord. 1626, passed 12-19-2022)  Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.09 FIRE SERVICE.
   (A)   No person shall take water from any fire hydrant except for fire
purposes, or with written permission of the city.
   (B)   It shall be expressly understood and agreed by and between the parties
receiving public or private fire service and the city that the city does not
assume any liability as insurers of property or persons; and that the agreement
does not contemplate any special service, pressure, capacity or facility, other
than the ordinary or changing conditions of the city water system which exist
from day to day. The city hereby declares, and it is agreed by the consumer,
that the city shall be free and exempt from any and all claims for injuries to
persons or property by reason of fire, water, or failure to supply water,
pressure or capacity.
   (C)   There shall be filed as part of each application for public or private
fire service (and, if required, of all applications for special services or
supplies) full details, plans or copies thereof, showing the location of all
pipes, valves and hose connections.
   (D)   (1)   All fire connection lines for standpipes and sprinkler systems,
or related fire protection needs, shall be installed at the expense of the
customer, whether public or private. The city shall, in all cases, make the tap
to the main (or install the tee) and shall provide the service to and including
a valve, said valve being located in a curb box on the side of the street, or
within the street. The fee to be charged by the city to the customer for the
service connection from the main to, and including, the valve and box shall be
fixed by resolution of City Council.
      (2)   Fire connection fees are set by the most recent fee schedule, as
amended from time to time and which is on file in the city offices.
   (E)   The fire line from the above mentioned valve into the property shall
be at the expense of the customer, and shall be installed by the customer or
his or her agent, unless the city shall agree to make such installation for
costs as may be agreed upon. All such lines shall be maintained at the expense
of the customer outside of public rights-of-way.
   (F)   The fire service connection from the main, through and including the
curb box and valve, and all portions of the service which are within public
rights-of-way, shall be and remain the property of the city, and shall be
accessible to and under its control.
   (G)   The city may, if it so elects, provide a domestic water service off a
fire service line, if the service is for the same customer. The city shall, in
such cases, provide all extra valving necessary for proper functioning in case
of fire service shut-off.
   (H)   All hydrants shall be furnished at the customer’s expense, including
all pipes and valves. All hydrants shall meet city specifications, except that
nozzle threads may be as requested by the political subdivision in which the
hydrant is to be located. All hydrants in public rights-of-way shall be
maintained and owned by the city.
(Ord. 1179, passed 2-5-1973; Ord. 1256, passed 5-5-1980; Res. 10-02, passed 1-
18-2010 ; Ord. 1626, passed 12-19-2022)  Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.10 METERS.
   (A)   All meters shall be furnished and installed by the city, complete with
couplings, and shall remain the property of the city and subject to its
control. The size and kind of meter shall be as the city deems necessary. They
shall be accessible and conveniently located at a point approved by the city so
as to control the entire supply, and a suitable place and protection therefore
shall be provided by the applicant. It is required by the city that each
applicant shall furnish a flat head (stop-cock or lock wing) meter stop on the
inlet side of the meter. Where pressure reducing valves are required or
installed by the applicant, this installation shall be on the customer’s side
of the meter. Prior to connection to the city water system, applicants having
wells or private water supply shall disconnect their water supply from plumbing
to be metered.
   (B)   Separate meters shall be used for each building supplied with water
and the city may require a separate meter for each tenant in any building.
Where buildings are remodeled to provide individual apartments, the city may
require the installation of a meter for each apartment. A group of buildings on
one site, occupied by one tenant for nonresidential purposes, may be served
through one meter.
   (C)   The separate meter requirement for each tenant, however, shall not
apply to hotels, rooming houses (where light housekeeping is not done) or
houses where the owner or occupant lets only one or more rooms that are not
separated as apartments with separate water fixtures.
   (D)   Separate meters shall be required for all mobile homes or trailers.
   (E)   A customer shall notify the city of any damage to, or the nonworking
of, any meter as soon as it comes to his or her knowledge.
   (F)   (1)   Meters will be maintained by the city so far as wear and tear
are concerned. The consumer, shall, however, at all times, properly protect the
meter upon his or her property from damage, by frost or other cause, and shall
be responsible for the cost of all repairs to any such meter damaged through
his or her negligence or that of any of the members of his or her family, his
or her agents, workmen, servants or employees. Such charge shall be payable in
full at the time when his or her next water bill shall be due and payable. The
fee for such repair of a frozen meter shall be fixed by resolution of City
Council.
      (2)   Frozen meter charges are set by the most recent fee schedule, as
amended from time to time and which is on file in the city offices.
   (G)   No person or persons, except duly authorized employees of the city,
shall repair or work on meters.
   (H)   In case of a disputed account involving the accuracy of a meter, such
meter shall be tested upon the request of the applicant. In the event the meter
so tested is found to have an error in registration of 4% or more, the bills
will be decreased or increased accordingly.
   (I)   (1)   Each request for the test of a meter for accuracy shall be
accompanied by a deposit, the amount of which shall be determined by the size
of the meter as follows: the fee for such meter test shall be fixed by
resolution of City Council.
      (2)   Meter test for accuracy rates are set by the most recent fee
schedule, as amended from time to time and which is on file in the city
offices.
   (J)   If the meter so tested shall be found to have an error in registration
of less than 4%, the deposit shall be retained by the city as compensation for
such test. If the error is found to be 4% or more, then the cost of the test
shall be borne by the city and the amount of the deposit shall be returned to
the applicant.
   (K)   Where water is furnished through a meter, the quantity recorded by it
shall be conclusive for both the applicant and the city, except when the meter
has been found to be registering inaccurately or has ceased to register. In
such case, the quantity may be determined by the average registration of the
meter when in order, or by such other fair and reasonable method as shall be
based upon the best information obtainable.
   (L)   No bypass or connection between the meter and the main shall be made,
maintained or permitted except as may be directed or installed by the city or
upon written permission from the city.
   (M)   The city may require a sealed bypass on any meter where water service
is critical, and such a bypass, or a tandem meter installation, shall be
required on all services one and one-half inch or larger. The cost of the
necessary valves and piping and the cost of their installation shall be borne
by the customer as part of the building connection.
   (N)   (1)   No charge shall be made for the furnishing of any meter, but a
fee as fixed by resolution of City Council shall be charged for the furnishing
and installation of an “outside reading” attachment to any present meter
installation, if requested by the customer. Such installations shall be made by
city forces when scheduling allows, and the cost included with the first water
billing following installation. All new services provided by the city, except
those in meter pits, shall be equipped with such attachments on the meters and
shall be charged as an addition to the original cost of connection for water
service.
      (2)   Outside reading attachment rates are set by the most recent fee
schedule, as amended from time to time and which is on file in the city
offices.
   (O)   (1)   Temporary meter removal shall be made upon request and the fee
for such removal shall be fixed by resolution of City Council. Such fee shall
include reinstallation of the meter during normal working hours upon request of
the customer.
      (2)   Temporary meter removal (reconnection fee): flat fee of an amount
set by the most recent fee schedule, as amended from time to time and which is
on file in the city offices.
(Ord. 1179, passed 2-5-1973; Ord. 1256, passed 5-5-1980; Res. 10-02, passed 1-
18-2010 ; Ord. 1626, passed 12-19-2022)  Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.11 DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE.
   (A)   Service may be discontinued for any of the following reasons:
      (1)   For misrepresentation in application as to property or fixtures to
be supplied or the use to be made of the water supply;
      (2)   For the use of water for any other property or purpose other than
that described in the application, or for failure to make application for
service;
      (3)   For neglecting or refusing entry of an employee of the city, after
proper notice, to any building or premises by an occupant, owner or tenant,
where the purpose of such entry is for inspection, installation, repair or
replacement of a meter, lines or other water system equipment;
      (4)   For willful waste of water through improper or imperfect pipes,
fixtures, meters or otherwise;
      (5)   For failure to protect and maintain in good order the meter
connections, lines or fixtures;
      (6)   For nonpayment of any bill for more than 15 days after the same is
rendered;
      (7)   For molesting any service pipe, meter curb stop-cock, seal or any
other appliance of the city controlling or regulating the water supply;
      (8)   In case of vacancy of premises;
      (9)   For connection of a private water system to the city water system;
or
      (10)   For violation of any rule or regulation herein contained.
   (B)   The city may order the water shut off from any premises connected with
the city mains for repairs, extensions or other necessary purposes.
   (C)   All water rates and charges for water service to premises shall accrue
and be charged against such applicant until such time as written notice, given
by such applicant or by his or her duly authorized agent, to discontinue the
service is filed with the city.
   (D)   It shall be the duty of the owners or agents to which water is
furnished by the city to cooperate with the city by promptly giving notice when
such property becomes vacant. If such notice is not given, the owners or agents
of the property shall be liable for all water charges against such property
until such notice is given or a new application is filed.
   (E)   The city reserves the right to shut off the water in its mains at any
time without notice for making repairs, extensions or alterations, but will so
far as practicable, notify consumers of the intention to shut off. It is
expressly stipulated by the city that no claim shall be made against it by
reason of the breaking of any pipe or for any other interruption of the supply
of water. No person shall be entitled to any damages or to have any option of
payment refunded for any stoppage for purpose of additions or repairs, which,
in the opinion of the city, may be deemed necessary, or for causes beyond its
control.
   (F)   In case of scarcity of water, whenever in its judgment the public
welfare may require it, the city shall have the right to reserve a sufficient
supply of water at all times in its reservoirs to provide for fire and other
emergencies or may restrict or regulate the quantity of water used by
consumers.
   (G)   (1)   A turn-on charge shall be paid where water has been turned off
for any violation of the terms of the application or rules of the city or for
any other reason stated under this section. The fee for such turn-on charge
shall be fixed by resolution of City Council. In such cases, the water shall
not be turned on until all water bills, repair bills and other accounts due to
the city shall have been paid, including the turn-on charge.
      (2)   Turn-on fee: flat fee: $50.
(Ord. 1179, passed 2-5-1973; Ord. 1256, passed 5-5-1980 ; Ord. 1626, passed 12-
19-2022)
§ 51.12 CONSTRUCTION BY CITY FORCES.
   City construction and installation charges for building connections or for
any other construction which is at the expense of the owner, except main
extensions, shall be computed on the basis of the actual hours expended times
the hourly rate of the employees involved, including city paid fringes,
together with the cost of material. The cost of material shall include a 15%
surcharge for waste and handling.
(Ord. 1179, passed 2-5-1973 ; Ord. 1626, passed 12-19-2022)
§ 51.13 PAYMENT FOR SERVICE.
   (A)   Bills for all charges are made in accordance with this chapter and are
due and payable on the fifteenth day of each month for water consumed, work
done, or services rendered during the preceding bill cycle. If the bill for
water furnished is not paid by the fifteenth day of the month a penalty of 10%
will be added, with a minimum penalty of $.10 for any one bill. If the
fifteenth day of the month falls on a Saturday, Sunday or holiday, bills may be
paid without penalty on the next business day.
   (B)   Bills for service to the federal government, state or local
governments, or their departments and institutions shall be payable without
penalty within 30 days of the date rendered.
   (C)   If any bill is not paid prior to the date of adding penalty, service
may be discontinued after five days’ written notice.
   (D)   (1)   The city may, at its option, in cases deemed hardships, enter
into an agreement of time payments, for a period not to exceed one year, for
installation or repair charges on the following:
         (a)   New service or renewal of service for owner of single-family or
owner-occupied multi-family dwellings; or
         (b)   Damage to city owned property.
      (2)   All such time payments shall bear interest in the amount of 6%, not
compounded, on the unpaid balance, until paid.
   (E)   All meters shall be read at least quarterly, and bills shall be
rendered as stated above. If the meter reader is unable to procure a monthly
reading of the meter, because ingress to the meter is obstructed in any manner,
or entrance to the premises is made precarious by a vicious dog, or for any
other reason, an estimate shall be made of the amount of water consumed, and
the billing shall be based on the estimate.
   (F)   In addition to the foregoing remedy and such other remedies as are
provided by law for the collection of delinquent water rents, it shall be
lawful for the proper officers of the city to file a lien or liens against the
property for any and all delinquent accounts, in the same manner provided by
law in the case of unpaid city taxes on real estate and to proceed to collect
the same.
(Ord. 1179, passed 2-5-1973; Ord. 1565, passed 12-19-2016; Ord. 1587, passed
12-17-2018; Ord. 1599 , 12-2-2019; Ord. 1606, passed 12-7-2020; Ord. 1613,
passed 12-20-2021; Ord. 1626, passed 12-19-2022; Ord. 1627, passed 12-19-2022;
Ord. 1647, passed 12-18-2023)
§ 51.14 MAIN EXTENSIONS.
   (A)   The city may refuse the extension of any main because of insufficient
water supply, lack of anticipated revenue sufficient to justify city
expenditures or for any other reason deemed fit by the city.
   (B)   The cost of the extension of any main shall be borne by the political
subdivision in which it is located or by such person as may agree to pay for
the extension, except for such credits as hereinafter specified.
   (C)   City specifications shall be followed in all construction of water
mains. Such specifications shall be approved by City Council and be kept on
file in the office of the City Engineer.
   (D)   All permits required by the state or federal government, or their
agencies, for extensions of mains shall be secured by the political subdivision
in which the main extension is to be constructed, or shall be secured by such
person as the political subdivision may delegate.
   (E)   Adequate plans and dimensions shall be submitted to the City Council
to secure approval for main extensions. Such plans shall be submitted by the
political subdivision in which the extension is to be made. All bidding
documents required for contracting such work done, including all drawings,
specifications, bid forms, advertisements, and permits shall be provided by
said political subdivision. The city may require that such plans submitted for
major extensions shall be certified to by a professional engineer licensed in
Pennsylvania.
   (F)   The minimum size of all main extensions shall be as the city deems
necessary, and shall be in accordance with accepted good engineering practice.
Any political subdivision desiring to install smaller mains shall provide proof
of adequacy for all potential needs. The size of the existing mains from which
extensions are proposed shall not be a limiting factor in sizing of main
extensions. The city reserves the right to regulate the use of cross-
connections from another source of its mains.
   (G)   All main extensions not constructed by city forces shall be inspected
and tested by the city, and the actual cost of said inspection and testing
shall be billed by the city and considered in all respects as a part of the
cost of extending the main or mains. No trench shall be closed on any new main
installation until said installation is approved by the city. The city may,
with City Council approval, allow such inspection and testing to be done by a
professional engineer registered in the State of Pennsylvania, providing such
approval is given before the project is underway, and providing that all costs
are borne by the political subdivision in which the extension occurs, or by
such other person as may agree to pay such costs.
   (H)   Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the city from electing to
install all or any part of any main extension with city forces, or to negotiate
with any political subdivision, person or firm as to a charge for such work,
whether said extensions are in public right-of-way or within private property.
   (I)   Main extensions shall be permitted in proposed subdivisions only if
such subdivision meets all county and/or local subdivision regulations, as may
apply, and only if the political subdivision in which the development is
located has agreed to accept and maintain the streets and roads therein.
   (J)   All main extensions into private developments shall be at the expense
of the developer, except for such credits as hereinafter specified.
   (K)   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as prohibiting any
political subdivision from entering into agreements with developers for the
purpose of sharing in the cost of the extensions of water mains.
   (L)   Upon completion of any main extension, including testing, chlorination
and final approval by the City Engineer, the main extension shall be accepted
by the city as part of its water distribution system and shall become the
property of, and be maintained by, the city.
(Ord. 1179, passed 2-5-1973 ; Ord. 1626, passed 12-19-2022)
§ 51.15 CREDITS FOR MAIN EXTENSIONS; EXISTING STREETS AND ROADS.
   (A)   A credit equal to the cost of furnishing and installing 35 feet of the
main extension for each bonafide customer may be credited against the total
cost of the main extension by the city. In cases where the main extension is
not to be made with city forces, the city may elect to pay said credit or to
install such portion of the main, with its own forces, as will equal the credit
based on 35 feet per bonafide customer.
   (B)   In determining the length of and necessity for any extension to a bona
fide customer, the terminal point of such extension shall, in all cases, be to
or beyond that point which lies in the road or street and which is located in
such fashion that the service and building connections can be installed at
right angles to the main to serve the proposed meter location on the last lot
for which service is requested. However, in the extension of any system of
distribution mains to a real estate development, the length of mains shall
include any necessary additional mains required for the rendition of adequate
service within the development.
   (C)   A BONAFIDE CUSTOMER within the meaning of this chapter shall mean a
prospective customer who has signed an application for water service and
agreed, in writing, to have water furnished by the city for a period of one
year or more.
(Ord. 1179, passed 2-5-1973 ; Ord. 1626, passed 12-19-2022)
§ 51.16 CREDITS FOR MAIN EXTENSIONS, NEW DEVELOPMENTS.
   (A)   (1)   A credit equal to the cost of furnishing and installing 35 feet
of main for each customer who actually connects to such main extension during a
period of five years may be paid by the city toward reimbursing the cost of
construction of mains in new streets or roads in private developments, if such
streets or roads are accepted and maintained by the political subdivision in
which they are located and meet all applicable subdivision and zoning
regulations.
      (2)   No reimbursement shall be made except through a written contract
with the city, on city forms and which is executed prior to construction of the
mains.
      (3)   The period of five years during which such reimbursement can be
made shall commence on the date of acceptance of said mains by the city.
   (B)   The payments of the credits for the customer who connect shall be made
by the city to the developer within 30 days after the first monthly water bill
is paid for said service by the customer.
   (C)   The total credits paid the developer shall in no case exceed the total
cost of the main. Capped service lines from the main to a point two feet inside
the curb line may be included in said total cost of main, if installed with
curb cock. No tapping fee will be required in such installations.
   (D)   The city may require documentation from the developer as to total
costs when the mains are not installed by the city.
(Ord. 1179, passed 2-5-1973 ; Ord. 1626, passed 12-19-2022)
§ 51.17 COMPUTATION OF CREDITS.
   (A)   In computing the credit for 35 feet of main or main extension, the
city shall use the latest costs available from its own records or those of the
water supply company, where applicable, for main construction of a similar size
and nature installed by city or water supply company personnel. Allowances
shall be made for unusual circumstances such as stream crossings or boring. The
computation shall include all direct material and labor costs together with 15%
of such costs for wage fringes, handling, waste and other overhead.
   (B)   The above computation shall be used to establish the value of credits
for all mains or main extensions installed by other than city forces. Said
value shall not be changed after start of construction.
   (C)   The credit to be used for mains installed by city forces shall be the
actual costs of construction determined as in division (A) above, including the
15% overhead.
(Ord. 1179, passed 2-5-1973 ; Ord. 1626, passed 12-19-2022)
§ 51.18 WATER SERVICE, GENERAL.
   (A)   No person will be allowed to furnish water to others except in
temporary emergency. In case of violation, water may be shut off, after due
notice, and the person supplying said water charged with an estimated bill for
water so supplied.
   (B)   Should any person or persons move into any premises supplied with
water from the city mains, without making a written application in the manner
provided therefor, and uses water, then such person or persons shall become
responsible for all water used from the date of the last reading previous to
their occupying such premises. Failure to pay the same shall be cause for
disconnecting such service until the amount due is paid.
   (C)   Where any customer is liable to the city for water furnished at one
place, and is thereafter located using water at some other place, the water
shall be turned off at the new location until all valid accounts past due are
paid.
   (D)   Where two or more occupants use the same house or apartment, and the
water account is in the name of one, and the one in whose name the account
stands moves away, the remaining occupant is also responsible for any unpaid
water bills.
   (E)   All meters, curb cocks, valves and meter boxes connected with the city
mains and service pipes, including those furnished at the expense of the
consumers or property owners, shall remain under the direct control of the
city, and no person or persons other than those authorized by the city shall
connect or disconnect, remove seals from, move or otherwise tamper with any
such meter or turn on or off the water at the curb cock, valve or meter, or to
open, move or tamper with any meter box, or open any meter box in any way.
   (F)   No person shall take or use water from the city water system except
under the terms and conditions specified in these regulations.
   (G)   The city may inquire into and investigate into the cause of any
unusual flow or unnecessary waste of water upon or within any premises served.
If such flow or waste results from want of repair of any pipe or other fixture,
it shall require the owner of such premises to make such necessary repairs
within ten days. Upon failure of such owner to make such repairs within the
time, it shall have authority to shut off the supply of water leading to such
premises. Such water shall not again be turned on until the consumer shall have
made the required repairs and paid the fee of $50 which is herein established
for such service.
   (H)   All contractors, persons or corporations who open, grade, regrade,
fill, excavate or work any street or alley shall give ten days’ written notice
to the city for the removal, raising or lowering of any water mains, pipes,
fittings, meters or other city material that may interfere with such work. Upon
failure to furnish such notice, any damage resulting from such failure will be
charged against such contractor, person or corporation responsible.
   (I)   Whenever water shall be used on any metered premises for fire
protection or firefighting, in an actual case of fire or conflagration, no
charge shall be made for the water so used and the amount of water so used
shall be ascertained by comparison with the average use of water during a
corresponding billing period, as shown by the meter.
   (J)   City Water Department employees shall have the right at any and all
reasonable hours to enter upon or into any premises to which water is supplied
by the city, for the purpose of inspecting any pipe, fixture, setting, reading
or repairing any meter, turning water off or on and enforcing the provisions of
these regulations generally. No person shall deny entrance to any such premises
to any officer or employee hereby granted such right of entry.
   (K)   Whoever intentionally, by any means or device, prevents water from
passing through any meter belonging to the city, or used in connection with the
supply of water to any customer by the city, to register the amount of water
passing through such meter, or intentionally prevents a meter from duly
registering the quantity of water supplied, or in any way interferes with its
proper action or just registration, or without the consent in writing of the
city intentionally diverts any water from any pipe or pipes of the city or
otherwise intentionally uses, or causes to be used, without the consent of the
city, any water produced or distributed by the city, or any person who retains
possession of or refuses to deliver any meter or other appliance loaned to him
or her by the city for the purpose of furnishing water through the city shall
for every offense suffer a penalty as hereinafter provided. The presence at any
time on or about any such meter or pipe of any device or pipes resulting in the
diversion of water or prevention of its free passage and registration by the
meter or diverting from the meter as above defined or resulting in the
prevention of water from reaching the meter, or preventing the just
registration of the meter or meters or the taking of any water except through a
meter as above set forth shall constitute prima facie evidence of knowledge on
the part of the person owning or having custody and control of the room,
building, place or premises where such device or pipe is of the existence
thereof and knowledge of such existence to the person who would be benefitted
by the failure of the water to be properly metered, and shall further
constitute prima facie evidence of intention on the part of such person or
persons to defraud, and shall bring such person prima facie within the scope,
meaning and penalties of these regulations.
(Ord. 1179, passed 2-5-1973 ; Ord. 1626, passed 12-19-2022)  Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.19 ADDITIONAL FEES AND CHARGES.
   (A)   Customer deposit: deposit required $50.
   (B)   Returned check for insufficient funds: flat fee $35.
   (C)   Shut-off prevention fee: flat fee $50.
(Res. 10-02, passed 1-18-2010)
§ 51.99 PENALTY.
   An person violating any of the provisions of this chapter may, on conviction
in a summary proceeding, be subjected to a fine of not less than $50 nor more
than $1,000 for each offense, together with costs of prosecution, and in
default of payment thereof undergo imprisonment in the county jail for a term
not in excess of 30 days.
(Ord. 1179, passed 2-5-1973 ; Ord. 1626, passed 12-19-2022)
CHAPTER 52: SEWER
Section
General Provisions
   
52.001   Purpose and policy
   
52.002   Administration
   
52.003   Abbreviations
   
52.004   Definitions
Sanitary Sewerage System
   
52.015   Connection to POTW required; privies and the like prohibited
   
52.016   Stormwater runoff prohibited in sanitary sewers
   
52.017   Discharge of unpolluted water; cost reduction
   
52.018   Garbage prohibited in system; exception
   
52.019   Manholes for sampling industrial wastes
   
52.020   No rate reduction for low-strength wastes
   
52.021   Determination of amount of sewage discharged; reduction in sewage
bills
   
52.022   Regulation by city
General Sewer Use Requirements
   
52.035   Prohibited discharge standards
   
52.036   National categorical pretreatment standards
   
52.037   State pretreatment standards
   
52.038   Local limits
   
52.039   City’s right of revision
   
52.040   Dilution
   
52.041   Special agreements and waivers
   
52.042   Pretreatment facilities
   
52.043   Additional pretreatment measures
   
52.044   Accidental discharge/slug control plans
   
52.045   Hauled wastewater
Wastewater Discharge Permits
   
52.060   Wastewater analysis
   
52.061   Wastewater discharge permit requirement
   
52.062   Wastewater discharge permitting: existing connections
   
52.063   Wastewater discharge permitting: new connections
   
52.064   Wastewater discharge permit application contents
   
52.065   Application signatories and certification
   
52.066   Wastewater discharge permit decisions
   
52.067   Wastewater discharge permit duration
   
52.068   Wastewater discharge permit contents
   
52.069   Wastewater discharge permit appeals
   
52.070   Wastewater discharge permit modification
   
52.071   Wastewater discharge permit transfer
   
52.072   Wastewater discharge permit revocation
   
52.073   Wastewater discharge permit reissuance
Reporting Requirements
   
52.085   Baseline monitoring reports
   
52.086   Compliance schedule progress reports
   
52.087   Reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadline
   
52.088   Periodic compliance reports
   
52.089   Reports of charged conditions
   
52.090   Reports of potential problems
   
52.091   Reports from unpermitted users
   
52.092   Notice of violation/repeat sampling and reporting
   
52.093   Notification of the discharge of hazardous waste
   
52.094   Analytical requirements
   
52.095   Sample collection
   
52.096   Timing
   
52.097   Record keeping
Compliance
   
52.110   Right of entry; inspection and sampling
   
52.111   Search warrants
   
52.112   Confidential information
   
52.113   Administrative enforcement remedies
   
52.114   Judicial enforcement remedies
   
52.115   Supplemental enforcement action
   
52.116   Affirmative defenses to discharge violations
   
52.117   Pretreatment charges and fees
Sewer Use Charges
   
52.130   Sewer use charge imposed
   
52.131   Sewer rates; rate changes
   
52.132   Payment schedule; late penalty
   
52.133   Properties using other than city water
   
52.134   Sewer fund
Sewer and Utility Connections
   
52.145   Sewer connection; permit required
   
52.146   Application to city
   
52.147   Sewer permit fees
   
52.148   City may order connections
   
52.149   Streets to be restored to former condition
   
52.150   Continuing to discharge runoff
Sewer Rates
   
52.165   Title
   
52.166   Definitions
   
52.167   Rental or charge on all users
   
52.168   Use of funds
   
52.169   Charges, users within the city
   
52.170   Charges, users outside the city
   
52.171   Basis of determining water use
   
52.172   Computation of water use
   
52.173   Metering of sewers
   
52.174   More than one water meter
   
52.175   Meters serving more than one household or establishment
   
52.176   Meters serving both inside and outside of the city
   
52.177   Application for service
   
52.178   Deposit
   
52.179   Billing
   
52.180   Furnishing and installing meters
   
52.181   Access to premises
   
52.182   Other contracts
   
52.183   Discontinued water service
   
52.184   Miscellaneous provisions
Wastewater Treatment Plant
   
52.195   Rates for dumping at treatment plant
 
   
52.999   Penalty
   
Appendix A: Civil penalty assessment policy
Editor’s Note:
   See also city’s fee schedule
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 52.001 PURPOSE AND POLICY.
   (A)   This chapter sets forth uniform requirements for users of the Publicly
Owned Sewage Treatment Works (POTW) for the city and enables the city to comply
with all applicable state and federal laws, regulations and permits, including
without limitation, the Federal Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.) the
USEPA General Pretreatment Regulations (40 C.F.R. part 403), the state’s Clean
Streams Law (35 P.S. §§ 691.1 et seq.) the PADEP Standards for Dischargers of
Industrial Wastes to POTWs (25 Pa. Code Chapter 95) and the city’s NPDES Permit
No. PA0028223.
   (B)   The objectives of this chapter are:
      (1)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the publicly owned
treatment works that will interfere with its operation;
      (2)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the publicly owned
treatment works that will pass through the publicly owned treatment works,
inadequately treated, into receiving waters, or otherwise be incompatible with
the publicly owned treatment works;
      (3)   To protect both publicly owned treatment works personnel who may be
affected by wastewater and sludge in the course of their employment and the
general public;
      (4)   To promote reuse and recycling of industrial wastewater and sludge
from the publicly owned treatment works;
      (5)   To provide for charges for the implementation of the city’s
pretreatment program relating to the publicly owned treatment works; and
      (6)   To enable the city to comply with its National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System permit (NPDES Permit No. PA002S223) conditions, sludge use
and disposal requirements, and any other federal or state laws and/or
regulations to which the publicly owned treatment works is subject.
   (C)   This chapter shall apply to all users of the publicly owned treatment
works. This chapter authorizes the issuance of wastewater discharge permits,
provides for monitoring, compliance and enforcement activities; establishes
administrative review procedures; provides for sewer user reporting; and
provides for the setting of charges and fees for the equitable distribution of
costs relating to the implementation of the pretreatment program established
herein.
(Ord. 1433, passed 7-1-2002)
§ 52.002 ADMINISTRATION.
   Except as otherwise provided herein, the coordinator shall administer,
implement and enforce the provisions of this chapter in accordance with the
purposes, policies and objectives as set forth in this chapter. Any powers
granted to or duties imposed upon the coordinator may be delegated by the
coordinator to other city personnel.
(Ord. 1433, passed 7-1-2002)
§ 52.003 ABBREVIATIONS.
   The following abbreviations, when used in this chapter, shall have the
designated meanings:
BOD          biochemical oxygen demand (5-day)
CFR          Code of Federal Regulations
City         City of Corry, Erie County, Pennsylvania
COD          chemical oxygen demand
DEP or PADEP Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection
EPA or USEPA U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
gpd          gallons per day
mg/l         milligrams per liter
NPDES        National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
POTW         publicly owned treatment works
RCRA         Resource Conservation and Recovery Act
SIC          Standard Industrial Classification
TSS          total suspended solids
U.S.C.       United States Code
 
(Ord. 1433, passed 7-1-2002)
§ 52.004 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACT or THE ACT. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the
Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.
   AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF THE USER.
      (1)   If the user is a corporation:
         (a)   The president, secretary, treasurer or a vice-president of the
corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who
performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the corporation; or
         (b)   The manager of one or more manufacturing, production or
operation facilities employing more than 250 persons or having gross annual
sales or expenditures exceeding $25,000,000, if authority to sign documents has
been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate
procedures.
      (2)   If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship, a general
partner or proprietor, respectively.
      (3)   If the user is a federal, state or local governmental facility: a
director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation
and performance of the activities of the government facility, or its designee.
      (4)   The individuals described in divisions (1) through (3) above may
designate another authorized representative if the authorization is in writing,
the authorization specifies the individual or position responsible for the
overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or having
overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company and the
written authorization is submitted to the city.
   BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND or BOD. The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures
for five days at 20°C, usually expressed as a concentration (e.g., mg/l). It
shall be determined by one of the methods acceptable to USEPA and PADEP as
specified in 40 C.F.R. part 136 or otherwise, if no such method is specified by
the foregoing, by one of the acceptable methods described in the latest edition
of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Sewage, published by the
American Public Health Association.
   CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD or CATEGORICAL STANDARD. Any regulation
containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by EPA in accordance with §§
307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317(b) and (c)) which apply to a
specific category of users and which appear in 40 C.F.R. Chapter I, Subchapter
N.
   CITY. The City of Corry, Erie County, Pennsylvania.
   COMBINED SEWER. A sewer designed to receive both sewage and stormwater
runoff.
   COORDINATOR or PRETREATMENT COORDINATOR. The person designated by the city
to supervise the pretreatment program for the POTW, and who is charged with
certain powers, duties and responsibilities by this chapter, or a duly
authorized representative thereof.
   DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION (PEP or PADEP). The Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection or, where appropriate, the Regional
Water Quality Program Manager, or other duly authorized official of such
Department.
   DOMESTIC USER. An owner of a single-family dwelling, flat, duplex or multi-
unit dwelling of four units or less.
   ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY (EPA or USEPA). The U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the Regional Water Protection Division
Director or other duly authorized official of such Agency.
   EXISTING SOURCE. Any source of discharge, the construction or operation of
which commenced prior to the publication by EPA of proposed categorical
pretreatment standards, which will be applicable to such source if the standard
is thereafter promulgated in accordance with § 307 of the Act, being 33 U.S.C.
§ 1317.
   GARBAGE. Solid wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food
and from the handling, storage and sale of produce.
   GRAB SAMPLE. A sample which is taken from a wastestream without regard to
the flow in the wastestream and over a period of time not to exceed 15 minutes
or as reasonably determined by the coordinator.
   INDIRECT DISCHARGE or DISCHARGE. The introduction of pollutants into the
POTW from any nondomestic source regulated under § 307(b), (c) or (d) of the
Act, being 33 U.S.C. §§ 1317(b), (c), (d).
   INDUSTRIAL WASTES. Any liquid, gaseous or waterborne wastes from industrial
processes or commercial establishments, as distinct from sanitary sewage.
   INSTANTANEOUS MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE DISCHARGE LIMIT. The maximum concentration
or mass loading limit of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time,
determined from the analysis of any discrete or composited sample collected,
independent of the industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling event.
   INTERFERENCE. A discharge, which alone or in conjunction with a discharge or
discharges from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment
processes or operations or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and
therefore, is a cause of a violation of the city’s NPDES permit, of the Federal
Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.), the Federal Clean Air Act (42
U.S.C. §§ 7401 et seq.), the state’s Clean Streams Act (35 P.S. §§ 691.1 et
seq.), the state’s Air Pollution Control Act (35 P.S. §§ 4001 et seq.) or the
regulations applicable to any of the foregoing, or of the prevention of sewage
sludge use or disposal in compliance with any of the following statutory/
regulatory provisions or permits issued thereunder, or any more stringent state
or local regulations: § 405 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1345); the Solid Waste
Disposal Act (42 U.S.C. §§ 6901 et seq.), including Title II commonly referred
to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA) (42 U.S.C. §§ 6901 et
seq.); any state regulations contained in any state sludge management plan
prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 U.S.C. §§
6941 et seq.); the Clean Air Act (42 U.S.C. §§ 7401 et seq.); the Toxic
Substances Control Act (15 U.S.C. §§ 2601 et seq.); and the Marine Protection,
Research and Sanctuaries Act (16 U.S.C. §§ 1431 et seq. and 33 U.S.C. §§ 1401
et seq.)
   MASS LOADING LIMIT or MASS LIMITATION. The pounds per day (or other
specified interval) of a particular pollutant allowed to be discharged to the
POTW at any time.
   MEDICAL WASTE. Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood
products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding,
surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes and dialysis
wastes.
   NEW SOURCE.
      (1)   Any building, structure, facility or installation from which there
is (or may be) a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced
after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under § 307(c) of the
Act, being 33 U.S.C. § 1317(c), which will be applicable to such source if such
standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided
that:
         (a)   The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed
at a site at which no other source is located;
         (b)   The building, structure, facility or installation totally
replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of
pollutants at an existing source; or
         (c)   The production or wastewater generating processes of the
building, structure, facility or installation are substantially independent of
an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are
substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility
is integrated with the existing plant and the extent to which the new facility
is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source should
be considered.
      (2)   Construction on a site at which an existing source is located
results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not
create a new building, structure, facility or installation meeting the criteria
of divisions (1)(b) or (1)(c) above but otherwise alters, replaces or adds to
existing process or production equipment.
      (3)   Construction of a NEW SOURCE as defined under this division has
commenced if the owner or operator has:
         (a)   Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous onsite
construction program:
            1.   Any placement, assembly or installation of facilities or
equipment; or
            2.   Significant site preparation work including clearing,
excavation or removal of existing buildings, structures or facilities which is
necessary for the placement, assembly or installation of new source facilities
or equipment.
         (b)   Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase
of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation
within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be
terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility,
engineering and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under
this division.
   NONCONTACT COOLING WATER. Water used for cooling which does not come into
direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste product or
finished product.
   NONDOMESTIC USER. Any user other than a domestic user.
   OCCUPIED BUILDING. Any structure erected and intended for continuous or
periodic habitation, occupancy or use by human beings or animals, and from
which structure sanitary sewage and industrial wastes, or either thereof, are
or may be discharged.
   PASS THROUGH. A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the United
States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a
discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any
requirement of the city’s NPDES permit, including an increase in the magnitude
or duration of a violation.
   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint stock company, limited liability company,
limited liability partnership, trust, estate, governmental entity or any other
legal entity; or their legal representatives, agents or assigns. This
definition includes all federal, state and local governmental entities.
   pH. A measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a solution, expressed in
standard units.
   POLLUTANT. Dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash,
sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes,
biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded
equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, municipal, agricultural and industrial
wastes and certain characteristics of wastewater (e.g., pH, temperature, TSS,
turbidity, BOD, COD, toxicity or odor).
   PRETREATMENT. The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of
pollutants or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in
wastewater prior to, or in lieu of, introducing such pollutants into the POTW.
This reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or
biological processes; by process changes; or by other means, except by diluting
the concentration of the pollutants unless allowed by an applicable
pretreatment standard.
   PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS. Any substantive or procedural requirement related
to pretreatment imposed on a user, other than a pretreatment standard.
   PRETREATMENT STANDARDS or STANDARDS. Pretreatment standards shall mean
prohibited discharge standards, categorical pretreatment standards and local
limits.
   PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS or PROHIBITED DISCHARGES. Absolute
prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances; these prohibitions
appear in §
52.015.
   PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE. The wastes from the preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food that has been shredded to such degree that all particles
will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public
sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension.
   PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW). A treatment works, as defined by §
212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1292), which is owned and/or operated by the city.
This definition includes any devices or systems used in the collection,
storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of sewage, sanitary sewage or
industrial wastes of a liquid nature and any conveyances which convey
wastewater to a treatment plant, including without limitation public pipelines
and pump stations.
   SANITARY SEWAGE. The normal water-carried household and toilet wastes from
residences, business buildings, institutions, industries and commercial
establishments, exclusive of stormwater runoff, surface water or groundwater.
   SANITARY SEWER. A sewer which carries sewage, and to which storm, surface
and groundwaters are not intentionally admitted.
   SEPTIC TANK WASTE. Any sewage from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical
toilets, campers, trailers and septic tanks.
   SEWAGE. Human excrement and gray water (household showers, dishwashing
operations and the like).
   SEWER. A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage or other waste liquids.
   SEWER DIRECTOR or DIRECTOR. The person designated by the city as the
Director of the city’s Department of Streets and Public Improvements, and who
is charged with certain powers, duties and responsibilities by applicable law,
by City Council and under this chapter, or a duly authorized representative
thereof.
   SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER.
      (1)   A user subject to categorical pretreatment standards; or
      (2)   A user that:
         (a)   Discharges an average of 25,000 gpd or more of process
wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling, and boiler
blowdown wastewater);
         (b)   Contributes a process wastestream which makes up 5% or more of
the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment
plant; or
         (c)   Is designated as such by the city on the basis that it has a
reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW’s operation or for
violating any pretreatment standard or requirement.
      (3)   Upon a finding that a user meeting the criteria in division (2)
above has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW’s operation
or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, the city may at any
time, on its own initiative or in response to a petition received from a user,
and in accordance with the procedures in 40 C.F.R. § 403.8(f)(6), determine
that such user should not be considered a significant industrial user.
   SLUG LOAD or SLUG. Any discharge of a non-routine episodic nature, or at a
flow rate or concentration which could cause a violation of the prohibited
discharge standards in §
52.015.
   STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC) CODE. A classification pursuant to
the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the United States
Office of Management and Budget.
   STORM SEWER. A sewer which is intended to carry stormwater runoff, surface
water, groundwater drainage, and the like, but which is not intended to carry
any sanitary sewage or polluted industrial waste.
   STORMWATER. Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural
precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation, including snowmelt.
   SUSPENDED SOLIDS. The total suspended matter that floats on the surface of,
or is suspended in, water, wastewater or other liquid, and which is removable
by laboratory filtering. It shall be determined by one of the methods
acceptable to USEPA and PADEP as specified in 40 C.F.R. part 136 or otherwise,
if no such method is specified by the foregoing, by one of the acceptable
methods described in the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination
of Water and Sewage, published by the American Public Health Association.
   UNPOLLUTED WATER OR WASTE. Any water or waste containing none of the
following: free or emulsified grease or oil; acid or alkali; phenols or other
substances imparting taste and odor to receiving waters; toxic or poisonous
substances in suspension, colloidal state or solution; obnoxious or odorous
gases. It shall contain not more than 10,000 parts per million by weight of
dissolved solids, of which not more than 2,500 parts per million shall be as
chloride and not more than ten parts per million each of suspended solids and
BOD. The color shall not exceed 50 parts per million. Analyses for any of the
abovementioned substances shall be made in accordance with methods acceptable
to USEPA and PADEP as specified in 40 C.F.R. part 136 or otherwise, if no such
method is specified by the foregoing, by one of the acceptable methods
described in the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of
Water and Sewage, published by the American Public Health Association.
   USER. Any user of or discharger to the City of Corry POTW.
   WASTEWATER. Liquid and water-carried industrial wastes and sewage from
residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing
facilities and institutions, whether treated or untreated, which are
contributed to the POTW.
   WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT or TREATMENT PLANT. Those portions of the POTW
which are designed to provide treatment of municipal sewage and industrial
waste.
(Ord. 1433, passed 7-1-2002)
SANITARY SEWERAGE SYSTEM
§ 52.015 CONNECTION TO POTW REQUIRED; PRIVIES AND THE LIKE PROHIBITED.
   (A)   All persons owning any occupied building now erected within the city
upon premises accessible to the POTW shall, if not already connected, at their
own expense, make connection with the POTW within three years after the
effective date of this section or upon the sale or transfer of the property,
whichever comes first. For purposes of this chapter, any property located
within 150 feet of a public sanitary sewer line is deemed accessible to the
POTW.
   (B)   All persons owning any property within the city accessible to the
POTW, but not connected to the system, upon which an occupied building is
hereafter erected shall, at the time of erection of such building, and at their
own expense, make the connection with the POTW.
   (C)   All persons owning any occupied building within the city upon property
which hereafter become accessible to the POTW shall, at their own expense, make
the connection with the POTW within 30 days after notice to do so from the city
or its authorized representative.
   (D)   All connections to the POTW shall be in full compliance with the
International Plumbing Code and any applicable ordinances and permits of the
city. No connection to the POTW shall be made unless and until any and all
necessary permits and approvals, as required by applicable law and the city’s
ordinances, have been received relating thereto.
   (E)   No person owning any occupied building within the city, on property
accessible to the POTW, shall erect, construct, use or maintain, or cause to be
erected, constructed, used or maintained, any privy, cesspool, sinkhole, septic
tank or other receptacle on such premises for receiving sanitary sewage.
   (F)   Upon connection to the POTW, all persons must remove or fill and
abandon all privies, cesspools, sinkholes, septic tanks and any other
receptacles on such premises for receiving sanitary sewage.
   (G)   Any person who erects, constructs or maintains a privy, cesspool,
sinkhole or septic tank or other receptacle for receiving sanitary sewage on
any property within the city accessible to the POTW in violation of this
chapter shall be deemed and shall be declared to be erecting, constructing and
maintaining a nuisance, which nuisance the city is hereby authorized and
directed to abate in any manner provided by law.
   (H)   Nothing in this chapter prevents the temporary use of portable
chemical toilets when used in accordance with applicable state law. (25 Pa.Code
§ 73.64 allows the use of chemical toilets at temporary construction sites,
facilities providing temporary recreational or sporting activities or temporary
seasonal facilities other than those intended for human habitation.)
(Ord. 1433, passed 7-1-2002) Penalty, see §
52.999
§ 52.016 STORMWATER RUNOFF PROHIBITED IN SANITARY SEWERS.
   (A)   The discharge of stormwater runoff to separate sanitary sewers is
hereby prohibited. Persons presently discharging stormwater runoff to separate
sanitary sewers shall cease and desist such practice within three months after
the effective date of this chapter.
   (B)   All persons connecting to the POTW shall provide adequate means for
eliminating and excluding stormwater runoff from their discharge into the POTW.
   (C)   The discharge of stormwater runoff to combined sewers is hereby
prohibited. Persons presently discharging stormwater runoff to combined sewers
shall cease and desist such discharge within 90 days after the date of written
notice to do so from the city.
(Ord. 1433, passed 7-1-2002; Ord. 1562, passed 5-2-2016) Penalty, see §
52.999
§ 52.017 DISCHARGE OF UNPOLLUTED WATER; COST REDUCTION.
   Wherever possible, unpolluted water generated by the user shall be
discharged directly to natural watercourses or storm sewers in accordance with
applicable law. In order to encourage such exclusion of unpolluted water
generated by the user from the POTW, generators of unpolluted water, so
excluded, will be entitled to a corresponding reduction in their sewer bills
subject to and in accordance with the provisions of §
52.021 hereinafter set forth.
(Ord. 1433, passed 7-1-2002)
§ 52.018 GARBAGE PROHIBITED IN SYSTEM; EXCEPTION.
   The discharge of garbage to the POTW is expressly prohibited unless such
garbage is properly shredded. (See §
52.004 - definitions.)
(Ord. 1433, passed 7-1-2002) Penalty, see §
52.999
§ 52.019 MANHOLES FOR SAMPLING INDUSTRIAL WASTES.
   When required by the city, any person, industry or commercial establishment
discharging industrial wastes to the POTW, or industrial wastes in combination
with sanitary sewage, shall install a suitable manhole or manholes on the sewer
or sewers conveying the discharges of such wastes to facilitate observation,
sampling and measurement of such industrial wastes and/or of the combined flow
of waste discharges. Such manholes shall be accessible and shall be provided
with appropriate safety features and constructed in accordance with plans
approved by the city. The manholes shall be installed at the expense of the
person, industry or commercial establishment which discharges the wastes into
the POTW.
(Ord. 1433, passed 7-1-2002)
§ 52.020 NO RATE REDUCTION FOR LOW-STRENGTH WASTES.
   No reduction in sewage charges will be permitted because of the fact that
certain industrial wastes discharged to the POTW may contain less than 300
milligrams per liter of suspended solids or less than 250 milligrams per liter
of BOD or less than 20 milligrams per liter of chlorine requirement.
(Ord. 1433, passed 7-1-2002)
§ 52.021 DETERMINATION OF AMOUNT OF SEWAGE DISCHARGED; REDUCTION IN SEWAGE
BILLS.
   (A)   Whenever a property upon which a sewer rental or use charge is imposed
by the city uses water from the city’s water supply system such that the water
so used is not discharged into the POTW, the quantity of water so used and not
discharged into the city’s sewers shall be measured by a metering or measuring
device approved by the city and installed without cost to the city.
   (B)   Where in the opinion of the city it is not practical to install a
metering or measuring device to continuously determine the quantity of water
not discharged into the POTW, the city shall determine periodically, in such
manner and by such method as it may prescribe, the percentage of water from the
city water supply system discharged into the POTW from such property, and the
quantity of water used to determine the sewerage rental or use charge shall be
the percentage of city water so used by such property.
   (C)   When requested in writing, persons complying with the terms of this
section will be granted a suitable reduction in their sewage bills. Such
reduction shall be calculated on that portion of the sewage consumption
diverted and excluded from the POTW.
   (D)   Persons requesting consideration for a reduction in their sewage bills
because of water excluded from the POTW shall make written application to the
city for such consideration giving their name, address and supporting data
fully describing other sources of incoming water, if any, as well as the
specific disposition of all water alleged not to be entering the POTW. The
application shall be accompanied by a scale drawing showing the plan of the
property, water distribution system, sewer layout, existing meters and proposed
meters in the drawing proposed for determining the quantity of water entering,
and not entering, the POTW.
(Ord. 1433, passed 7-1-2002)
§ 52.022 REGULATION BY CITY.
   The city shall promulgate and enforce such rules and regulations deemed
necessary for the enforcement of this chapter and for the safe, economical and
efficient management, control and protection of the city’s POTW. Such rules and
regulations shall be consistent with the intent and objectives of this chapter.
(Ord. 1433, passed 7-1-2002)
GENERAL SEWER USE REQUIREMENTS
§ 52.035 PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS.
   (A)   General prohibitions.
      (1)   No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW any
pollutant or wastewater which causes pass through or interference.
      (2)   These general prohibitions apply to all users of the POTW whether
or not they are subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any other
national, state or local pretreatment standards or requirements,
   (B)   Specific prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be
introduced into the POTW the following pollutants, substances or wastewater:
      (1)   Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the POTW,
including gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, used motor oil and any other
wastestreams with a closed-cup flashpoint of less than 140°F (60°C) using the
test methods specified in 40 C.F.R. § 261.21;
      (2)   Wastewater having a pH less than 5.0 or more than 12.5, or as more
stringently designated by the coordinator for the purpose of protecting the
POTW or otherwise causing corrosive structural damage to the POTW or equipment;
      (3)   Solid or viscous substances in amounts which will cause obstruction
of the flow in the POTW resulting in interference, but in no case solids
greater than one-half inch in any dimension;
      (4)   Pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, and the
like), released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration
which, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, will cause
interference with the POTW;
      (5)   Wastewater having a temperature greater than 150°F (65°C), or which
will inhibit biological activity in the treatment plant resulting in
interference, but in no case wastewater which causes the temperature at the
introduction into the treatment plant to exceed 104°F (40°C);
      (6)   Petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil, or products of
mineral oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or pass through;
      (7)   Pollutants which result in the presence of flammable, explosive,
toxic gases, vapors or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute
worker health and safety problems;
      (8)   Trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated
by the coordinator in accordance with §
52.045;
      (9)   Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids or other wastewater
which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to
create a public nuisance or a hazard to life, or to prevent entry into the
sewers for maintenance or repair;
      (10)   Wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes except in
compliance with applicable state or federal regulations;
      (11)   Stormwater, surface water, groundwater, artesian well water, roof
runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate, deionized
water, noncontact cooling water and unpolluted wastewater, unless specifically
authorized by the coordinator;
      (12)   Sludges, screenings or other residues from the pretreatment of
industrial wastes;
      (13)   Medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the
coordinator in a wastewater discharge permit;
      (14)   Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other sources,
the treatment plant’s effluent to fail a toxicity test;
      (15)   Detergents, surface-active agents or other substances which may
cause excessive foaming in the POTW;
      (16)   Fats, waxes, oils or greases of animal or vegetable origin in
concentrations greater than 100 mg/l or containing substances which may
solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32°F and 150°F (0°C and
65°C); or
      (17)   Wastewater causing two readings on an explosion hazard meter at
the point of discharge into the POTW, or at any point in the POTW, of more than
5% or any single reading over 10% of the lower explosive limit of the meter.
   (C)   Use of prohibited substances. Pollutants, substances or wastewater
prohibited by this section shall not be processed, handled, stored or disposed
of in such a manner that they could be discharged to the POTW.
(Ord. 1433, passed 7-1-2002) Penalty, see §
52.999
§ 52.036 NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS.
   (A)   The federal categorical pretreatment standards found at 40 C.F.R.
Chapter I, Subchapter N are hereby incorporated by reference. No user shall
introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW any pollutants, substances or
wastewater in violation of any federal categorical pretreatment standard
applicable to such user.
   (B)   Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in terms
of either the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in wastewater, the
coordinator may impose equivalent concentration or mass limits in accordance
with 40 C.F.R. § 403.6(c).
   (C)   When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is
mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the coordinator shall
impose an alternate limit using the combined wastestream formula in 40 C.F.R. §
403.6(e).
   (D)   A user may obtain a variance from a categorical pretreatment standard
if the user can prove, pursuant to the procedural and substantive provisions in
40 C.F.R. § 403.13, that factors relating to its discharge are fundamentally
different from the factors considered by EPA when developing the categorical
pretreatment standard.
   (E)   A user may obtain a net gross adjustment to a categorical standard in
accordance with 40 C.F.R. § 403.15.
(Ord. 1433, passed 7-1-2002)
§ 52.037 STATE PRETREATMENT STANDARDS.
   No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW any
pollutants, substance or wastewater in violation of applicable state law and/or
any state standard applicable to such user.
(Ord. 1433, passed 7-1-2002) Penalty, see §
52.999
§ 52.038 LOCAL LIMITS.
   The city may establish by ordinance, resolution, individual wastewater
discharge permits or otherwise, and review from time to time, local limits
regulating the discharge of specific pollutants by users, which local limits
may be more stringent than those set forth in §§
52.035 through
52.037 above.
   (A)   Local limits may be established for any substance which is discharged
or is likely to be discharged to the POTW sewer system.
   (B)   Local limits may limit concentration, mass or a combination of the
two.
   (C)   Local limits may be established as deemed necessary by the POTW to
prevent interference, pass through, sludge contamination, violations of the
city’s NPDES permit or otherwise to protect the POTW, human health and the
environment.
   (D)   Local limits may be included in individual wastewater discharge
permits or otherwise applied to users as deemed appropriate by the city.
   (E)   Any discharge by a user of any pollutant in excess of any applicable
local limit constitutes a violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 1433, passed 7-1-2002)
§ 52.039 CITY’S RIGHT OF REVISION.
   The city reserves the right to establish, by ordinance, resolution,
individual wastewater discharge permits or otherwise, more stringent standards
or requirements on discharges to the POTW.
(Ord. 1433, passed 7-1-2002)
§ 52.040 DILUTION.
   No user shall ever increase the use of process water, or in any way attempt
to dilute a discharge, as a partial or complete substitute for adequate
treatment to achieve compliance with a discharge limitation unless expressly
authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement. The
coordinator may impose various mass limitations in place of, or in addition to,
concentration-based limitations on users who may be using dilution to meet
applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other cases when the
imposition of mass limitations is appropriate.
(Ord. 1433, passed 7-1-2002) Penalty, see §
52.999
§ 52.041 SPECIAL AGREEMENTS AND WAIVERS.
   (A)   Waiver of requirements other than the federal and state minimum. No
provision of this chapter shall be construed as prohibiting or preventing any
special agreement or arrangement between the city and any user whereby
compatible industrial wastewater discharges of unusual strength or character
may be accepted by the city for treatment, or whereby the city may otherwise
waive or adjust requirements herein, subject to any city-imposed special
conditions and city-imposed capital and usage charges and/or surcharges to the
user. However, in no instance shall a waiver or adjustment be granted by the
city which would result in a violation of applicable law or any applicable
minimum federal or state pretreatment requirement or standard (e.g., National
Categorical Pretreatment Standards).
   (B)   Waiver or adjustment of local limits.
      (1)   The city specifically reserves the right to grant a waiver or
adjustment to any user for any specific local limit developed pursuant to §
52.038, when it can be demonstrated by the user to the satisfaction of the city
that such waiver or adjustment will not result in interference, pass through, a
violation of the city’s NPDES permit or a violation of this chapter.
      (2)   In no case shall any such waiver or adjustment of local limits
allow a user to discharge any pollutant which, in combination with other users’
discharges, would reasonably be expected to exceed the mass loadings determined
by the city as acceptable to the POTW based upon considerations of, among other
things, interference, pass through and sludge contamination. The city may
consider other factors (e.g., effect of the discharge on the POTW’s treatment,
future expansion; whether compliance with the limit would result in a removal
cost wholly out of proportion to the environmental benefits achieved) as it
deems appropriate.
      (3)   The city may require a user requesting such special agreement
waiving or adjusting any such local limit to submit supporting documentation
indicating why the user cannot reasonably expect to meet the local limits,
setting forth an expeditious schedule for obtaining compliance with such local
limits, and such other information as the city may require. In granting a
special agreement the city may impose time limitations upon any less-stringent
requirements and a compliance schedule for achieving full compliance. In
granting any special agreement, the city may impose any other special
conditions deemed necessary or appropriate by the city.
      (4)   If granting a special agreement under this section would result in
increased costs to the city (e.g., capital, operations and maintenance,
treatment, and/or sludge disposal costs), the city may condition the special
agreement upon the agreement of the user to pay such costs, and to provide
security adequate in the city’s judgment to assure payment of such costs. Any
and all special agreements or waivers under this section require the approval
of City Council.
(Ord. 1433, passed 7-1-2002)
§ 52.042 PRETREATMENT FACILITIES.
   Users shall provide wastewater treatment as necessary to comply with this
chapter and shall achieve compliance with all applicable federal categorical
pretreatment standards, state industrial waste discharge standards, local
limits and the prohibitions set out in §
52.035 within the time limitations specified by EPA, the DEP or the city,
whichever is more stringent. Any facilities necessary for compliance shall be
provided, operated and maintained at the user’s expense. Detailed plans
describing such facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the
city for review, and shall be acceptable to the city before such facilities are
constructed. The review of such plans and operating procedures shall in no way
relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying such facilities as
necessary to produce a discharge acceptable to the city under the provisions of
this chapter.
(Ord. 1433, passed 7-1-2002)
§ 52.043 ADDITIONAL PRETREATMENT MEASURES.
   (A)   Whenever deemed necessary, the city may require users to restrict
their discharge during peak flow periods, designate that certain wastewater be
discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/or consolidate points of
discharge, separate sewage wastestreams from industrial wastestreams and such
other conditions as may be necessary to protect the POTW and determine the
user’s compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   The city may require any person discharging into the POTW to install
and maintain, on his or her property and at his or her expense, a suitable
storage and flow-control facility to ensure equalization of flow. An individual
discharge permit may be issued solely for flow equalization.
   (C)   Grease, oil and/or sand interceptors (i.e., traps) provided by the
user, shall be installed by all restaurants discharging to the POTW; provided,
however, that this requirement may be waived by the city on a case-by-case
basis with respect to a restaurant which is not discharging wastewater with oil
and grease in greater that normal domestic sanitary sewage levels. In addition,
grease traps shall be provided and installed by other users when, in the
opinion of the city, they are necessary for the proper handling of any
wastewater containing excessive amounts of grease and oil, or sand; except that
such interceptors shall not be required for domestic users. All interception
units shall be of a type and capacity approved by the city and shall be so
located to be easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Such interceptors
shall be inspected, cleaned and repaired regularly, as needed, by the user at
his or her expense. Records of grease trap inspections and maintenance and
receipts from the discharge or disposal of all grease shall be maintained
onsite at each facility required to have a grease trap.
   (D)   Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may be
required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection meter.
(Ord. 1433, passed 7-1-2002)
§ 52.044 ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGE/SLUG CONTROL PLANS.
   (A)   Each user shall provide protection from any discharge, including, but
not limited to, accidental discharges, discharges of a non-routine, episodic
nature, a non-customary batch discharge, or a slug load or slug, of prohibited
wastewater, materials or other substances regulated by this chapter, or that
may cause potential problems for the POTW. All facilities needed to prevent
such discharges shall be provided and maintained at the user’s own cost and
expense.
   (B)   The coordinator shall periodically evaluate whether each significant
industrial user needs an accidental discharge/slug control plan. The
coordinator may also require any user to develop, submit for approval, and
implement such a plan. Alternatively, the coordinator may develop such a plan
for any user. An accidental discharge/slug control plan shall address, at a
minimum, the following:
      (1)   Description of discharge practices, including non-routine batch
discharges;
      (2)   Description of stored chemicals;
      (3)   Procedures for immediately notifying the POTW of any accidental or
slug discharge, as required by §
52.090; and
      (4)   Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug
discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and
maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and
unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building
of containment structures or equipment, flow equalization measures and/or
facilities, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants, including
solvents, and/or measures and equipment for emergency response.
(Ord. 1433, passed 7-1-2002)
§ 52.045 HAULED WASTEWATER.
   (A)   Septic tank waste may be introduced into the POTW only at locations as
may be designated by the coordinator, and at such times as may be established
by the coordinator; provided, however, that nothing herein shall require the
city or the POTW to accept any hauled or septic tank waste at any time from any
source. Such waste shall not violate this chapter or any other requirements
established by the city. The coordinator may require septic tank waste haulers
to obtain individual wastewater discharge permits.
   (B)   Haulers of any industrial waste shall obtain individual wastewater
discharge permits from the city prior to disposing industrial waste in the city
POTW. The coordinator may require generators of hauled industrial waste to
obtain wastewater discharge permits. The coordinator also may prohibit the
disposal of hauled septic and/or industrial waste. The discharge of hauled
industrial waste is subject to all other requirements of this chapter.
   (C)   Industrial waste haulers may discharge loads only at locations
designated by the coordinator. No load may be discharged without prior consent
of the coordinator. The coordinator may collect samples of each hauled load to
ensure compliance with applicable limits and standards. The coordinator may
require the industrial waste hauler to provide a waste analysis of any load
prior to discharge.
   (D)   Industrial waste haulers must provide a waste-tracking form for every
load. This form shall include, at a minimum, the name and address of the
industrial waste hauler, permit number, truck identification, names and
addresses of sources of waste, and volume and characteristics of waste. The
form shall identify, at a minimum, the type of industry, known or suspected
waste constituents and whether any wastes are RCRA hazardous wastes.
(Ord. 1433, passed 7-1-2002)
WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMITS
§ 52.060 WASTEWATER ANALYSIS.
   When requested by the city, a user must submit information on the nature and
characteristics of its wastewater within 30 days of the request, or within such
other time frame as may be requested by the city. The coordinator is authorized
to prepare a form for this purpose and may periodically require users to update
this information.
(Ord. 1433, passed 7-1-2002)
§ 52.061 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT REQUIREMENT.
   (A)   The city may require various users of the POTW to obtain wastewater
discharge permits as necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter.
   (B)   Any violation of the terms and conditions of a wastewater discharge
permit shall be deemed a violation of this chapter and subjects the wastewater
discharge permittee to the sanctions set forth in §§
52.113 through
52.115 and any other applicable sanctions under federal and state law.
Obtaining a wastewater discharge permit does not relieve a permittee of its
obligation to comply with all federal and state pretreatment standards or
requirements or with any other requirements of federal, state and local law.
   (C)   Any new discharger of industrial waste into the city POTW shall notify
the city of his, her or their intent to discharge at least 30 days prior to
commencing such discharge.
(Ord. 1433, passed 7-1-2002)
§ 52.062 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMITTING: EXISTING CONNECTIONS.
   Any existing user required by the city to obtain a wastewater discharge
permit shall, within 30 days after the date of notification by the city of the
need for a permit, apply to the coordinator for a wastewater discharge permit
in accordance with §
52.064, and shall not cause or allow discharges to the POTW to continue beyond
90 days after the date of such notification by the city except in accordance
with a wastewater discharge permit issued by the coordinator; provided,
however, that the city may allow continued discharge beyond the applicable 90-
day period (prior to permit issuance) for good cause.
(Ord. 1433, passed 7-1-2002)
§ 52.063 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMITTING: NEW CONNECTIONS.
   (A)   Any user required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit who proposes
to begin or recommence discharging into the POTW must obtain such permit prior
to the beginning or recommencing of such discharge.
   (B)   An application for this wastewater discharge permit, in accordance
with §
52.064, must be filed at least 60 days prior to the date upon which any
discharge will begin or recommence.
(Ord. 1433, passed 7-1-2002)
§ 52.064 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT APPLICATION CONTENTS.
   (A)   All users required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit must submit
a permit application. The coordinator may require all users to submit as part
of an application the following information:
      (1)   All information required by §
52.085(B);
      (2)   Description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the
premises, including a list of all raw materials and chemicals used or stored at
the facility which are, or could accidentally or intentionally be, discharged
to the POTW;
      (3)   Number and type of employees, hours of operation and proposed or
actual hours of operation;
      (4)   Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes, and
rate of production;
      (5)   Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum per
day);
      (6)   Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and details
to show all sewers, floor drains and appurtenances by size, location and
elevation, and all points of discharge;
      (7)   Time and duration of discharges; and
      (8)   Any other information as may be deemed necessary by the coordinator
to evaluate the wastewater discharge permit application.
   (B)   Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and will
be returned to the user for revision.
(Ord. 1433, passed 7-1-2002)
§ 52.065 APPLICATION SIGNATORIES AND CERTIFICATION.
   All wastewater discharge permit applications and user reports must be signed
by an authorized representative of the user and contain the following
certification statement:
   “I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were
prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed
to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information
submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system,
or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the
information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true,
accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for
submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and
imprisonment for knowing violations.”
(Ord. 1433, passed 7-1-2002)
§ 52.066 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT DECISIONS.
   The coordinator will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require
additional information. Within 60 days of receipt of a complete wastewater
discharge permit application, the coordinator will determine whether or not to
issue a wastewater discharge permit. The coordinator may deny any application
for a wastewater discharge permit.
(Ord. 1433, passed 7-1-2002)
§ 52.067 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT DURATION.
   A wastewater discharge permit shall be issued for a specified time period,
not to exceed five years from the effective date of the permit. A wastewater
discharge permit may be issued for a period less than five years, at the
discretion of the coordinator. Each wastewater discharge permit will indicate a
specific date upon which it will expire.
(Ord. 1433, passed 7-1-2002)
§ 52.068 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT CONTENTS.
   A wastewater discharge permit shall include such conditions as are deemed
reasonably necessary by the coordinator to prevent pass through or
interference, protect the quality of the water body receiving the treatment
plant’s effluent, protect worker health and safety, facilitate sludge
management and disposal and protect against damage to the POTW.
   (A)   Wastewater discharge permits must contain:
      (1)   A statement that indicates wastewater discharge permit duration,
which in no event shall exceed five years;
      (2)   A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is nontransferable
without prior notification to the city in accordance with §
52.071, and provisions for furnishing the new owner or operator or user with a
copy of the existing wastewater discharge permit;
      (3)   Effluent limits based on applicable pretreatment standards;
      (4)   Self monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification and record-
keeping requirements. These requirements shall include an identification of
pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency and sample
type based on federal, state and local law; and
      (5)   A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for
violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable
compliance schedule. Such schedule may not extend the time for compliance
beyond that required by applicable federal, state or local law.
   (B)   Wastewater discharge permits may contain, but need not be limited to,
the following conditions:
      (1)   Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of
discharge and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization;
      (2)   Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology,
pollution control or construction of appropriate containment devices designed
to reduce, eliminate or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the
treatment works;
      (3)   Requirements for the development and implementation of spill
control plans or other special conditions including management practices
necessary to adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated or non-routine
discharges;
      (4)   Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to
reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW;
      (5)   The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the
management of the wastewater discharged to the POTW;
      (6)   Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and
sampling facilities and equipment;
      (7)   A statement that compliance with the wastewater discharge permit
does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all
applicable federal and state pretreatment standards, including those which
become effective during the term of the wastewater discharge permit; and
      (8)   Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the coordinator to ensure
compliance with this chapter, and all applicable state and federal laws, rules
and regulations.
(Ord. 1433, passed 7-1-2002)
§ 52.069 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT APPEALS.
   (A)   The coordinator shall provide public notice of the issuance,
reissuance, modification, transfer, suspension, revocation or denial of any of
the foregoing, with respect to any wastewater discharge permit. Any person,
including the user, may administratively petition the City Sewer Director to
reconsider such a wastewater discharge permit determination within 30 days of
notice thereof.
   (B)   Failure to submit to the Sewer Director a written timely
administrative petition for reconsideration shall be deemed to be a waiver of
the administrative appeal.
   (C)   In its petition, the appealing party must indicate the wastewater
discharge permit determination provisions objected to, the reasons for this
objection, and the alternative conditions or provisions, if any, it seeks to
place in the wastewater discharge permit.
   (D)   The effectiveness of the wastewater discharge permit determination
shall not be stayed pending the appeal.
   (E)   If the Sewer Director fails to act within 60 days, the administrative
petition for reconsideration shall be deemed to be denied. Decisions not to
reconsider a wastewater discharge permit determination as referenced above,
shall be considered final administrative actions for purposes of subsequent
judicial review.
   (F)   Aggrieved parties seeking judicial review of any final administrative
wastewater discharge permit decision (including without limitation any permit
issuance, modification, transfer, suspension, revocation or denial of any of
the foregoing) by the Sewer Director must appeal such action within 30 days to
the county’s Court of Common Pleas.
   (G)   Any action of the city for which review has been otherwise available
hereunder shall not be subject to administrative or judicial review in any
civil or criminal proceedings for enforcement.
(Ord. 1433, passed 7-1-2002)
§ 52.070 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT MODIFICATION.
   The coordinator, unilaterally or upon application, may modify a wastewater
discharge permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following
reasons:
   (A)   To incorporate any new or revised federal, state or local pretreatment
standards or requirements;
   (B)   To address significant alterations or additions to the user’s
operation, processes or wastewater volume or character since the time of
wastewater discharge permit issuance;
   (C)   A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent
reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge;
   (D)   Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to
the city’s POTW, city personnel or the receiving waters;
   (E)   Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater discharge
permit;
   (F)   Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in
the wastewater discharge permit application or in any required reporting;
   (G)   Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment
standards pursuant to 40 C.F.R. § 403.13;
   (H)   To correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater discharge
permit; or
   (I)   To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership or operation to a new
owner or operator or user. Modification for this purpose may not be allowed
unless the permit is transferable as provided in §
52.071.
(Ord. 1433, passed 7-1-2002)
§ 52.071 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT TRANSFER.
   (A)   Wastewater discharge permits may be transferred to a new owner or
operator only if the permittee gives at least 30 days advance notice to the
coordinator and the coordinator approves the wastewater discharge permit
transfer.
   (B)   The notice to the coordinator must include a written certification by
the new owner or operator or user which:
      (1)   States that the new owner and/or operator and/or user has no
immediate intent to change the facility’s operations and processes;
      (2)   Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur; and
      (3)   Assumes and acknowledges full responsibility and liability for
complying with the existing wastewater discharge permit.
   (C)   Failure to provide advance notice of a transfer and to obtain prior
approval of such transfer renders the wastewater discharge permit void as of
the date of facility transfer.
(Ord. 1433, passed 7-1-2002)
§ 52.072 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT REVOCATION.
   (A)   The coordinator may revoke a wastewater discharge permit for good
cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons:
      (1)   Failure to notify the coordinator of significant changes to the
wastewater prior to the changed discharge;
      (2)   Failure to provide prior notification to the coordinator of changed
conditions pursuant to §
52.089;
      (3)   Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts
in the wastewater discharge permit application;
      (4)   Falsifying self-monitoring reports or otherwise creating,
maintaining and/or providing inaccurate or false information, data, documents
and/or reports with respect to the user’s discharge or any other information or
documentation required to be maintained or provided under this chapter, the
user’s permit, wastewater discharge or applicable federal and state
pretreatment laws and regulations;
      (5)   Tampering with monitoring equipment;
      (6)   Refusing to allow the coordinator timely access to the facility
premises and records;
      (7)   Failure to meet effluent limitations;
      (8)   Failure to pay fines and/or penalties;
      (9)   Failure to pay sewer charges;
      (10)   Failure to meet compliance schedules;
      (11)   Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater
discharge permit application;
      (12)   Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of business
ownership of a permitted facility;
      (13)   Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any
terms of the wastewater discharge permit or this chapter; or
      (14)   Failure to provide any or all documents and information as may be
requested by the city.
   (B)   Wastewater discharge permits shall be voidable upon cessation of
operations or transfer of business ownership. All wastewater discharge permits
issued to a particular user are void upon the issuance of a new wastewater
discharge permit to that user.
(Ord. 1433, passed 7-1-2002)
§ 52.073 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT REISSUANCE.
   A user with an expiring wastewater discharge permit shall apply for
wastewater discharge permit reissuance by submitting a complete permit
application, in accordance with §
52.064, a minimum of 60 days prior to the expiration of the user’s existing
wastewater discharge permit.
(Ord. 1433, passed 7-1-2002)
REPORTING REQUIREMENTS
§ 52.085 BASELINE MONITORING REPORTS.
   (A)   (1)   All categorical standard users of the city POTW shall provide
the city with a copy of all reports, documents and certifications required to
be provided to USEPA pursuant to 40 C.F.R. part 403.
      (2)   Within either 180 days after the effective date of a categorical
pretreatment standard, or the final administrative decision on a category
determination under 40 C.F.R. § 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing
categorical users currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the
POTW shall submit to the coordinator a report which contains the information
listed in division (B) below. Within 90 days following the commencement of
their discharge to the POTW, new categorical users, and sources that become
categorical users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical
standard, shall submit to the coordinator a report which contains the
information listed in division (B) below. A new source shall report the method
of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable categorical standards. A
new source also shall give estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of
pollutants to be discharged.
   (B)   Categorical users described above shall submit the information set
forth below:
      (1)   Identifying information. The name and address of the facility,
including the name of the operator and owner;
      (2)   Environmental permits. A list of any environmental control permits
held by or for the facility;
      (3)   Description of operations. A brief description of the nature,
average rate of production, and standard industrial classifications of the
operation(s) carried out by such user. This description should include a
schematic process diagram which indicates points of discharge to the POTW from
the regulated processes;
      (4)   Flow measurement. Information showing the measured average daily
and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated process
streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of the combined
wastestream formula set out in 40 C.F.R. § 403.6(e);
      (5)   Measurement of pollutants.
         (a)   The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each
regulated process.
         (b)   The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and
concentration, and/or mass, where required by the standard or by the
coordinator, of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated
process. Instantaneous, daily maximum, and long-term average concentrations, or
mass, where required, shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of
daily operations and shall be analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in
§
52.094.
         (c)   Sampling must be performed in accordance with procedures set out
in §
52.095.
      (6)   Certification. A statement, reviewed by the user’s authorized
representative and certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether
pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not,
whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional
pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements;
      (7)   Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be
required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the
user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or O&M. The completion date
in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for
the applicable pretreatment standard. A compliance schedule pursuant to this
section must meet the requirements set out in §
52.086; and
      (8)   Signature and certification. All baseline monitoring reports must
be signed and certified in accordance with §
52.065.
(Ord. 1433, passed 7-1-2002)
§ 52.086 COMPLIANCE SCHEDULE PROGRESS REPORTS.
   The following conditions shall apply to the compliance schedule required by
§
52.085:
   (A)   The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates
for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction
and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the
applicable pretreatment standards (such events include, but are not limited to,
hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans, executing contracts
for major components, commencing and completing construction, and beginning and
conducting routine operation);
   (B)   No increment referred to above shall exceed nine months;
   (C)   The user shall submit a progress report to the coordinator no later
than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date of
compliance including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the
increment of progress, the reason for any delay and, if appropriate, the steps
being taken by the user to return to the established schedule; and
   (D)   In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such progress
reports to the coordinator.
(Ord. 1433, passed 7-1-2002)
§ 52.087 REPORTS ON COMPLIANCE WITH CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD DEADLINE.
   Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable
categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source, following
commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any user subject
to such categorical pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the
coordinator a report containing the information described in §
52.085. For users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits
established in accordance with the procedures in 40 C.F.R. § 403.6(c), this
report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user’s long-term production
rate. For all other users subject to categorical pretreatment standards
expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production (or
other measure of operation), this report shall include the user’s actual
production during the appropriate sampling period. All compliance reports must
be signed and certified in accordance with §
52.065.
(Ord. 1433, passed 7-1-2002)
§ 52.088 PERIODIC COMPLIANCE REPORTS.
   (A)   All users of the city POTW who are required by the city to have
individual discharge permits, all categorical standards users, and any other
user as may be required by the city shall, at a frequency determined by the
coordinator, but in no case less than twice per year (in June and December),
submit a report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the
discharge which are limited by pretreatment standards and the measured or
estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period. All
periodic compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with §
52.065.
   (B)   All wastewater samples must be representative of the user’s discharge.
Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be properly
operated, kept clean and maintained in good working order at all times. The
failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good working order shall
not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are unrepresentative
of its discharge.
   (C)   If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this section
monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the coordinator, using
the procedures prescribed in §
52.095, the results of this monitoring shall be included in the report.
   (D)   The city may sample and analyze user discharges in lieu of and/or in
addition to requiring users to conduct the sampling and analysis as set forth
above.
   (E)   Individual wastewater discharge permits as issued by the city may
require more frequent monitoring and compliance reporting than as set forth
above.
(Ord. 1433, passed 7-1-2002)
§ 52.089 REPORTS OF CHARGED CONDITIONS.
   (A)   Each user must notify the coordinator of any significant changes to
the user’s operations or system which might alter the nature, quality or volume
of its wastewater at least 30 days before the change.
   (B)   The coordinator may require the user to submit such information as may
be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including the submission
of a wastewater discharge permit application under §
52.064.
   (C)   The coordinator may issue a wastewater discharge permit under §
52.066 or modify an existing wastewater discharge permit under §
52.070 in response to changed conditions or anticipated changed conditions.
   (D)   For purposes of this requirement, significant changes include, but are
not limited to, flow increases (over the daily flow measurements reported by
the user in its baseline monitoring report or otherwise) of 20% or greater, and
the discharge of any previously unreported pollutants.
(Ord. 1433, passed 7-1-2002)
§ 52.090 REPORTS OF POTENTIAL PROBLEMS.
   (A)   In the case of any discharge, including, but not limited to,
accidental discharges, discharges of a non-routine, episodic nature, a non-
customary batch discharge, or a slug load or slug, that may cause potential
problems for the POTW, the user shall telephone and notify the coordinator of
the incident immediately if possible (and in any event within 24 hours
thereof). This notification shall include the location of the discharge, type
of waste, concentration and volume, if known, and the corrective actions taken
by the user.
   (B)   Within five days following such discharge, the user shall submit a
detailed written report describing the cause(s) of the discharge and the
measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such
notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage or other
liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, natural
resources or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such
notification relieve the user of any fines, penalties or other liability which
may be imposed pursuant to this chapter or any other applicable law.
   (C)   A notice shall be permanently posted on the user’s bulletin board or
other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of a
discharge described in division (A) above. Users shall ensure that all of their
employees who may cause, contribute to, or witness the occurrence of such a
discharge are advised of the emergency notification procedures.
(Ord. 1433, passed 7-1-2002)
§ 52.091 REPORTS FROM UNPERMITTED USERS.
   All users not required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall provide
appropriate information and reports to the coordinator as the coordinator may
require.
(Ord. 1433, passed 7-1-2002)
§ 52.092 NOTICE OF VIOLATION/REPEAT SAMPLING AND REPORTING.
   If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation of this chapter or any
permit issued thereunder, the user must notify the coordinator within 24 hours,
and in writing within five days of becoming aware of the violation. The user
shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the
repeat analysis to the coordinator within 30 days after becoming aware of the
violation. The user is not required to resample if the coordinator monitors at
the user’s facility at least once a month, or if the coordinator samples
between the user’s initial sampling and when the user receives the results of
this sampling.
(Ord. 1433, passed 7-1-2002)
§ 52.093 NOTIFICATION OF THE DISCHARGE OF HAZARDOUS WASTE.
   (A)   (1)   Any user who commences the discharge of hazardous waste shall
notify the POTW, the EPA Regional Waste Management Division Director and the
state hazardous waste authorities, in writing, of any discharge into the POTW
of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste
under 40 C.F.R. part 261. Such notification must include the name of the
hazardous waste as set forth in 40 C.F.R. part 261, the EPA hazardous waste
number and the type of discharge (continuous, batch or other).
      (2)   If the user discharges more than 100 kilograms of such waste per
calendar month to the POTW, the notification also shall contain the following
information to the extent such information is known and readily available to
the user; an identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the
wastes, an estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents in the
wastestream discharged during that calendar month and an estimation of the mass
of constituents in the wastestream expected to be discharged during the
following 12 months.
      (3)   All notifications must take place no later than 180 days after the
discharge commences. Any notification under this division (A) need be submitted
only once for each hazardous waste discharged. However, notifications of
changed conditions must be submitted under §
52.089. The notification requirement in this section does not apply to
pollutants already reported by users subject to categorical pretreatment
standards under the self-monitoring requirements of §§
52.085,
52.087 and
52.088.
   (B)   Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of division (A) above
during a calendar month in which they discharge no more than 15 kilograms of
hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute hazardous wastes as specified in
40 C.F.R. §§ 261.30(d) and 261.33(e). Discharge of more than 15 kilograms of
non-acute hazardous wastes in a calendar month, or of any quantity of acute
hazardous wastes as specified in 40 C.F.R. §§ 261.30(d) and 261.33(e), requires
a one-time notification. Subsequent months during which the user discharges
more than such quantities of any hazardous waste do not require additional
notification.
   (C)   In the case of any new regulations under § 3001 of RCRA identifying
additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any additional
substance as a hazardous waste, the user must notify the coordinator, the EPA
Regional Waste Management Waste Division Director and the state hazardous waste
authorities of the discharge of such substance within 90 days of the effective
date of such regulations.
   (D)   In the case of any notification made under this section, the user
shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity
of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has determined to be
economically practical.
   (E)   This provision does not create a right to discharge any substance not
otherwise permitted to be discharged by this chapter, a permit issued
thereunder and/or any applicable federal or state law.
   (F)   No hazardous waste shall be discharged to the POTW by any user unless
specifically approved by the coordinator.
(Ord. 1433, passed 7-1-2002) Penalty, see §
52.999
§ 52.094 ANALYTICAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted
as part of a wastewater discharge permit application or report shall be
performed using techniques acceptable to USEPA and PADEP as specified in 40
C.F.R. part 136, unless otherwise specified in an applicable categorical
pretreatment standard.
   (B)   If no such method is specified by the foregoing, one of the acceptable
methods described in the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination
of Water and Sewage, published by the American Public Health Association shall
be used.
(Ord. 1433, passed 7-1-2002)
§ 52.095 SAMPLE COLLECTION.
   (A)   Except as indicated in division (B) below or otherwise in this chapter
or an industrial wastewater discharge permit, the user must collect wastewater
samples using flow proportional composite collection techniques. In the event
flow proportional sampling is infeasible, the coordinator may authorize the use
of time proportional sampling or a minimum of four grab samples where the user
demonstrates that this will provide a representative sample of the effluent
being discharged. In addition, grab samples may be required to show compliance
with instantaneous discharge limits.
   (B)   Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, phenols,
sulfides and volatile organic compounds must be obtained using grab collection
techniques.
   (C)   In addition, the city expressly reserves the right to construct,
install, operate and/or maintain off-site sampling and flow monitoring stations
with respect to any user.
(Ord. 1433, passed 7-1-2002)
§ 52.096 TIMING.
   Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the date
postmarked. For reports which are not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail
facility serviced by the United States Postal Service, the date of receipt of
the report shall govern.
(Ord. 1433, passed 7-1-2002)
§ 52.097 RECORD KEEPING.
   Users subject to the reporting requirements of this chapter shall retain,
and make available for inspection and copying, all records of information
obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this chapter and any
additional records of information obtained pursuant to monitoring activities
undertaken by the user independent of such requirements. Records shall include
the date, exact place, method, and time of sampling, and the name of the person
(s) taking the samples; the dates analyses were performed; who performed the
analyses; the analytical techniques or methods used; and the results of such
analyses. These records shall remain available for a period of at least five
years. This period shall be automatically extended for the duration of any
litigation concerning the user or the city, or where the user has been
specifically notified of a longer retention period by the coordinator.
(Ord. 1433, passed 7-1-2002)
COMPLIANCE
§ 52.110 RIGHT OF ENTRY; INSPECTION AND SAMPLING.
   (A)   The coordinator or its designees shall have the right to enter the
property and premises of any user to determine whether the user is complying
with all requirements of this chapter and any wastewater discharge permit or
order issued hereunder.
   (B)   Users shall allow the coordinator ready access to all parts of the
premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and
copying, and the performance of any additional duties.
      (1)   Where a user has security measures in force which require proper
identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the user shall
make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon presentation
of suitable identification, the coordinator will be permitted to enter without
delay for the purposes of performing specific responsibilities.
      (2)   The coordinator shall have the right to set up on or off the user’s
property, and/or require installation of, such devices as are necessary to
conduct sampling and/or metering of the user’s operations and discharge.
      (3)   The coordinator may require the user to install monitoring
equipment as necessary. The facility’s sampling and monitoring equipment shall
be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the user
at its own expense. All devices used to measure wastewater flow and quality
shall be calibrated semi-annually or otherwise as required by the coordinator
to ensure their accuracy.
      (4)   Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to
the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the
user at the written or verbal request of the coordinator and shall not be
replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the user.
      (5)   Unreasonable delays in allowing the coordinator access to the
user’s premises shall be a violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 1433, passed 7-1-2002) Penalty, see §
52.999
§ 52.111 SEARCH WARRANTS.
   If the coordinator has been refused access to a building, structure or
property, or any part thereof, and is able to demonstrate probable cause to
believe that there may be a violation of this chapter, or that there is a need
to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program
of the city designed to verify compliance with this chapter or any permit or
order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety and
welfare of the community, then the coordinator may seek issuance of a search
warrant from the District Justice and/or the county’s Court of Common Pleas.
(Ord. 1433, passed 7-1-2002)
§ 52.112 CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION.
   Information and data on a user obtained from reports, surveys, wastewater
discharge permit applications, wastewater discharge permits and monitoring
programs, and from the coordinator’s inspection and sampling activities, shall
be available to the public without restriction, unless the user specifically
requests, and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the coordinator,
that the release of such information would divulge information, processes or
methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets under applicable
state law. Any such request must be asserted at the time of submission of the
information or data. When requested and demonstrated by the user furnishing a
report that such information should be held confidential, the portions of a
report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made
available for inspection by the public, but shall be made available immediately
upon request to governmental agencies for uses related to the NPDES program or
pretreatment program, and in enforcement proceedings involving the person
furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics and other
“effluent data” as defined by 40 C.F.R. § 2.302 will not be recognized as
confidential information and will be available to the public without
restriction.
(Ord. 1433, passed 7-1-2002)
§ 52.113 ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES.
   (A)   Notice of violation. When the coordinator finds that a user has
violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, a wastewater
discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard
or requirement, the coordinator may serve upon that user a written notice of
violation. Within 30 days of the receipt of such notice, an explanation of the
violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to
include specific required actions, shall be submitted by the user to the
coordinator. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the user of liability
for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of
violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the coordinator
to take any enforcement or other action, including emergency actions or any
other enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of violation.
   (B)   Consent orders. The city may enter into administrative consent orders,
assurances of voluntary compliance or other similar documents establishing an
agreement with any user responsible for noncompliance. Such documents will
include specific action to be taken by the user to correct the noncompliance
within a time period specified by the document. Such documents shall have the
same force and effect as the administrative orders issued pursuant to divisions
(D) and (E) below and shall be judicially enforceable.
   (C)   Show cause hearing. The Sewer Director may order a user which has
violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, a wastewater
discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard
or requirement, to appear before the Sewer Director and show cause why any
proposed enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the
user specifying the time and place for the meeting, the proposed enforcement
action, the reasons for such action and a request that the user show cause why
the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the meeting
shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt
requested) at least ten days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served on
any authorized representative of the user. A show cause hearing shall not be a
bar against, or prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.
   (D)   Compliance orders. When the coordinator finds that a user has
violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, a wastewater
discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard
or requirement, the coordinator may issue an administrative order to the user
directing that the user come into compliance within a specified time. If the
user does not come into compliance within the time provided, sewer service may
be discontinued unless and until adequate treatment facilities, devices or
other related appurtenances are installed and properly operated, or the user
otherwise comes into compliance. Compliance orders also may contain other
requirements to address the noncompliance, including without limitation,
additional self-monitoring and management practices designed to minimize the
amount of pollutants discharged to the sewer. A compliance order may not extend
the deadline for compliance established for a pretreatment standard or
requirement, nor does a compliance order relieve the user of liability for any
violation, including any continuing violation. Issuance of a compliance order
shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action
against the user.
   (E)   Cease and desist orders. When the coordinator finds that a user has
violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, a wastewater
discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard
or requirement, or that the user’s past violations are likely to recur, the
coordinator may issue an administrative order to the user directing it to cease
and desist all such violations and directing the user to:
      (1)   Immediately comply with all requirements; and
      (2)   Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be
needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including
halting operations and/or terminating the discharge. Issuance of a cease and
desist order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any
other action against the user.
   (F)   Administrative civil penalties.
      (1)   When the city finds that a user has violated, or continues to
violate, any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit or order
issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the city
may assess a civil penalty against such user in an amount not to exceed $1,000
per day for each violation. Each violation for each separate day shall
constitute a separate and distinct offense. In the case of monthly or other
long-term average discharge limits, civil penalties may be assessed for each
day during the period of violation.
      (2)   The procedures for assessing and appealing such administrative
civil penalties, and the relevant factors to be considered in assessing such
penalties, shall be as set forth in the city’s Civil Penalty Assessment Policy
attached hereto as
Appendix A.
      (3)   In addition to the civil penalties provided herein, the city may
recover interest, damages, reasonable attorney’s fees, expert witness fees,
administrative or show cause proceedings costs and/or court costs, court
reporter fees and other administrative enforcement, proceedings and/or
litigation expenses against the person or user found to be in violation of this
chapter.
      (4)   Assessment of an administrative civil penalty hereunder shall not
be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the
user.
   (G)   Emergency suspensions. The coordinator may immediately suspend a
user’s discharge, after informal notice to the user, whenever such suspension
is necessary in the opinion of the coordinator to stop an actual or threatened
discharge which presents or causes, or may present or cause, an imminent or
substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons, which threatens
or causes interference or pass through or sludge contamination with respect to
the POTW, which threatens or causes the POTW to violate any term or condition
of its NPDES permit, or which presents or causes, or may present or cause, an
endangerment to the environment.
      (1)   Any person or user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall
immediately stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a user’s
failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the
coordinator may take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate
severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW,
its receiving stream or endangerment to any individuals. The coordinator may
allow the user to recommence its discharge when the user has demonstrated to
the satisfaction of the coordinator that the period of endangerment has passed,
unless the termination proceedings in division (H) below are initiated against
the user.
      (2)   A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge
presenting such endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement,
describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to
prevent any future occurrence, to the coordinator within five days thereof.
      (3)   Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing
prior to any emergency suspension under this section.
   (H)   Termination of discharge.
      (1)   In addition to the provisions in §
52.072, any user who violates the following conditions may be subject to
discharge termination:
         (a)   Violation of wastewater discharge permit conditions;
         (b)   Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and
characteristics of its discharge;
         (c)   Failure to report significant changes in operations or
wastewater volume, constituents and characteristics prior to discharge;
         (d)   Refusal of reasonable access to the user’s premises for the
purpose of inspection, monitoring or sampling; or
         (e)   Violation of the pretreatment standards in §§
52.035 through
52.045.
      (2)   Such user will be notified of the proposed termination of its
discharge and be offered an opportunity to show cause under division (C) above
why the proposed action should not be taken. Exercise of this option by the
coordinator shall not be a bar to, or a prerequisite for, taking any other
action against the user.
(Ord. 1433, passed 7-1-2002)
§ 52.114 JUDICIAL ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES.
   (A)   Injunctive relief. When the coordinator finds that a user has
violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, a wastewater
discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard
or requirement, the coordinator may seek the issuance of a temporary or
permanent injunction, as appropriate, which restrains or compels the specific
performance of the wastewater discharge permit, order or other requirement
imposed by this chapter on activities of the user. The coordinator may also
seek such other action as is appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief,
including a requirement for the user to conduct environmental abatement,
remediation and/or corrective action. A petition for injunctive relief shall
not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a
user.
   (B)   Remedies nonexclusive. The remedies provided for in this chapter are
not exclusive. The coordinator may take any, all or any combination of these
actions against a noncompliant user. The coordinator may take any other
enforcement action under applicable law against any user when the circumstances
warrant. Further, the coordinator is empowered to take more than one
enforcement action against any noncompliant user.
(Ord. 1433, passed 7-1-2002)
§ 52.115 SUPPLEMENTAL ENFORCEMENT ACTION.
   (A)   Performance bonds. The coordinator may decline to issue or reissue a
wastewater discharge permit to any user who has failed to comply with any
provision of this chapter, a previous wastewater discharge permit, or order
issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, unless
such user first files a satisfactory bond, payable to the city, in a sum not to
exceed a value determined by the coordinator to be necessary to achieve
consistent compliance.
   (B)   Liability insurance. The coordinator may decline to issue or reissue a
wastewater discharge permit to any user, including without limitation any user
who has failed to comply with any provision of this chapter, a previous
wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement, unless the user first submits proof that
it has obtained financial assurances sufficient to restore or repair damage to
the POTW caused by its discharge.
   (C)   Water supply severance. Whenever a user has violated or continues to
violate any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit, or order
issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, water
service to the user may be severed in accordance with applicable law. Service
will only recommence, at the user’s expense, after it has satisfactorily
demonstrated its ability to comply.
   (D)   Public nuisances. A violation of any provision of this chapter, a
wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement is hereby declared a public nuisance and
shall be corrected or abated as directed by the coordinator. Any person(s)
creating a public nuisance shall be subject to the provisions of applicable law
governing such nuisances, including reimbursing the city for any costs incurred
in removing, abating or remedying said nuisance.
(Ord. 1433, passed 7-1-2002)
§ 52.116 AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSES TO DISCHARGE VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Upset.
      (1)   For the purposes of this section, UPSET means an exceptional
incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with
categorical pretreatment standards or with individual permit limits because of
factors beyond the reasonable control of the user. An UPSET does not include
noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed
treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive
maintenance or careless or improper operation.
      (2)   An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action
brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards if the
requirements of division (C) below are met.
      (3)   A user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset
shall demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs or
other relevant evidence that:
         (a)   An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause(s) of the
upset;
         (b)   The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and
workmanlike manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance
procedures; and
         (c)   The user has submitted the following information to the
coordinator within 24 hours of becoming aware of the upset. If this information
is initially provided orally, a written submission must be provided within five
days of becoming aware of such upset:
            1.   A description of the indirect discharge and cause of
noncompliance;
            2.   The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times
or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to
continue; and
            3.   Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate and
prevent recurrence of the noncompliance.
      (4)   In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish the
occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof.
      (5)   Users will have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any
claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance with
categorical pretreatment standards.
      (6)   Users shall control production of all discharges to the extent
necessary to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment standards upon
reduction, loss or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is
restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement
applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power
of the treatment facility is reduced, lost or fails.
   (B)   Prohibited discharge standards. A user shall have an affirmative
defense to an enforcement action brought against it for noncompliance with the
general prohibitions in §
52.035(A) or the specific prohibitions in §
52.035(B)(9) through (B)(17) and (C) if it can prove that it did not know, or
have reason to know, that its discharge, alone or in conjunction with
discharges from other sources, would cause pass through or interference and
that either:
      (1)   A local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the user was
in compliance with each limit directly prior to, and during, the pass through
or interference; or
      (2)   No local limit exists, but the discharge did not change
substantially in nature or constituents from the user’s prior discharge when
the city was regularly in compliance with its NPDES permit, and in the case of
interference, was in compliance with applicable sludge use or disposal
requirements.
   (C)   Bypass.
      (1)   For the purposes of this division (C), the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
         (a)   BYPASS means the intentional diversion of waste streams from any
portion of a user’s treatment facility.
         (b)   SEVERE PROPERTY DAMAGE means substantial physical damage to
property, damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to become
inoperable or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can
reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. SEVERE PROPERTY
DAMAGE does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production.
      (2)   A user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause
pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it also is
for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. These bypasses are not
subject to the provision of divisions (C)(3) and (C)(4) below.
      (3)   (a)   If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall
submit prior notice to the coordinator, at least ten days before the date of
the bypass, if possible.
         (b)   1.   A user shall submit oral notice to the coordinator of an
unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards within 24
hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass.
            2.   A written submission shall also be provided within five days
of the time the user becomes aware of the bypass.
            3.   The written submission shall contain a description of the
bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and
times, and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is
expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate and
prevent reoccurrence of the bypass.
      (4)   (a)   Bypass is prohibited, and the coordinator may take an
enforcement action against a user for a bypass, unless:
            1.   Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal
injury or severe property damage;
            2.   There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the
use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes or
maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not
satisfied if adequate back-up equipment should have been installed in the
exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred
during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventive maintenance; and
            3.   The user submitted notices as required under division (C)(3)
above.
         (b)   The coordinator may approve an anticipated bypass, after
considering its adverse effects, if the coordinator determines that it will
meet the three conditions listed in division (C)(4) above.
(Ord. 1433, passed 7-1-2002)
§ 52.117 PRETREATMENT CHARGES AND FEES.
   (A)   The city may adopt reasonable fees for reimbursement of costs of
setting up, operating and implementing the city’s pretreatment program which
may include:
      (1)   Fees for wastewater discharge permit applications including the
costs of processing such applications;
      (2)   Fees for monitoring, inspection and surveillance procedures,
including the costs of collection and analyzing a user’s discharge, and
reviewing monitoring reports submitted by users;
      (3)   Fees for reviewing and responding to accidental discharge
procedures and construction;
      (4)   Fees for filing appeals; and
      (5)   Other fees as the city may deem necessary to carry out the
requirements contained herein.
   (B)   These charges and fees relate solely to the matters covered by this
chapter and are separate from all other fees, fines and penalties chargeable by
the city.
(Ord. 1433, passed 7-1-2002)
SEWER USE CHARGES
§ 52.130 SEWER USE CHARGE IMPOSED.
   Sewer use charges or rentals for the use of the POTW, sewers, sewerage
system and sewage treatment works of the city shall be imposed upon the owners
of property served thereby.
(Ord. 1433, passed 7-1-2002)
§ 52.131 SEWER RATES; RATE CHANGES.
   (A)   The applicable sewer rentals or use charge rates shall be set forth by
separate city ordinance from time to time.
   (B)   The city may increase or decrease such sewer rates as it deems
necessary.
(Ord. 1433, passed 7-1-2002)
§ 52.132 PAYMENT SCHEDULE; LATE PENALTY.
   (A)   Payment schedule. The city shall establish a payment schedule whereby
sewer charges collected by the city shall be billed and paid monthly.
   (B)   Late charges. If the bill for sewer services is not paid by the
fifteenth day of the month a penalty of 10% will be added, with a minimum
penalty of $.10 for any one bill. If the fifteenth day of the month falls on a
Saturday, Sunday or holiday, bills may be paid without penalty on the next
business day.
(Ord. 1433, passed 7-1-2002; Ord. 1588, passed 12-17-2018; Ord. 1600 , passed
12-2-2019; Ord. 1607, passed 12-7-2020; Ord. 1614, passed 12-20-2021; Ord.
1628, passed 12-19-2022; Ord. 1656, passed 12-16-2024)
§ 52.133 PROPERTIES USING OTHER THAN CITY WATER.
   (A)   For a property which uses water, all or part of which is from a source
or sources other than the city’s water supply system, there shall be a sewer
rental, separate from and in addition to any sewer rental based on the
consumption of water from the city’s water supply system. Such separate or
additional sewer rental shall be measured by the quantity of water from the
source or sources other than the city’s water supply system which is discharged
into the city’s sewers from such property.
   (B)   The owner of such property shall install, without cost to the city, a
meter or meters to measure the quantity of water received from other than the
city’s water supply system and deposited into the city’s sewers. No meter shall
be installed or used for such purpose without the approval of the city, and the
sewer use charge or rental based upon water received from other than the city’s
water supply system shall be subject to the same sewer rates as are required to
be paid by the owner of a metered property receiving the same quantity of water
from the city’s water supply system.
   (C)   Until the owner of the property installs an approved meter or meters,
the city shall make an estimate of the amount of water from sources other than
the city’s water supply system which is discharged into the city’s sewers from
the property, and the property owner shall pay the applicable rate of sewer
rental based upon such estimate.
(Ord. 1433, passed 7-1-2002)
§ 52.134 SEWER FUND.
   All monies received by the city as a result of sewer use charges or rentals
shall be deposited in a special city fund designated as the Sewer Fund.
(Ord. 1433, passed 7-1-2002)
SEWER AND UTILITY CONNECTIONS
§ 52.145 SEWER CONNECTION; PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person shall make, or attempt to make, a connection with any public
sewer, sanitary, storm or combination, for any purpose whatever, until such
connection has been approved in writing by the Corry Municipal Authority and
written permission therefor has been granted by the city, which permit shall be
exhibited at all times by the holder thereof to the proper city officials upon
demand.
(Ord. 1433, passed 7-1-2002) Penalty, see §
52.999
§ 52.146 APPLICATION TO CITY.
   Any person requiring a connection to any sewer of the city shall make
application to the city.
(Ord. 1433, passed 7-1-2002)
§ 52.147 SEWER PERMIT FEES.
   Applicants for sanitary, storm or combination sewer connection permits shall
pay to the city a fee, which shall be as set forth by separate ordinance from
time to time. In the case of sewer construction requiring the opening of a city
street, alley or easement, a separate street excavation permit shall be
obtained from the city for each location. In the case of sewer construction
requiring the opening of a state highway, a state Department of Transportation
occupancy permit must be obtained through the city and/or as otherwise required
by applicable laws.
(Ord. 1433, passed 7-1-2002)
§ 52.148 CITY MAY ORDER CONNECTIONS.
   (A)   Whenever the city is contemplating the paving of any street in which
there is a sanitary, storm or combination sewer, or other utility(s), the city
may require all parties owning properties on such street, who do not yet have
sewer connections, to install such connections, and to install other utility
(s), and extend the same to beyond the curb lines.
   (B)   If any party shall neglect or refuse to do so for five days after
written notice from the city to make such connections, the city may enter into
a contract for the construction of such connections. The cost thereof plus 10%
shall be assessed upon the lot or parcels of land for the accommodation of
which such connections may be constructed.
(Ord. 1433, passed 7-1-2002)
§ 52.149 STREETS TO BE RESTORED TO FORMER CONDITION.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of any party excavating or damaging any city
streets while installing, replacing, repairing or maintaining any utilities to
restore the excavated or damaged streets to the satisfaction of the city.
   (B)   If any party shall neglect or refuse to do so for five days after
written notice from the city to make such restoration(s), the city may enter
into a contract for the construction of such restoration. The cost thereof plus
10% shall be assessed upon the lot or parcels of land for the accommodation of
which such connections may be constructed.
(Ord. 1433, passed 7-1-2002)
§ 52.150 CONTINUING TO DISCHARGE RUNOFF.
   If any owner shall fail to cease and desist from discharging runoff within
90 days after written notice to do so, the city may contract with a third party
for the work necessary to disconnect the discharge. The costs thereof plus 10%
shall be assessed upon the lot or parcels of land from which the discharge or
runoff originates.
(Ord. 1562, passed 5-2-2016) Penalty, see §
52.999
SEWER RATES
§ 52.165 TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Sewer Rate Ordinance
of the City of Corry”.
(Ord. 1225, passed 3-21-1977)
§ 52.166 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with
the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the
plural number include the singular number and words in the singular number
include the plural number. The word “shall” is always mandatory and not merely
directory.
   AUTHORITY. The municipal authority of the City of Corry.
   CITY. The City of Corry, Erie County, Pennsylvania, and/or its duly
authorized employees.
   COMBINED SEWER. A sewer designed to receive both sewage and stormwater
runoff.
   PERSON. Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company,
organization or entity of any kind.
   SEWAGE. A combination of water-carried wastes from residences, business
buildings, institutions and industrial and commercial establishments, together
with such ground, surface or stormwater as may be present.
   SEWER. A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage into the sewerage system.
   SEWERAGE SYSTEM. All sanitary sewers, all combined sewers, all sewage
treatment works and all other facilities owned or operated by either the city
or the authority for the collection, transportation and treatment of sanitary
sewage and industrial wastes, together with their appurtenances, and any
additions, extensions or improvements thereto. It shall also include sewers
which serve one or more persons and discharge into the public sewerage system
even though those sewers may not have been constructed by city or authority
funds and are not owned or maintained by the city or authority. It does not
include separate storm sewers or culverts which have been constructed for the
sole purpose of carrying storm and surface runoff, the discharge from which is
not and does not become tributary to the sewage treatment facilities.
   STORM SEWER. A sewer which is intended to carry stormwater runoff, surface
waters, groundwaters drainage and the like, but which is not intended to carry
any sanitary sewage or polluted industrial waste.
   STORMWATER RUNOFF. The portion of the rainfall which reaches a channel,
trench, sewer or other conveyance.
   USER. For any premises from which sewage is generated, that person who
contracts for public water service to the premises or, in cases where no public
water service is connected to the premises, shall mean that person who is the
legal owner of the premises.
   WATER DEPARTMENT. The city department responsible for operation of the
public water supply system in the city.
(Ord. 1225, passed 3-21-1977)
§ 52.167 RENTAL OR CHARGE ON ALL USERS.
   A sewer service rental or charge is and shall be imposed upon the users of
all properties within the city which are drained directly by the sewerage
system or from which sewage is transported to and treated at the sewage
treatment plant operated by the city.
(Ord. 1225, passed 3-21-1977)
§ 52.168 USE OF FUNDS.
   The funds received by the city from the collection of charges or rentals
herein provided for shall be used for the purpose of defraying the expense of
the city in the operation, maintenance, repair, alteration, inspection,
depreciation or other expense in relation to such sewerage system and sewage
treatment works and for such payments as the city may be required to make under
any lease or agreement it may enter into for the said sewerage system and
sewage treatment works with the municipal authority of the city in accordance
with the provisions of the Municipality Authority Act, 53 Pa.C.S. §§ 5301 et
seq., as amended.
(Ord. 1225, passed 3-21-1977)
§ 52.169 CHARGES, USERS WITHIN THE CITY.
   (A)   Monthly charges. Users of the sewerage system, located within the city
who are furnished metered water service by the city, and/or obtain water from
other sources, shall pay monthly sewer rentals or charges in accordance with
the following schedule of rates based on monthly water consumption:
 
Base charge for each meter:               $30.38 flat rate
0-2,500 gallons of water per month        $0.0060 per gallon
2,501 and over gallons of water per month $0.0057 per gallon
 
   (B)   Minimum charge. The minimum monthly charge for sewer service shall not
be less than $34.88.
   (C)   Senior citizen rate. Each residential dwelling unit in which all
occupants residing therein have passed their 65th birthday shall, upon making
proper application with the city, receive a discount in the amount of $4 per
month from their sewer service charge.
   (D)   Residential unit multiplier.
      (1)   A structure serviced by a single water meter which supplies water
to multiple residential dwelling units shall be charged a multiple of the base
fee established per this section.
      (2)   Examples.
         (a)   A duplex would be billed two times the base fee in addition to
the sewer usage rate.
         (b)   A structure containing 25 individual residential dwelling units
would be billed 25 times the base fee in addition to the sewer usage rate.
(Ord. 1566, passed 12-19-2016; Ord. 1566, passed 12-18-2017; Ord. 1588, passed
12-17-2018; Ord. 1600 , passed 12-2-2019; Ord. 1607, passed 12-7-2020; Ord.
1614, passed 12-20-2021; Ord. 1628, passed 12-19-2022; Ord. 1648, passed 12-18-
2023; Ord. 1656, passed 12-16-2024)
Editor’s Note:
   See also city’s fee schedule
§ 52.170 CHARGES, USERS OUTSIDE THE CITY.
   Users of sewers located outside the corporate limits of the city shall pay
sewer rentals at a rate of 150% of the charge that would be imposed if the
sewage had originated within the corporate limits.
(Ord. 1225, passed 3-21-1977)
Editor’s Note:
   See also city’s fee schedule
§ 52.171 BASIS OF DETERMINING WATER USE.
   The volume of water to be used for determining sewer charges or rentals
shall include metered water purchased from the city, and in addition all water
obtained from sources other than the city (wells, streams and the like), as
determined from meters installed and maintained by the city, from meters
installed and maintained by the property owners and approved by the city or
from estimates or measurements made by the city, all as hereinafter set forth.
(Ord. 1225, passed 3-21-1977)
§ 52.172 COMPUTATION OF WATER USE.
   The following methods of measurement shall be used for the computation of
the volume of water upon which the sewage charge shall be based.
   (A)   Metered sewer users supplied with water by the city. The sewer rental
or charge for any premises shall be computed monthly according to the water
meter readings as used by the city for billing water service to said premises.
   (B)   Sewer users supplied with water which originates, all or in part, from
sources other than the city water mains. The sewer rental or charge shall be
computed monthly according to the total water used, including both water from
city mains and from other sources. The city shall furnish, install and
maintain, at city expense, a meter or meters to measure the flow of such water
from other sources at a point near the source or entrance into the premises.
The user shall allow the installation and maintenance of such meter or meters,
including necessary piping, and shall afford normal and reasonable protection
to such equipment.
   (C)   Sewer users for which water used is excluded from the sewer system. In
the event it is established to the satisfaction of the city that a portion of
the water used in or on any property, served by the public sanitary sewerage
system, does not and cannot enter the system, the city may require or permit
the installation of additional meters in such manner as to determine either the
quantity of water excluded from the public sewerage system or the quantity of
water actually entering the public sewerage system, exclusive of stormwater
runoff. The sewer charge shall be based upon the quantity of water estimated,
measured or computed by the city to be actually entering the public sewerage
system, exclusive of stormwater runoff. The cost of furnishing, installing and
maintaining any meters other than those utilized to measure water purchased
from the Water Department shall be borne by the sewer user. The type, size,
location, piping, arrangement and maintenance of such meters shall be subject
to the approval of the city, and shall be installed by the city if the city so
elects.
(Ord. 1225, passed 3-21-1977)
§ 52.173 METERING OF SEWERS.
   In cases where actual water use cannot be economically determined, the user
may elect, or the city may require, the user to install, pay for and maintain a
meter or meters, and necessary piping, approved by the city for measuring the
volume of sewage discharged to the sewerage system, in which case sewer rentals
or charges shall be based upon actual metered waste volumes discharged to the
sewerage system at a rate equal to the charge that would be made had such waste
volume discharged been metered water use.
(Ord. 1225, passed 3-21-1977)
§ 52.174 MORE THAN ONE WATER METER.
   Where industrial, commercial or public sewer customers have more than one
meter serving property situated on contiguous parcels and under common
ownership and occupancy, the measurement by two or more meters of the quantity
of water used in or on one property by one customer may be combined and the
service charge shall be billed to said customer as though the quantity of water
was measured by one meter, if the city so elects.
(Ord. 1341, passed 2- -1990)
§ 52.175 METERS SERVING MORE THAN ONE HOUSEHOLD OR ESTABLISHMENT.
   Where more than one household, mobile home site, business establishment or
other occupied space is served by a single water meter, the monthly volume of
water measured by the single meter shall be divided by the number of units
served or capable of being served by the single meter. The product shall be
rounded to the nearest 100 cubic feet to obtain the average water consumption
per unit. The monthly charge for sewer service shall be the applicable sewer
rate for the average water consumption per unit multiplied by the number of
units served or capable of being served by the single meter, plus the “base
charge”.
(Ord. 1341, passed 2- -1990)
§ 52.176 METERS SERVING BOTH INSIDE AND OUTSIDE OF THE CITY.
   Where one meter serves households, mobile home sites, business
establishments or other occupied space, or portions of such space, part of
which are within the city corporate limits and part of which are outside the
city limits, the user shall pay a monthly rate adjusted as the city shall deem
fair and equitable. If the user so elects, he or she may, at his or her cost,
separately meter the portions inside and outside of the city corporate limits,
with the meter and installation to be approved by the city.
(Ord. 1225, passed 3-21-1977)
§ 52.177 APPLICATION FOR SERVICE.
   (A)   All users of the sewage system as of the effective date of this
subchapter who are connected to the city water mains and are metered for such
water use, shall have no formal requirement as to application for sewage
service.
   (B)   All other users shall apply for sewage service as follows:
      (1)   By applying for water service in accordance with city’s water rate
and regulation ordinance in effect at the time of application; and
      (2)   By applying for a sewer connection permit in accordance with the
current city ordinances regulating such connections.
(Ord. 1225, passed 3-21-1977)
§ 52.178 DEPOSIT.
   A deposit of $50 to be applied against unpaid bills or damage claims may be
required with each new application for service, which deposit may be in
addition to any deposit required for water service. Said deposits shall be
returned to the customer, without interest, upon termination of sendee, or
after 12 consecutive months of billing paid without penalty, if no other
charges remain unpaid.
(Ord. 1496, passed 4-6-2009)
Editor’s Note:
   See also city’s fee schedule
§ 52.179 BILLING.
   Billing will be by the city to the user, and shall be in accordance with the
following.
   (A)   Bills will be rendered for all charges made in accordance with this
subchapter and are due and payable on or about the first day of each month for
service rendered during the preceding month. If the bill for sewer use
furnished is not paid within 15 days from the date rendered, a penalty of 10%
will be added, with a minimum penalty of $0.10 for any one bill. If the
fifteenth day of net payment period falls on a Saturday, Sunday or holiday,
bills may be paid without penalty on the next business day following.
   (B)   The date of payment shall be the date received.
   (C)   Bills for service to the federal government, state or local
governments, or their departments and institutions shall be payable without
penalty within 30 days of the date rendered.
   (D)   If any bill is not paid prior to the date of adding penalty, or if any
sewer charges are due under this chapter or prior city ordinances, whether for
sewer rental, penalties, liens or other fees attribute to sewer service, water
service may be discontinued, and/or the sewer connection may be blocked to
prohibit use, after five days’ written notice.
   (E)   All meters shall be read at least quarterly, and bills shall be
rendered as stated above. If the meter reader is unable to procure a monthly
reading of the meter, or meters, because ingress to the meter is obstructed in
any manner, or entrance to the premises is made precarious by a vicious dog, or
for any other reason, an estimate shall be made of the amount of water consumed
and the billing shall be based on the estimate.
   (F)   If the meter reader is unable to gain access to the meter for a period
of three consecutive months, water service may be discontinued and/or the sewer
connection may be blocked to prohibit use after five days’ written notice.
   (G)   In addition to the foregoing remedy and such other remedies as are
provided by law for the collection of delinquent sewer charges, it shall be
lawful for the proper officers of the city to file a lien or liens against the
property for any and all delinquent accounts, in the same manner provided by
law in the case of unpaid city taxes on real estate and to proceed to collect
the same.
   (H)   In cases where it becomes necessary for the city to block a sewer for
non payment of bills, or other causes in accordance with this chapter, the user
shall be billed for the actual cost of blocking said sewer and the reopening of
same, prior to any permitted reuse of city sewers. Such actual cost shall
include all costs of labor, equipment and material.
   (I)   In cases where it becomes necessary for the city to shut off water
service for non payment of bills, or other causes in accordance with this
subchapter, the user shall be billed a turn-on charge of $5. In such cases, the
water will not be turned on until all sewer rentals, penalties, liens or other
fees attributable to service due to the city shall have been paid, including
the turn-on charge.
(Ord. 1225, passed 3-21-1977 ; Ord. 1648, passed 12-18-2023)
Editor’s Note:
   See also city’s fee schedule
§ 52.180 FURNISHING AND INSTALLING METERS.
   (A)   All water meters on city water services shall be furnished and
installed by the city, in accordance with the applicable provisions of the city
water rate and regulation ordinance in effect at the time of installation.
   (B)   Water meters for private water systems, when installed in compliance
with this subchapter, and used for direct measurement of water used from a
private well, spring, cistern or other on-site source, shall be furnished,
installed and maintained by the city.
   (C)   Water meters for clear water discharges not entering the sewage
system, or required for metering flow within and outside the city corporate
limits, or otherwise required by this subchapter at the user’s expense, shall
be furnished by the user, and installed and maintained by the city, all at the
expense of the user. Any meter furnished shall be subject to approval of the
city as to type, size and location.
   (D)   Sewage meters, where water meters cannot economically be used, shall
be furnished, installed and maintained by the user. Such meters shall be
subject to approval by the city as to type, size, location and maintenance.
   (E)   Where clear water meters are required at the users expense, or the
user elects to provide meters, such meters may be furnished, installed and
maintained by the city at the following rates.
Meter Size Monthly Charge
Meter Size Monthly Charge
5/8 inch   $1
3/4 inch   1
1 inch     1.60
1-1/2 inch 2.80
2 inch     3.50
3 inch     5.80
4 inch     10
6 inch     14
 
   (F)   Where clear water meters are used as in (E) above, but the meter is
furnished by the user, the city may install and maintain the meter at the
following rates.
Meter Size Monthly Charge
Meter Size Monthly Charge
5/8 inch   $0.50
3/4 inch   0.50
1 inch     0.75
1-1/2 inch 1.30
2 inch     1.50
3 inch     2.35
4 inch     3.30
6 inch     5.30
 
   (G)   Where clear water meters are used, as in division (E) above, and the
meter, by written agreement, is to be furnished, installed and maintained by
the user, there shall be no charge by the city for meter installation,
operation or maintenance. The city shall, however, in such cases, retain the
right to inspect, test and seal the meter at the time of installation and at
such other times as it deems necessary. The city shall, in all such cases, have
full access to the meter and connecting piping as if the meter were city
property.
   (H)   Where meters are not available when requested by a user, and delivery
time necessitates an unreasonable delay in installation, the city may estimate
the bill to be charged for sewer use. When this is done, the estimated bills
shall be adjusted by the city, after meter installation, to conform with the
average monthly billing for sewer use during the first three months following
meter installation.
(Ord. 1225, passed 3-21-1977)
Editor’s Note:
   See also city’s fee schedule
§ 52.181 ACCESS TO PREMISES.
   The duly authorized agents of the city and the municipal authority of the
city shall have access at all reasonable hours of the day to all parts of the
premises to which water and sewer service is supplied to make necessary
inspection.
(Ord. 1225, passed 3-21-1977)
§ 52.182 OTHER CONTRACTS.
   Nothing contained in this subchapter shall preclude the city or authority
from entering into contracts with neighboring municipalities for the treatment
of their sewage pursuant to a schedule of fees differing from the service
charges above set forth.
(Ord. 1225, passed 3-21-1977)
§ 52.183 DISCONTINUED WATER SERVICE.
   Sewage service shall terminate with the discontinuance of public water
service, except as otherwise provided herein.
(Ord. 1225, passed 3-21-1977)
§ 52.184 MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS.
   (A)   No person shall furnish sewage service to others, except in temporary
emergencies.
   (B)   Should any person or persons move into any premises supplied with
water from the city mains, without making a written application in the manner
provided therefor, and uses water, then such person or persons shall become
responsible for all sewer service from the date of the last reading previous to
their occupying such premises. Failure to pay the same shall be cause for
disconnecting such service, until the amount due is paid.
   (C)   Where any customer is liable to the city for water or sewer service
furnished at one place, and is thereafter located using water or sewer service
at some other place, the water shall be turned off at the new location until
all valid sewer service accounts past due are paid.
   (D)   All meters, curb cocks, piping valves and meter boxes connected with
the city mains and service pipes, including those furnished at the expense of
the consumers or property owners, shall remain under the direct control of the
city, and no person or persons other than those authorized by the city shall
connect or disconnect, bypass, remove seals from, move or otherwise tamper with
any such meter or turn on or off the water at the curb cock, valve or meter, or
to open, move or tamper with any meter box, or open any meter box in any way.
   (E)   No person shall make use of city sewers except in accordance with the
terms and conditions of this chapter.
   (F)   Whenever water shall be used on any metered premises for fire
protection or firefighting, in an actual case of fire or conflagration, no
charge shall be made for the use of sewers as determined by such water
consumption, and the amount of water so used shall be ascertained by comparison
with the average use of water during a corresponding billing period, as shown
by the meter.
   (G)   (1)   Whoever intentionally, by any means or device, prevents water
from passing through any meter belonging to the city, or used in connection
with the supply of water or measurement of sewage or water flows for any user
by the city, to register the flow passing through such meter, or intentionally
prevents a meter from duly registering the flow or in any way interferes with
its proper action or just registration, or without the consent in writing of
the city intentionally diverts any water from any pipe or pipes of the city or
otherwise intentionally uses, or causes to be used, without the consent of the
city, any water produced or distributed by the city, or any person who retains
possession of or refuses to deliver any meter or other appliance loaned to him
or her by the city for the purpose of furnishing water or measuring sewage or
water flow shall for every offense suffer a penalty as hereinafter provided.
      (2)   The presence at any time on or about any such meter or pipe of any
device or pipes resulting in the diversion of water or prevention of its free
passage and registration by the meter or diverting from the meter as above
defined or resulting in the prevention of water from reaching the meter, or
preventing the just registration of the meter or meters or the taking of any
water except through a meter as above set forth shall constitute prima-facie
evidence of knowledge on the part of the person owning or having custody and
control of the room, building, place or premises where such device or pipe is
of the existence thereof and knowledge of such existence to the person who
would be benefitted by the failure of the water to be properly metered, and
shall further constitute prima facie evidence of intention on the part of such
person or persons to defraud, and shall bring such person prima facie within
the scope, meaning and penalties of these regulations.
   (H)   Any use of sewers connected to the sewerage system which is not
metered, or otherwise controlled by the city, shall be billed on a basis which
is mutually agreed upon by the city and the contracting person prior to such
use.
   (I)   If any person or persons discharge sewage into the sewerage system
without the provisions of meter, or other approved method of measuring flow,
water service to the premises may be discontinued and/or the sewer connection
may be blocked to prohibit use after five days’ written notice.
(Ord. 1225, passed 3-21-1977) Penalty, see §
52.999
WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT
§ 52.195 RATES FOR DUMPING AT TREATMENT PLANT.
   The following rates shall be charged for septic waste which is hauled to and
dumped in the special septic waste vault at the city’s wastewater treatment
plant:
   (A)    For a haul truck with a 1,000 gallon tank or less, the fee shall be a
flat rate of $55;
   (B)   For a haul truck with a tank capacity greater than 1,000 but no more
than 1,500 gallons, a fee shall be a flat rate of $85;
   (C)   For a haul truck with a tank capacity greater than 1,500 but not more
than 2,000 gallons, a fee shall be a flat rate of $110;
   (D)   For a haul truck with a tank capacity greater than 2,000 but not more
than 2,500 gallons, a fee shall be a flat rate of $135;
   (E)   For a haul truck with a tank capacity greater than 2,500 but not more
than 3,000 gallons, a fee shall be a flat rate of $165;
   (F)   For a haul truck with a tank capacity greater than 3,000 but not more
than 4,000 gallons, a fee shall be a flat rate of $220; and
   (G)   For a haul truck with a tank capacity greater than 4,001 but not more
than 5,000 gallons, a fee shall be a flat rate of $275;
   (H)   For a haul truck with a tank capacity greater than 5,001 but not more
than 6,000 gallons, a fee shall be a flat rate of $300;
(Res. 17-04, passed 2-6-2017; Res. 17-10, passed 7-17-2017; Res. 22-31, passed
12-19-2022)
Editor’s Note:
   See also city’s fee schedule
§ 52.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is proscribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person or owner who fails to cease and desist from discharging
runoff into the combined sewers within 90 days of written notice to do so shall
be in violation of §
52.150, and in addition to all other rights and remedies of the city for such
violation shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine not less than $300
nor more than $1,000 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days, or both.
Each 30 days of non compliance shall constitute a separate offense.
   (C)   Any person violating any of the provisions of §§
52.165 to
52.184 may, on conviction in a summary proceeding, be subjected to a fine of
not less than $50 nor more than $1,000 for each offense, together with costs of
prosecution, and in default of payment thereof undergo imprisonment in the
county jail for a term not in excess of 30 days.
   (D)   (1)   A user who has violated, or continues to violate, any provision
of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or
any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall be liable to the city for
a maximum civil penalty of $1,000 per day per violation. Each violation for
each separate day shall constitute a separate and distinct offense under this
section. In the case of a monthly or other long-term average discharge limit,
penalties may accrue for each day during the period of the violation.
      (2)   In addition to the civil penalties provided herein, the city may
recover interest, damages, reasonable attorney’s fees, expert witness fees,
administrative or show cause proceedings costs and/or court costs, court
reporter fees and other administrative enforcement, proceedings and/or
litigation expenses against the person or user found to be in violation of this
chapter.
      (3)   In determining the amount of the civil penalty liability, the court
shall take into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited
to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration of
the violation, any economic benefit gained through the user’s violation,
corrective actions by the user, the compliance history of the user and any
other factors as justice requires, expressly including the factors set forth in
the city’s civil penalty assessment policy attached hereto as
Appendix A.
      (4)   Filing a suit for judicially-imposed civil penalties hereunder
shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action
against a user.
   (E)   (1)   A user who willfully or negligently violates any provision of
this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any
other pretreatment standard or requirement shall, upon conviction, be guilty of
a criminal summary offense, punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000 per
violation, per day, or imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or both.
      (2)   A user who willfully or negligently introduces any substance into
the POTW which causes personal injury or property damage shall, upon
conviction, be guilty of a criminal summary offense and be subject to a penalty
of not more than $1,000, or be subject to imprisonment for not more than 90
days, or both. This penalty shall be in addition to any other cause of action
for personal injury or property damage available under state law.
      (3)   A user who knowingly makes any false statements, representations or
certifications in any application, record, report, plan or other documentation
filed, or required to be maintained, pursuant to this chapter, wastewater
discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or who falsifies, tampers with or
knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under
this chapter shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a criminal summary offense,
punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000 per violation, per day, or
imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or both.
(Ord. 1225, passed 3-21-1977; Ord. 1433, passed 7-1-2002; Ord. 1562, passed 5-
2-2016)
Cross-reference:
   Civil penalty assessment policy, see
Appendix A
APPENDIX A: CIVIL PENALTY ASSESSMENT POLICY
   (A)   Introduction. The city hereby adopts and issues this policy for the
assessment of civil penalties for violations of the pretreatment and/or other
provisions in the city’s sewer ordinance.
   (B)   Purpose.
      (1)   
Chapter 52, inter alia, establishes a regulatory system by which the city
monitors and controls the quantity and quality of discharges to its sewage
collection system from industrial and other users. A key to the success of this
program is timely and meaningful enforcement of pretreatment regulations
governing the discharge of industrial waste into the city’s sewage collection
system.
      (2)   It is the purpose of this policy to establish procedures by which
the city may assess administrative civil penalties. Nothing in this policy is
to be construed as precluding any other action or remedy available, in equity
or at law by any legal entity or governmental entity.
   (C)   Procedure for assessing civil penalties.
      (1)   Violations of the pretreatment and other ordinance provisions are
discovered through a variety of mechanisms. These may include industrial users’
self-monitoring compliance reports; city sampling; city field inspections;
reports from other governmental agencies; and reports from employees or
citizens. When the city determines that a civil penalty is warranted, an
investigation is initiated to determine the appropriate level of penalty. The
purpose of the investigation is to evaluate the factors used to determine the
amount of the civil penalty. The factors to be evaluated are the damage to the
air, water, land or other natural resources of the commonwealth and their uses;
costs of restoration and abatement; savings resulting to the user in
consequence of the violation; history of past violations; deterrence of future
violations; and other relevant factors, as well as the civil penalties factors
as set forth in the Federal Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.) and the
state’s Clean Streams Act (35 P.S. §§ 691.1 et seq.) The results of the
investigation shall be documented and the appropriate penalty determined in
accordance with the foregoing factors.
      (2)   Once the city has prepared a recommended penalty assessment, a show
cause order is prepared by the coordinator. The show cause order shall contain
the name and address of the user committing the violation; the specific
violation or violations for which the penalty is sought with a brief
description of the circumstances surrounding the violation or violations
sufficient to provide notice to the user; an explanation of the factors
selected to determine the penalty; the penalty proposed; and any other
enforcement actions proposed to be taken at that time in addition to the
penalty.
      (3)   The show cause order and attachments shall be submitted to the City
Sewer Director. If the show cause order facially states a violation, the Sewer
Director shall sign the show cause order and direct the user to appear before
him or her for a show cause hearing on a date no sooner than 15 days from the
issuance of the show cause order. The Sewer Director shall direct that the show
cause order be served upon the user. Upon service of the show cause order, the
Sewer Director shall advise the user that; the user has the right to be
represented by counsel; a court reporter will be present to record the show
cause hearing, the user is entitled to present witnesses and offer evidence on
its own behalf; the user will have the right to cross examine any witness of
the city; and any testimony presented at the show cause hearing will be under
oath or affirmation
      (4)   The Sewer Director shall preside over the show cause hearing. At
the show cause hearing, the coordinator shall present testimony and evidence in
support of the proposed order. The user, with the assistance of its own
counsel, shall have the opportunity to defend its actions and to challenge the
proposed assessment of the penalty or other enforcement action. At the
conclusion of the show cause hearing, the Sewer Director shall direct the
coordinator and the industrial user, with the assistance of their respective
counsels, to prepare proposed findings of fact, conclusions of law and orders.
After consideration and review of the proposed findings of fact, conclusions of
law and orders submitted, the Sewer Director shall prepare a final order which
is supported by findings of fact and conclusions of law. This final order may
be appealed to the county’s Common Pleas Court within 30 days of its issuance
pursuant to 42 Pa.C.S.A. §§ 933 and 5571(b).
      (5)   Appealing a penalty or negotiating a compliance agreement shall not
relieve a user of a duty to mitigate and/or correct any violation of any
federal, state or local law, regulation, ordinance, permit or requirement.
Penalties shall continue to accrue for existing or new violations during the
negotiation or appeal process until the issues involved with such violations
are resolved.
   (D)   Procedure for obtaining consent penalties.
      (1)   In addition to the unilateral penalty assessment just described,
the coordinator may negotiate consent penalties in lieu of assessments.
      (2)   The procedures established herein for determining the appropriate
penalties shall be used for obtaining consent penalties. In addition to the
information required to be included in the show cause order, the coordinator
shall also include a brief description of the circumstances which justify a
negotiated penalty. Negotiated penalties may be less than unilateral penalties
with justification, but the initial penalties sought must take into account the
relevant and applicable penalties factors. As with assessed penalties, proposed
consent penalties must be reviewed and approved by the Sewer Director.
      (3)   Factors to be considered in determining whether to seek a consent
penalty include without limitation the nature and severity of the violation,
compliance history, recalcitrance of the user, undue economic distress caused
by assessment of the penalty according to the factors, and the negative impact
which the penalty would have upon the users ability to achieve compliance.
Consent penalties shall be incorporated into binding and enforceable consent
order and agreements or compliance agreements negotiated to achieve timely and
effective correction of the violation. All consent orders and agreements or
compliance agreements shall stipulate further penalties for breach of any terms
of such agreement.
(Ord. 1433, passed 7-1-2002)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   GENERAL REGULATIONS
      
71.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
      
72.   BICYCLES AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
      
73.   PARKING REGULATIONS
      
74.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
      
75.   PARKING SCHEDULES
CHAPTER 70: GENERAL REGULATIONS
Section
   
70.01   Weight restrictions
   
70.02   Electrical speed timing device
   
70.03   No u-turns
   
70.04   Turning when traffic obstructed
   
70.05   Noise
§ 70.01 WEIGHT RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   The City Council may from time to time designate, either by motion or
resolution, streets within the city which streets shall be limited in use to
vehicles not exceeding five tons’ gross weight under the provisions of this
division (A).
   (B)   After any such resolution or motion has been adopted or passed by the
City Council, the necessary officials of this city shall post such streets with
such signs as may be required by law indicating to the public the weight limit
applicable to such streets.
   (C)   The term FIVE TONS’ GROSS WEIGHT shall be construed to be the total
weight of the vehicle, operator, passengers and load.
   (D)   This division (A) shall not apply to vehicles which travel upon any
restricted streets only for the purpose of making a delivery or a pick-up from
a residence or place of business located on such restricted street, provided,
however, that in making such delivery or pick-up such vehicle shall travel on
the restricted street the minimum practical distance.
(Ord. 952, passed 10-3-1960) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 70.02 ELECTRICAL SPEED TIMING DEVICE.
   (A)   The city’s Police Department, under the direction of the Mayor, be
authorized to place the “speed check” device on any street within the city for
the purpose of monitoring vehicle speed and issuing citations to those persons
found to be in violation of the legally posted speed on said streets.
   (B)   The electrical speed timing device used by the Police Department shall
be maintained and certified at regular intervals according to the state’s
Department of Transportation Regulations.
(Ord. 1287, passed 8-2-1982)
§ 70.03 NO U-TURNS.
   There shall be no u-turns on any street
(Ord. 929, passed 2-2-1959) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 70.04 TURNING WHEN TRAFFIC OBSTRUCTED.
   No vehicle shall in order to make a turn, if, in doing so, traffic is
obstructed.
(Ord. 929, passed 2-2-1959) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 70.05 NOISE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to make or suffer to be made unnecessary
noise in connection with the operation of any vehicles within the city.
(Ord. 929, passed 2-2-1959) Penalty, see §
73.99
CHAPTER 71: STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Section
   
71.01   Definitions
   
71.02   Driving on sidewalks prohibited
   
71.03   Exception
   
71.04   Making complete stop before approaching street
   
71.05   Vehicles in excessive size or weight
   
71.06   Parades
   
71.07   Repairing of vehicles
 
   
71.99   Penalty
§ 71.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   MOTOR DRIVEN VEHICLE. Any vehicle, conveyance or equipment which is
propelled or driven by a motor or engine.
   PARKWAY. Any area within a public street right-of-way which is not a public
sidewalk or traveled roadway.
   PUBLIC SIDEWALK. Any area used by the public for a pedestrian walkway within
or along a street right-of-way.
(Ord. 1150, passed 2-1-1971)
§ 71.02 DRIVING ON SIDEWALKS PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to operate or park, or cause
to be operated or parked, any motor driven vehicle on the public sidewalks or
parkways of the city, except that nothing contained herein shall prohibit the
movement of such vehicles or conveyances across a public sidewalk or parkway at
right angles to the sidewalk or parkway in order to gain ingress or egress from
property adjacent to the sidewalk if due regard and care for the safety of
pedestrians is observed.
(Ord. 1150, passed 2-1-1971) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.03 EXCEPTION.
   Nothing herein contained shall prohibit the operation or use of mechanical
or motorized equipment specifically designed and used for snow plowing or
removal and/or lawn maintenance.
(Ord. 1150, passed 2-1-1971)
§ 71.04 MAKING COMPLETE STOP BEFORE APPROACHING STREET.
   All vehicles shall, before leaving any private driveway or alley, come to a
complete stop before entering into a street of the city.
(Ord. 929, passed 2-2-1959) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 71.05 VEHICLES IN EXCESSIVE SIZE OR WEIGHT.
   No vehicle in excessive size or weight which is likely to cause a delay or
danger to traffic or damage to a street shall be moved in the city without a
permit from the Superintendent of Street and Public Improvements.
(Ord. 929, passed 2-2-1959) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 71.06 PARADES.
   No parade shall be held except upon permit of the Mayor or Chief of Police
and if an when held shall be subject to the regulations of the Chief of Police.
(Ord. 929, passed 2-2-1959) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 71.07 REPAIRING OF VEHICLES.
   The streets of the city shall not be used for the repairing or overhauling
of vehicles except in an emergency.
(Ord. 929, passed 2-2-1959) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 71.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person or persons violating or failing to comply with any of the
provisions of §§
71.01 through
71.03 may, upon conviction in a summary proceeding, be subjected to a fine of
not less than $10 nor more than $50 for each offense and in default of payment
thereof, imprisonment in county jail for a term not in excess of 30 days.
(Ord. 1150, passed 2-1-1971)
CHAPTER 72: BICYCLES AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
Section
General Provisions
   
72.01   Definitions
   
72.02   Riding prohibited on public parking lots and in designated public areas
   
72.03   Riding upon private property prohibited without permission
   
72.04   Law enforcement exclusion
Snowmobiles
   
72.15   Operation
 
   
72.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 72.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PRIVATE PROPERTY. Non-public property, owned by an individual, partnership
or corporation, and may mean both land and/or other property held in possession
of such owner.
   PUBLIC PARKING LOTS. All parking areas and spaces of all natures and
descriptions whatsoever located within the city, whether owned and operated by
the city or any other public entity.
   PUBLIC SIDEWALK. The improved surface beginning at the face of the curb line
along a street and continuing to front edge of private property, intended for
use by pedestrians in the course of travel along the said street. It shall also
mean a sidewalk run through or across any publicly owned land or facility.
(Ord. 1463, passed 10-3-2005)
§ 72.02 RIDING PROHIBITED ON PUBLIC PARKING LOTS AND IN DESIGNATED PUBLIC
AREAS.
   It shall be unlawful to use, operate or ride a bicycle, roller skates,
roller blades, skateboards, scooters and similar equipment on any public
parking lot located within the city or to ride said devices within the property
known as the City Park.
(Ord. 1463, passed 10-3-2005) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.03 RIDING UPON PRIVATE PROPERTY PROHIBITED WITHOUT PERMISSION.
   It shall be unlawful to use, operate or ride a bicycle, roller skates,
roller blades, skateboards, scooters and similar equipment on any private
property within the city without the prior written permission of the owner of
such property; provided, that oral permission will be satisfactory with respect
to private property owned and occupied by the parents, legal guardians or
grandparents of the person using, operating or riding upon such devices. It
shall be unlawful to use any personal property (fixed or portable) as a prop
for jumping on or over, grinding on or ramping to without prior written
permission.
(Ord. 1463, passed 10-3-2005) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.04 LAW ENFORCEMENT EXCLUSION.
   Any law enforcement officer shall be exempt from prosecution for the
performance of any acts in violation of this chapter which are committed during
the discharge of his or her duties as a law enforcement officer.
(Ord. 1463, passed 10-3-2005)
SNOWMOBILES
§ 72.15 OPERATION.
   (A)   Snowmobiles shall not be operated on pedestrian sidewalks.
   (B)   The streets and alleyways shall not be used as snowmobile play areas.
(Res. passed 2-2-1970) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of §§
72.01 through
72.04 shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $25 and not more than
$300.
(Ord. 1463, passed 10-3-2005)
CHAPTER 73: PARKING REGULATIONS
Section
   
73.01   Parking in streets and alleys
   
73.02   Parking on or close to bridges
   
73.03   Parking between curb and sidewalk
   
73.04   Night parking
   
73.05   Thirty-degree angle parking
   
73.06   Parking of vehicles for show or sale
   
73.07   Vehicles for hire
   
73.08   Parking of trucks
   
73.09   Parking of cars in groups
   
73.10   Parking in alleys
   
73.11   Parking meters
   
73.12   Which side of street parking allowed determined by house number
   
73.13   Posting of signs
 
   
73.99   Penalty
§ 73.01 PARKING IN STREETS AND ALLEYS.
   (A)   All parking on the streets and alleys of the city shall be parallel
parking unless specifically stated otherwise.
   (B)   In case of parallel parking where stalls are marked out on the
pavement, the entire vehicle shall be within such stall.
(Ord. 929, passed 2-2-1959) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.02 PARKING ON OR CLOSE TO BRIDGES.
   No vehicle shall be parked on any bridge or within 25 feet from the approach
of any bridges within the city.
(Ord. 929, passed 2-2-1959) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.03 PARKING BETWEEN CURB AND SIDEWALK.
   It shall be unlawful to park or leave standing any vehicle between the curb,
actual highway or roadway as commonly used and the sidewalk on any street in
the city.
(Ord. 929, passed 2-2-1959) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.04 NIGHT PARKING.
   It shall be unlawful to park or leave standing longer than one hour any
vehicle on any street in the city between the hours of 3:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.
where official signs are erected. If this section is violated on more than one
night, each nights’ violation shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 929, passed 2-2-1959) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.05 THIRTY-DEGREE ANGLE PARKING.
   (A)   In the case of angle parking, the right front wheel of the car shall
be not more than six inches from the curb and the car shall be parked at an
angle to the curb of 30 degrees.
   (B)   No vehicle over 20 feet from curb to rear of the vehicle shall park on
any street where 30-degree parking is used, except for the purpose of
immediately loading or unloading merchandise, freight or other goods.
(Ord. 929, passed 2-2-1959) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.06 PARKING OF VEHICLES FOR SHOW OR SALE.
   There shall be no parking of vehicles for show or sales purpose on any
street in the city.
(Ord. 929, passed 2-2-1959) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.07 VEHICLES FOR HIRE.
   Jitney busses, taxicabs, busses and other vehicles for hire shall not park
or stand on any of the streets of the city except at such places, during such
hours and subject to such regulations as may be designated by the Chief of
Police. Any and all persons, partnerships or corporations desiring to operate
such conveyance shall make application to and at all times be under the
supervision of the Chief of Police.
(Ord. 929, passed 2-2-1959) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.08 PARKING OF TRUCKS.
   It shall be unlawful to park any truck that is 20 feet or more long from
bumper to bumper, longer than 15 minutes for the purpose of loading or
unloading on Centre Street from South Street to Franklin Street.
(Ord. 929, passed 2-2-1959) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.09 PARKING OF CARS IN GROUPS.
   The parking of cars on the streets of the city in groups of more than two by
any person, firm or corporation is hereby forbidden.
(Ord. 929, passed 2-2-1959) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.10 PARKING IN ALLEYS.
   There shall be no parking in any alley in the city.
(Ord. 929, passed 2-2-1959) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.11 PARKING METERS.
   (A)   The Mayor may from time to time install parking meters at such
locations as he or she directs, to operate during such time as he or she shall
designate and to have such parking limits as he or she designates.
   (B)   It shall be a violation of this section for any person to leave his or
her car parked or standing at a parking meter within the hours designated by
the Mayor if the parking meter flag registers a violation.
   (C)   In parallel parking spaces, any vehicle parked in a metered zone shall
be parked with either its front or rear end within 18 inches of a line
extending out from the parking meter and perpendicular to the curb depending
upon the location of the parking meter for that parking space, and in either
event shall be parked within the lines marked on the street for such parking
spaces.
(Ord. 929, passed 2-2-1959; Ord. 1033, passed 2-1-1965) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.12 WHICH SIDE OF STREET PARKING ALLOWED DETERMINED BY HOUSE NUMBER.
   (A)   There shall be no parking on the side of any street in the city where
house addresses are odd numbers, between the hours of 5:00 p.m. on even-
numbered days to 5:00 p.m. on odd-numbered days. At all other times, parking
shall be allowed on such side of all streets posted in accordance with this
section.
   (B)   There shall be no parking on the side of any street in the city where
the house addresses are even numbers, between the hours of 5:00 p.m. on odd-
numbered days to 5:00 p.m. on even-numbered days. At all other times, parking
shall be allowed on such side of all streets posted in accordance with this
section.
   (C)   Divisions (A) and (B) of this section shall be effective only as to
such streets as are posted with signs indicating the provisions of divisions
(A) and (B).
(Ord. 1000, passed 4-15-1963) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.13 POSTING OF SIGNS.
   The Council may from time to time direct the posting of signs regulating the
parking of vehicles at such locations as Council may designate and to have such
parking limits as they shall designate.
(Ord. 1033, passed 2-1-1965)
§ 73.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   The fine for violation of any provision of this chapter shall be $15
if payment is made to the Police Department within 72 hours after the offense.
After the expiration of 72 hours from the date of the offense, the fine shall
be $20.
   (B)   If the fine is not paid within five days after a notice is sent by the
Police Department directing the offender to pay the necessary at the Police
Department, then the parking ticket shall be referred to the Magisterial
District Court, and upon conviction thereof in a summary proceeding be
sentenced to pay a fine of $50 plus cost of prosecution. In default of such
payment of fine, such person shall be liable to imprisonment for not more than
five days.
   (C)   Notwithstanding the above, the Mayor may provide central boxes or
receptacles and may permit persons who have violated the metered time limit
parking provisions of this chapter to deposit $1 in such boxes or pay at the
police station within such period after the violation as the Mayor may
designate, and the payment of such $1 shall be in lieu of all other penalties
herein provided for metered overtime parking.
(Ord. 929, passed 2-2-1959; Ord. 1033, passed 2-1-1965; Ord. 1220, passed 11-
15-1976; Ord. 1290, passed 10-4-1982; Ord. 1346, passed 2-18-1991; Ord. 1431,
passed 3-4-2002; Ord. 1571, passed 8-21-2017)
CHAPTER 74: TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
Schedule
   
I.   Roller blades, skateboards and the like
   
II.   Thru highways
   
III.   One-way streets
SCHEDULE I. ROLLER BLADES, SKATEBOARDS AND THE LIKE.
   It shall be unlawful to use, operate or ride roller skates, roller blades,
skateboards, scooters and similar equipment on the sidewalk along the following
portion of the streets and designated areas in the city.
Street Side Between
Street            Side  Between
Center Street     Both  Smith Street to Pleasant Street
First Avenue      East  Main Street to South Street
Main Street       South First Avenue to Center Street
Main Street       Both  Center Street to Concord Street
Maple Avenue      West  Main Street to Washington Street
South Street      Both  First Avenue to Mill Street
Spring Street     Both  Main Street to South Street
Washington Street Both  First Avenue to Maple Avenue
 
(Ord. 1463, passed 10-3-2005) Penalty, see §
72.99
SCHEDULE II. THRU HIGHWAYS.
   (A)   State Highway L.R. 25076 from Station 176+80 (city line) to Station
224+23 shall be, and is hereby designated as, a “thru highway” and all traffic
shall come to a full stop before entering or crossing the same after proper
signs have been erected.
   (B)   The city requests the Department of Highways to erect signs at the
intersections of all highways which enter upon said state highway between the
points aforesaid.
   (C)   Said state highway shall not be considered a “thru highway” unless or
until the Secretary of Highways approves this resolution and the Department of
Highways erects the necessary signs to stop traffic as above.
(Res. passed 7-6-1964)
SCHEDULE III. ONE-WAY STREETS.
   The following are one-way streets in the city:
 
Street               Description                           Ord. No. Date Passed
                     Portion extending from Concord Street
                     to East Street shall be restricted to
East South Street    vehicular traffic moving in a         929      2-2-1959
                     westerly direction and all parked
                     vehicles shall be facing in a
                     westerly direction
                     Portion extending from Concord Street
East Pleasant Street to East Street shall be restricted to 929      2-2-1959
                     vehicle traffic moving in an easterly
                     direction
                     Portion extending from North Center
                     Street to Mott Street shall be
Franklin Street      restricted to vehicle traffic moving  929      2-2-1959
                     in a westerly direction and all
                     parked vehicles shall be facing in a
                     westerly direction
                     Portion extending from East
                     Washington Street to East Park Place
                     shall be restricted to vehicular
Maple Avenue         traffic moving in a northerly         929      2-2-1959
                     direction and parked vehicles shall
                     be facing in a northerly direction on
                     the east side of the street
                     Portion extending from West
                     Washington Street to West Park Place
                     shall be restricted to vehicular
                     traffic moving in a southerly
                     direction and all parked vehicles
Mott Street          shall be facing in a southerly        1242     8-7-1978
                     direction; excepting that portion
                     south of the former Allen Street
                     which shall be open to two-way
                     traffic with no parking on either
                     side
                     Portion extending from North Center
                     Street to Mott Street shall be
West Park Place      restricted to vehicular traffic       1242     8-7-1978
                     moving in a westerly direction and
                     all parked vehicles shall be facing
                     in a westerly direction
 
(Ord. 929, passed 2-2-1959; Ord. 1033, passed 2-1-1965; Ord. 1242, passed 8-7-
1978) Penalty, see §
73.99
CHAPTER 75: PARKING SCHEDULES
Schedule
   
I.   No parking areas
   
II.   No parking signs
   
III.   Restricted parking
SCHEDULE I. NO PARKING AREAS.
   (A)   The following are no parking areas in the city:
Street Description Ord. No. Date Passed
Street     Description                                                                     Ord. Date
                                                                                           No.  Passed
Allen      No parking on the north side or the east side of Allen Street                   929  2-2-
Street                                                                                          1959
           Two-hour parking limits for cars parked on either side of Centre Street from
           Park Place to Pleasant Street excepting that in front of the federal post
           office building from the intersection of South Centre Street and West South
Centre     Street southerly to a point 125 feet from such intersection the parking period  929  2-2-
Street     shall be 15 minutes. Both the two-hour parking limit and the 15-minute parking       1959
           limit shall be effective between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.
           No parking on the east side of Centre Street from Park Place to Columbus Avenue
           No parking on either side of Centre Street from Pleasant Street to Grove Street
Chestnut   Parking is hereby prohibited on Chestnut Street, and that the city’s Department
Street     of Public Works is hereby ordered to erect “No Parking” signs in appropriate     
           locations to inform the public of said prohibition.
           No parking on the south side of East Church Street from Centre Street to
           Concord Street
           30-degree angle parking is required on the north side of East Church Street
           from Centre Street to Concord Street where the curbing has been removed, the
Church     pavement widened and space marked off for parking                                    2-2-
Street     No parking on the south side of West Church Street from Centre Street to Spring 929  1959
           Street
           No parking on the north side of Church Street from Spring Street to First
           Avenue
           No parking on the south side of Church Street from Euclid Street to Fourth
           Avenue
Clinton    No parking on that portion of Clinton Street except where parking meters are         2-2-
Street     provided                                                                        929  1959
           Parking restricted to two hours between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.
Concord    No parking on the east side of Concord Street from Main Street to Church Street 929  2-2-
Street                                                                                          1959
           Parking is hereby prohibited from the bridge on East Pleasant Street in the 400
           block for a distance of 300 feet East to the intersection of Summer Street on
           the south side of the street during the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 2:
           00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. during normal days of school
           No parking on the south side of the 500 block of East Pleasant Street from
East       Summer Street to Avenue A at any time
Pleasant   North side of the 500 block of East Pleasant Street shall be no parking during       
Street     the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. during normal
           days of school
           No parking during the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. to 4:00
           p.m. during normal days of school the north side of East South Street from
           Avenue A to just east of the east school district parking lot entrance
           There shall be established a resident only parking only on the west side of
           Summer Street from East Pleasant street to East South Street
           Public parking is hereby prohibited on the north side of East South Street,
           from the intersection of East South Street and South Center Street, extending
           East a distance of a total of 164 feet to Chestnut Street
           Notwithstanding the foregoing, however, parking of municipal vehicles only
           shall be permitted on the north side of East South Street beginning
           approximately 36 feet from the intersection of East South Street and South
           Center Street (which is currently delineated “No Parking Here to Corner”),
           extending East a distance of 71 feet
           The area from 36 feet point to 164 feet from said curbside shall be designated
East South “Municipal Vehicles Only” and “Tow Away Zone” from the intersection of East
Street     South Street and South Center Street                                                 
           Except for public safety vehicles, at no time is a driveway to be blocked or
           impeded
           The Corry Department of Public Works is hereby ordered to erect “Municipal
           Vehicles Only” and “Tow Away Zone” signs as may be appropriate and in
           appropriate locations to inform the public of said parking prohibition, and any
           other measures deemed necessary to alert said public of this no parking
           restriction
           MUNICIPAL VEHICLES is defined as any vehicle titled to any municipality and/or
           any motor vehicle owned and/or operated by a member of the city’s Police or
           Fire Departments, including those of career and volunteer firefighters
Fifth      No parking on the west side of Fifth Avenue                                     929  2-2-
Avenue                                                                                          1959
First      Parking on First Avenue between Pleasant Street and Main Street is limited to   929  2-2-
Avenue     two hours between 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.                                            1959
Fourth     No parking on the west side of Fourth Avenue from West Church Street to West    929  2-2-
Avenue     Main Street                                                                          1959
           No parking on the north side of the Franklin Street between Centre Street and
Franklin   Grace Street and on the south side of Franklin Street                           929  2-2-
Street     Parking shall be limited to two hours between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 9:00        1959
           p.m.
Grace      No parking on the east side of Grace Street                                     929  2-2-
Street                                                                                          1959
Lemon      No parking on the west side of Lemon Street between Pleasant Street and Main    929  2-2-
Street     Street                                                                               1959
           From the east side of First Avenue to the west side of Concord Street parking
           on Main Street shall be limited to two hours between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and
           9:00 p.m.
           No parking on the north side of West Main Street between Second Avenue and
           Union Street
Main       No parking on either side of West Main Street between First Avenue and Second        2-2-
Street     Avenue                                                                          929  1959
           No parking on the north side of East Main Street between Concord Street and
           East Street
           On the north side of West Main Street from Centre Street to First Avenue
           parking shall be limited to 30-degree angle parking
           No parking shall be permitted on either side of West Main Street from Union
           Street to Fifth Avenue
           No parking on the west side of the Maple Avenue between East Park Place and the
           East Washington Street
           No parking on the east side of Maple Avenue between East Park Place and East
           Smith Street
           Parking is limited to two hours between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on
Maple      Maple Avenue between Smith Street and Washington Street                         929  2-2-
Avenue     Between Smith Street and Park Place the parking permitted on the west side of        1959
           Maple Avenue shall be at a 30-degree angle
           No parking on the east side of Maple Avenue between Washington Street and the
           railroad right-of-way
           On the west side of Maple Avenue between Washington Street and the railroad,
           parking shall be parallel to the center of Maple Avenue
Mill       No parking on either side of Mill Street                                        929  2-2-
Street                                                                                          1959
           No parking on the east side of Mott Street between Washington Street and Park
Mott       Place                                                                           929  2-2-
Street     Parking on the west side of the street is limited to two hours between the           1959
           hours of 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.
           No parking on the north side of West Park Place between Centre Street and Grace
           Street
           No parking on the south side of the East Park Place between Centre Street and
Park Place Maple Avenue                                                                    929  2-2-
           Parking on the remainder of Park Place shall be limited to two hours between         1959
           the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.
           Parking on the north side of the East Park Place from Maple Avenue to Centre
           Street shall be 30-degree angle parking
Park       Parking is limited to two hours between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on 929  2-2-
Street     the entire street                                                                    1959
           No parking on the south side of East Pleasant Street from Centre Street to East
           Street
           No parking on the north side of West Pleasant Street between Centre Street and
Pleasant   Northwest Street                                                                     2-2-
Street     No parking on the south side of East Pleasant Street between Fourth Avenue and  929  1959
           Northwest Street
           On the south side of West Pleasant Street between Centre Street and Fourth
           Avenue parking will be limited to two hours of parking between the hours of 8:
           00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.
           No parking on the east side of Second Avenue from Pleasant Street to Main
Second     Street                                                                          929  2-2-
Avenue     No parking on the west side of North Second Avenue from West Washington Street       1959
           to the Pennsylvania Railroad
Sixth      No parking on the west side of Sixth Avenue                                     929  2-2-
Avenue                                                                                          1959
           No parking on the south side of Smith Street between Centre Street and Maple
           Avenue
           No parking on either side of Smith Street between Maple Avenue and Wright
           Street
Smith      No parking on the south side of Smith Street between Wright Street and Wayne         2-2-
Street     Street                                                                          929  1959
           No parking on the south side of West Smith Street from Centre Street to Mead
           Avenue
           No parking on either side of Smith Street between Mead Avenue and Essex Street
           No parking on the north side of Smith Street between Essex Street and Worth
           Street
           No parking on the south side of East South Street from the east side of Centre
           Street to a point distant easterly 100 feet from the easterly line of Centre
           Street for a longer period than 15 minutes between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and
           9:00 p.m.
South      On the north side of East South Street from Centre Street to Mill Street and on      2-2-
Street     the south side of East South Street from a point 100 feet east of the easterly  929  1959
           of Centre Street to Mill Street and on both sides of West South Street from
           Centre Street to First Avenue parking shall be limited to two hours between 8:
           00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.
           No parking on the south side of East South Street from Concord Street to East
           Street
Spring     No parking on the east side of Spring Street from West Main Street to West      929  2-2-
Street     Church Street                                                                        1959
Third      No parking on the east side of Third Avenue                                     929  2-2-
Avenue                                                                                          1959
           No parking on the north side of West Washington Street between the west side of
           Allen Street and the Buffalo Division of the Pennsylvania Railroad on the south
Washington side Washington Street between Alley Street and Maple Avenue                         2-2-
Street     Parking shall be limited to two hours between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 9:00   929  1959
           p.m.
           No parking shall be permitted on the north side of West Washington Street
           between Mead Avenue and Essex Street
           Parking is prohibited on the west side of Wayne Street from East Congress
           Street to East Irving Street
Wayne      Parking is also prohibited on the east side of Wright Street from East Congress
Street     Street to the end of the school property                                             
           It is also determined that parking be prohibited on the north side of East
           Congress Street from Wayne Street to Wright Street while permitting parking on
           the south side of East Congress Street from Wayne Street to Wright Street
West       No parking on the north side of North Congress Street from Centre Street to the      2-2-
Congress   right-of-way of the Buffalo Division of the Pennsylvania Railroad               929  1959
Street
Wright     No parking on the east side of Wright Street from Smith Street to Congress      929  2-2-
Street     Street                                                                               1959
 
   (B)   A violation of this schedule will consist of a fine of $10 per
occurrence to be paid within 72 hours. After 72 hours, the fine will be
increased to $15 per occurrence. If the fine is not paid within 14 days of
issuance, the violation/ticket will be referred to the District Court Justice
whereupon additional fines and court costs may be imposed.
(Ord. 929, passed 2-2-1959; Ord. 1547, passed 8-3-2015; Ord. 1548, passed 9-21-
2015; Ord. 1550, passed 10-5-2015; Ord. 1553, passed 11-2-2015) Penalty, see §
73.99
SCHEDULE II. NO PARKING SIGNS.
   (A)   No parking signs shall be erected on the west side of Second Avenue
from Pleasant Street to Sherman Street.
   (B)   No parking signs shall be erected on the west side of Euclid Street
from Church Street to Sherman Street.
   (C)   No parking signs shall be erected on both sides of West Pleasant
Street from Northwest Street to Route 77 bypass.
(Res. passed 3-1-1982) Penalty, see §
10.99
SCHEDULE III. RESTRICTED PARKING.
   (A)   Alternate parking:
      (1)   Seventh Street. Parking on Seventh Street from S. Center Street to
East Street will be designated as alternate parking starting at 5:00 p.m. even
days and 5:00 p.m. odd days.
      (2)   Mead Avenue. Parking on Mead Avenue from W. Washington Street to W.
Smith Street will be designated as alternate parking starting at 5:00 p.m. even
days and 5:00 p.m. odd days.
   (B)   No parking 3:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m.: Intentionally left blank.
   (C)   Streets no parking anytime: Intentionally left blank.
   (D)   Streets special parking regulations: Intentionally left blank.
   (E)   Alleys: There shall be no parking at any time in any alleys owned and
maintained by the city.
   (F)   Municipal lots: Overnight parking shall be as designated below:
      (1)   Lot 1. Beside China Jade on E. Washington Street, the middle two
rows will be designated alternate parking, one side will be no parking from 3:
00 a.m. to 7:00 a.m. even days and the other side will be no parking 3:00 a.m.
to 7:00 a.m. odd days. The side next to Fire Station 2 will be no parking 3:00
a.m. to 6:00 a.m.
      (2)   Lot 1A. Behind Center Place Apartments off of Park Street, the
spots not designated for Center Place Apartment parking only will be no parking
3:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m.
      (3)   Lot 2. Behind Tamarack Tavern off of Park Street, the two sides
will be designated alternate parking, one side will be no parking from 3:00
a.m. to 7:00 a.m. even days and the other side will be no parking 3:00 a.m. to
7:00 a.m. odd days.
      (4)   Lot 2A. Next to Willa's Pizza and Lot 3A next to the Elks Club will
be designated alternate parking between the lots with one lot no parking 3:00
a.m. to 6:00 a.m. even days and one lot designated no parking 3:00 a.m. to 6:00
a.m. odd days.
      (5)   Lot 3. East of Fire Station 2 on E. Washington Street, the two
sides will be designated alternate parking, one side will be no parking 3:00
a.m. to 7:00 a.m. even days and the other side will be no parking 3:00 a.m. to
7:00 a.m. odd days except for the Fire Department only parking spots.
      (6)   Lot 4. Next to Rossbacher Insurance on N. Center Street, the two
sides will be designated alternate parking, one side will be no parking from 3:
00 a.m. to 7:00 a.m. even days and the other side will be no parking 3:00 a.m
to 7:00 a.m. odd days.
      (7)   Lot 5. Next to the mural off of N. Center Street will be designated
no parking 3:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m.
      (8)   Lot 6. Next to Sam's Restaurant and Tropicana Bar on E. Main
Street, the middle two rows will be designated alternate parking, one side will
be no parking from 3:00 a.m. to 7:00 a.m. even days and the other side will be
no parking 3:00 a.m. to 7:00 a.m. odd days, the side next to Sam's Restaurant
will be no parking 3:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m.
      (9)   Lot 7. At the corner of W. Main Street and First Avenue, the two
sides directly off on First Avenue will be designated alternate parking, one
side will be no parking from 3:00 a.m. to 7:00 a.m. even days and the other
side will be no parking 3:00 a.m. to 7:00 a.m. odd days. The side off of Main
Street will be designated no parking 3:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m.
   (G)   Penalty.
      (1)   The fine for violating any provision of this schedule shall be $15
if payment is made to the Police Department within 72 hours after parking
violation. After the expiration of 72 hours from the date and time of the
violation, the fine shall be $20.
      (2)   If the fine is not paid within five days after a notice of unpaid
parking ticket is sent by the Police Department directing the offender/owner to
pay the necessary fine at the Police Department, then the parking ticket shall
be referred to the Magisterial District Court and upon conviction thereof in a
summary proceeding, be sentenced to pay a fine of $50 plus costs of
prosecution. In default of such payment of fine, such person shall be
imprisoned for not more than five days in the Erie County jail.
(Ord. 1583, passed 12-3-2018)
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   FAIR HOUSING
      
91.   ANIMALS
      
92.   FIRE PREVENTION
      
93.   PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
      
94.   PARKS AND RECREATION
      
95.   NUISANCES
CHAPTER 90: FAIR HOUSING
Section
   
90.01   Fair housing
§ 90.01 FAIR HOUSING.
   (A)   Discrimination in the sale, rental, leasing, financing of housing or
land to be used for construction of housing, or in the provision of brokerage
services because of race, color, sex (including gender identity and sexual
orientation), national origin, religion, familial status (families with
children), or handicap (disability) is prohibited by Title VIII of the Civil
Rights Act of 1968 (Federal Fair Housing Act) and the Pennsylvania Human
Relations Act adds the additional protected classes of age, ancestry and use of
guide or support animals because of the blindness, deafness or physical
handicap of the user or because the user is a handler or trainer of support or
guide animals. It is the policy of the city to implement programs to ensure
equal opportunity in housing for all persons regardless of race, color, sex
(including gender identity and sexual orientation), national origin, religion,
familial status, handicap, age, ancestry and use of guide or support animals
because of the blindness, deafness or physical handicap of the user or because
the user is a handler or trainer of support or guide animals. Additionally it
is illegal to retaliate against a person who has filed a fair housing complaint
or assisted in a fair housing investigation. Therefore, the city does hereby
pass the following section.
   (B)   Within available resources the city will assist all persons who feel
they have been discriminated against because of race, color, sex (including
gender identity and sexual orientation), national origin, religion, familial
status, handicap, age, ancestry and use of guide or support animals because of
the blindness, deafness or physical handicap of the user or because the user is
a handler or trainer of support or guide animals to seek equity under federal
and state laws by filing a complaint with the local Fair Housing Officer,
Pennsylvania Human Relations Commission and the U.S. Department of Housing and
Urban Development, whichever is chosen by the person filing the complaint.
   (C)   The city shall make publically known this section and through this
publicity shall cause owners of real estate, developers, and builders to become
aware of their respective responsibilities and rights under the Federal Fair
Housing Act, the Pennsylvania Human Relations Act, and any local laws or
ordinances.
   (D)   Further action will at a minimum include, but not to be limited to:
      (1)   Publicizing the name and contact information of the local Fair
Housing Officer, which will include the process to file a complaint if a person
feels they have been discriminated against in housing in any manner and other
applicable fair housing information through local media and community
contracts; and
      (2)   Conduct at least one fair housing activity annually to better
inform the public of their rights under the Fair Housing Law and Pennsylvania
Human Relations Act; and
      (3)   Use the fair housing logo on all materials dealing with housing
programs such as but not limited to:
         (a)   Public advertisements for vacancy or discussing the program.
         (b)   Applications for assistance.
         (c)   Contracts.
         (d)   Municipal letters dealing with the federal programs.
      (4)   If you’re a person with a disability or have limited English
proficiency and require a reasonable accommodation or document translation,
please contact the business offices of the city, 100 S. Center St., Corry, PA
16407, 814-663-7041, jsmith@corrypa.gov, www.corrypa.com.
(Res. 16-12, passed 10-3-2016; Res. 17-20, passed 10-16-2017; Res. 19-20,
passed 10-21-2019; Res. 20-10, passed 8-17-2020; Res. 22-18, passed 9-19-2022;
Res. 24-32, passed 10-21-2024) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 91: ANIMALS
Section
General Provisions
   
91.01   Definition
   
91.02   Noise disturbance
   
91.03   Animal wastes
   
91.04   Damage by animals
Running at Large
   
91.15   Definitions
   
91.16   Licensing and confining of dogs
   
91.17   Office of the dog pound operator
   
91.18   Capture and detention of dogs
   
91.19   Disposition of unclaimed dogs
 
   
91.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 91.01 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   OWNER. Any person having a right of property in any dog or cat or having
custody of any dog or cat, or any person who harbors or permits a dog or cat to
remain on or around his or her property.
(Ord. 1437, passed 10-21-2002)
§ 91.02 NOISE DISTURBANCE.
   (A)   No owner of any dog or cat shall allow or permit the dog or cat to
engage in repeated loud howling or barking or other unreasonable noise to the
disturbance of any person any time of the day or night regardless of whether
the dog or cat is physically situated in or upon private property. Such noise
is hereby declared to be a public nuisance.
   (B)   Whenever any person shall complain to the Police Department that a dog
which repeatedly barks or howls or a cat which repeatedly cries or howls is
being kept by any person in the city, the Police Department shall notify the
owner that a complaint has been received and direct the owner to take the
necessary steps to alleviate the barking, howling and/or crying. Notification
of the complaint and subsequent actions by the police officer shall be
documented in the Police Department’s official records, (dog complaint/activity
report).
   (C)   If, despite the warning by the Police Department, provided in division
(B) above, the dog or cat continues to bark, howl and/or cry to the disturbance
of any person and upon receipt by the Police Department of a verified complaint
by a citizen of the city followed by a written statement of fact and a
willingness by said citizen to testify in court, then the Police Department
shall cite the owner for a violation of this subchapter.
(Ord. 1437, passed 10-21-2002) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.03 ANIMAL WASTES.
   No person shall cause or permit a dog or cat to be present on property,
public or private, not owned or occupied by such person unless such person has
in his or her possession an appropriate device for cleaning up any waste by
such animal for immediate transmission and deposit in an appropriate receptacle
located upon property owned or possessed by such person. This section shall not
apply to a handicapped individual using an animal as a guide animal.
(Ord. 1437, passed 10-21-2002) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.04 DAMAGE BY ANIMALS.
   No owner of a dog or cat shall allow such dog or cat to damage in any
respect any property, public or private, not owned or possessed by such dog or
cat owner.
(Ord. 1437, passed 10-21-2002) Penalty, see §
91.99
RUNNING AT LARGE
§ 91.15 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AT LARGE. Intended to mean off the premises of the owner and not under the
control of the owner or a member of his or her immediate family, either by
leash, cord, chain or otherwise.
   DOGS. Intended to mean both male and female canines.
   OWNER. Intended to mean any person or persons, firm, association or
corporation owning, keeping or harboring a dog.
(Ord. 1002, passed 7-1-1963)
§ 91.16 LICENSING AND CONFINING OF DOGS.
   (A)   All dogs within the city shall be licensed as required by the laws of
the state.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any owner of any dog to permit such dog to
run at large regardless of whether such dog shall be licensed or unlicensed.
(Ord. 1002, passed 7-1-1963) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.17 OFFICE OF THE DOG POUND OPERATOR.
   (A)   There is hereby created and established the office of a dog pound
operator in the city, such office to be filled from time to time by the person
designated by the City Council.
   (B)   The dog pound operator shall function under the office of the Mayor
and in accordance with the rules and regulations consistent with this
subchapter that may be from time to time established by the Mayor.
(Ord. 1002, passed 7-1-1963)
§ 91.18 CAPTURE AND DETENTION OF DOGS.
   (A)   All dogs running at large in the city, whether or not such dogs have
licenses as required by the state, shall be captured by such persons as may be
from time to time designated by the Mayor.
   (B)   All dogs captured shall be turned over to the dog pound operator and
confined in a suitable place and cared for in a proper and humane manner by
said dog pound operator. The City Council reserves complete right to make rules
and regulations relative to the treatment of dogs so confined and to the place
of confinement in order that the confined dogs shall be treated in a humane
manner at all times and in a manner that is not offensive to the persons in the
neighborhood of the place of confinement.
   (C)   Immediately after capture of any dog bearing license or other
identification, the dog pound operator shall cause notice, either in person or
by registered mail, to be given to the person in whose name the dog is
licensed, or to his or her agent, notifying such person to claim the dog within
ten days from the date of such notice during which period the dog shall be
confined and cared for by the dog pound operator.
   (D)   All dogs without licenses or other identification captured running at
large shall be confined in the same manner by the said dog pound operator for a
period of at least five days; provided, however, that if the dog appears to be
under the age that would require a license then it shall be kept for a ten-day
period.
(Ord. 1002, passed 7-1-1963)
§ 91.19 DISPOSITION OF UNCLAIMED DOGS.
   All dogs captured and not claimed by the owner within a period stated above
shall be sold or given away, and in default of such shall be destroyed in some
humane manner, and the City Council reserves the right to make rules and
regulations regarding such destruction of dogs to ensure that the same is
performed in a humane manner.
(Ord. 1002, passed 7-1-1963)
§ 91.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of §§
91.02 through
91.04 shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than $300 plus costs
and, in default of payment thereof, to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 30
days.
   (B)   (1)   Any person violating any of the provisions of §§
91.15 though
91.19 may, on conviction in a summary proceeding, be subjected to s fine of $3
for the first offense and $10 for each subsequent offense, plus $1.50 per day
if said animal is lodged in the dog pound, together with costs of prosecution,
and, in default of payment thereof, imprisonment in the county jail for a term
not in excess of 30 days.
      (2)   Disposition of fines and proceeds of sale of the dogs.
         (a)   When required by the state law and to the extent required by the
state law, all fines and proceeds from the sale of dogs shall be paid over to
the County Treasurer or other person designated by state law; provided,
however, that the sum of $1.50, being the per diem cost of maintaining the
dogs, may be deducted from the sales price of the dogs and this sum shall then
be turned over to the City Treasurer.
         (b)   The dog pound operator may apply for reimbursement under the
provisions of the state law for each dog disposed of by him or her, and any
amount so received by the dog pound operator shall be turned over to the City
Treasurer.
         (c)   Any fines or charges not payable to the state as required by
state law shall be paid to the city to be disposed of from time to time as the
City Council may direct.
(Ord. 1002, passed 7-1-1963; Ord. 1040, passed 6-21-1965; Ord. 1437, passed 10-
21-2002)
CHAPTER 92: FIRE PREVENTION
Section
Open Burning
   
92.01   Title
   
92.02   Authority
   
92.03   Policy
   
92.04   Definitions
   
92.05   Regulations
   
92.06   Enforcement orders
   
92.07   Responsibility to owners and operators
   
92.08   Unlawful conduct
Outdoor Furnace Regulations
   
92.20   Title
   
92.21   Definition
   
92.22   Permit required/fee
   
92.23   Installation, operation and maintenance of outdoor furnaces
Fireworks
   
92.35   Definitions
   
92.36   Permits
   
92.37   Request for extension of permit
   
92.38   Use of consumer fireworks
   
92.39   Use of Chinese lanterns
   
92.40   Use of display fireworks
   
92.41   Rules and regulations
   
92.42   Agricultural purposes
   
92.43   Attorney General
   
92.44   Department of Agriculture
 
   
92.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Fire Department, see
Ch. 35
   Performance standards, see §
156.094
OPEN BURNING
§ 92.01 TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known and may be cited as “The City of Corry Open
Burning Ordinance of 2018”.
(Ord. 1518, passed 8-20-2012; Ord. 1581, passed 7-2-2018)
§ 92.02 AUTHORITY.
   The City Council, under, and by virtue of and pursuant to the authority
granted by Third Class City Code, 11 Pa.C.S. §§ 10101 et seq., P.L. 662, No.
164, as amended, does hereby enact and ordain this subchapter.
(Ord. 1581, passed 7-2-2018)
§ 92.03 POLICY.
   Whereas the City Council has determined that air pollution from open burning
may be detrimental to the health, comfort, living conditions, welfare and
safety of the citizens of the city, it is hereby declared to be the policy of
the city to safeguard the citizens of the city from such air pollution while
allowing citizens to enjoy recreation in the outdoors of the city.
(Ord. 1518, passed 8-20-2012; Ord. 1581, passed 7-2-2018)
§ 92.04 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BON FIRE. Area (larger than 36 inches) where a fire (of natural wood) is
built and maintained under continued supervision by competent person.
   BURNING. The act of consuming by fire; to flame, char, scorch or blaze. As
used in this subchapter, smoldering shall have the same meaning as burning and
any smoldering shall be deemed as burning.
   CAMP FIRE. Area (no larger than 36 inches) where a fire (of natural wood) is
built and maintained under continued supervision by a competent person.
   CEREMONIAL FIRE. Involving a group or organization conducting a service for
their betterment.
   CLEARING AND GRUBBING. Process of cleaning property of native vegetation
which are cleared from land during or prior to the process of permitted
construction of a structure. The term does not include demolition wastes, dirt
laden roots or leaves.
   COOKING FIRE.  Used to prepare food.
   ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY/AGENT. A sworn or appointed person by the city as an
officer, inspector or investigator, of the city, who possesses specialized
training in, and whose duty shall be to gain compliance with city ordinances,
state laws and federal laws which they are responsible to enforce. These powers
shall include the power to issue notices of violation or non-traffic citations.
   FIRE RING. Complete, unbroken ring made of non-combustible material (metal,
stone, earth or brick) that will keep the fire in a designated area.
   LEAVES AND YARD WASTE. Natural vegetation from trees, shrubs, bushes, tall
weeds or grass, yard clippings, and any natural growth product.
   MUNICIPALITY. A city, incorporated town, township, borough, county,
municipal authority, or other public body created under state law having
jurisdiction over the disposal of sewage, industrial wastes, or other wastes.
   NATURAL WASTE. Wood not treated, not painted, not varnished or finished.
Sticks, limbs or branches with no leaves on them.
   NATURAL WOOD. Natural product from trees, untreated, unpainted, without
stain or varnish. Would not produce harmful by-products during the process of
combustion.
   OPEN BURNING. Kindling or maintaining a fire where the products of
combustion are emitted directly into the ambient air without passing through a
stack or a chimney.
   PORTABLE FIRE PIT. Portable, outdoor, solid-fuel-burning fireplace that may
be constructed of steel or other noncombustible material.
   REFUSE. Any waste material except clean wood. Waste material generated from
occupied structures.
   SMOKE GENERATION. By product of the process of combustion released into the
ambient air.
(Ord. 1518, passed 8-20-2012; Ord. 1581, passed 7-2-2018)
§ 92.05 REGULATIONS.
   Open burning within the city that meets the requirements set forth in this
section shall be allowed if constantly attended and supervised by a competent
person until the fire is extinguished or is cold. The person shall have readily
available for use such fire extinguishing equipment as may be necessary for the
total control of the fire.
   (A)   A fire set to prevent or abate a fire hazard, when approved by the
Department of Environmental Protection’s Regional Air Quality Program office
and set by or under the supervision of a public officer;
   (B)   Any fire set for the prevention and control of disease or pests, when
approved by the Department of Environmental Protection’s Regional Air Quality
Program office;
   (C)   Any fire set for the purpose of instructing personnel in firefighting,
when approved by the Department of Environmental Protection’s Regional Air
Quality Program office;
   (D)   A fire set for the purpose of clearing and grubbing property prior to
the process of permitted construction of a structure or production of
agricultural commodities in their raw state on farms.
   (E)   A camp fire/recreational fire within a fire ring no larger than 24
inches in diameter, at least 15 feet from any structure or ignitable material
or within a fire ring no larger than 36 inches in diameter, at least 25 feet
from any structure or ignitable material. Portable fire pits shall meet the
requirements of 24-inch fire ring unless equipped with spark cover it can be
ten feet from any structure.
      (1)   For the purpose of cooking;
      (2)   For the purpose of recreation; or
      (3)   For the purpose of ceremonial.
   (F)   A bon fire larger than 36 inches in diameter, used to clear property
of natural waste that is dry (not fresh/green). A permit from the city must be
obtained prior to burning to allow for inspection of site and materials to be
burned. Inspection of the site will insure location is a safe distance from
structures (minimum distance shall be determined based on size of planned fire)
or other exposures and verify material being burned are not prohibited.
      (1)   For the purpose of reducing natural waste products;
      (2)   For the purpose of ceremonial by an organized organization; or
      (3)   For the purpose of disposing leaves and yard waste (only at pre-
determined locations).
   (G)   Smoke generation, if approved to have a burn, meeting one of the above
allowable sections, the owner of the fire shall insure any smoke generated goes
in a direction that does not cause harm or irritation to another person. They
shall take into consideration wind direction and speed. The owner shall make
every attempt to keep smoke or by products of the combustion process onto their
property.
   (H)   An official organized camp ground shall be allowed to reduce the
distance of a fire ring within ten feet of a structure.
(Ord. 1518, passed 8-20-2012; Ord. 1581, passed 7-2-2018) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.06 ENFORCEMENT ORDERS.
   (A)   The following materials cannot be burned:
      (1)   Refuse including but not limited to food wastes, food wraps,
packaging, animal carcasses, paint or painted materials, furniture, composite
shingles, construction or demolition debris or other household or business
wastes;
      (2)   Asphalt and products containing asphalt;
      (3)   Treated or painted wood including but not limited to plywood,
composite shingles, construction or demolition debris or other household or
business wastes;
      (4)   Any plastic material including but not limited to nylon, PVC, ABS,
polystyrene or urethane foam, and synthetic fabrics, plastic films and plastic
containers;
      (5)   Rubber including tires and synthetic rubber - like products;
      (6)   Newspaper, corrugated cardboard, container board, office paper and
other materials that must be recycled in accordance with the recycling program;
or
      (7)   Electronic devices, TV’s, computers, monitors, key boards,
speakers, radios or appliances.
   (B)   The Fire Department and Police Department shall have the power and
duty to enforce the provisions of this subchapter.
   (C)   The city may issue such orders as are necessary to aid in the
enforcement of the provisions of this subchapter. These orders shall include,
but shall not be limited to: orders requiring persons to cease unlawful open
burning, orders to take corrective action or to abate a public nuisance, orders
to cease or refrain from burning due to weather conditions, orders requiring
the testing, sampling, or monitoring of any open burning; or orders requiring
production of information. Such an order may be issued if the city finds that
any condition existing in or on the facility or source involved is causing or
contributing to open burning or if the city finds that any person is in
violation of any provision of this subchapter.
   (D)   The city may, in its order, require compliance with such conditions as
are necessary to prevent or abate open burning or effect the purposes of this
subchapter.
   (E)   An order issued under this section shall take effect upon notice,
unless the order specifies otherwise.
   (F)   The authority of the city to issue an order under this section is in
addition to any remedy or penalty which may be imposed pursuant to this
subchapter. The failure to comply with any such order is hereby declared to be
a public nuisance.
   (G)   Permits to burn shall be acquired at the city for bon fires (over 36
inches in diameter) within the city limits. This one-time permit will allow the
Fire Department to check the area where burn will occur, check items to be
burned (insuring they are appropriate) and instruct property owner of their
responsibility to have extinguishment equipment on hand. The once a calendar
year cost for bon fire burn permit shall be $5.
(Ord. 1518, passed 8-20-2012; Ord. 1581, passed 7-2-2018)
Editor’s Note:
   See also city’s fee schedule
§ 92.07 RESPONSIBILITY TO OWNERS AND OPERATORS.
   (A)   Whenever the city enforcing agent finds that open burning is occurring
in the city, other than those exceptions noted in §
92.05, the enforcing agent may order the owner or operator to take corrective
action in a manner satisfactory to the city, or the enforcing agent may order
the owner or operator to allow access to the land by the enforcing agent or a
third party to take such action.
   (B)   For purposes of collecting or recovering the costs involved in taking
corrective action or pursuing a cost recovery action pursuant to an order or
recovering the cost of litigation, oversight, monitoring, sampling, testing and
investigation related to a corrective action, the city may collect the amount
in the manner established by statute.
   (C)   A person utilizing or maintaining an outdoor burn ring, permitted or
unpermitted bon fire shall be responsible for all fire suppression costs and
any other liability resulting from damage caused by fire.
(Ord. 1518, passed 8-20-2012; Ord. 1581, passed 7-2-2018)
§ 92.08 UNLAWFUL CONDUCT.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to fail to comply with or to cause or assist in
the violation of any of the provisions of this subchapter or to fail to comply
with any order or other requirement of the city; or to cause a public nuisance;
or to cause air, soil or water pollution resulting from an open burning
incident; or to hinder, obstruct, prevent or interfere with the city or its
personnel in their performance of any duty hereunder, including denying the
code enforcement authority access to the source or facility; or to violate the
provisions of 18 Pa.C.S. §§ 4903 (relating to false swearing) or 4904 (relating
to unsworn falsification to authorities) in regard to papers required to be
submitted under this subchapter.
   (B)   The owner or operator of an open burning source shall not allow
pollution of the air, water or other natural resources of the city to result
from the source.
(Ord. 1518, passed 8-20-2012; Ord. 1581, passed 7-2-2018) Penalty, see §
92.99
OUTDOOR FURNACE REGULATIONS
§ 92.20 TITLE.
   The official title of this subchapter is “The City of Corry Outdoor Furnace
Ordinance”.
(Ord. 1408, passed 7-20-1998)
§ 92.21 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   OUTDOOR FURNACE. Sometimes referred to as an outside furnace, a furnace
placed outside the structure to be heated that, as fuel, primarily burns wood
or coal and may also be capable of burning oil and/or gas or similar fuel.
(Ord. 1408, passed 7-20-1998)
§ 92.22 PERMIT REQUIRED/FEE.
   It shall be unlawful for anyone to install an outdoor or outside furnace
within the city without first obtaining a permit therefor. The fee for such
permit is $10.
(Ord. 1408, passed 7-20-1998) Penalty, see §
92.99
Editor’s Note:
   See also city’s fee schedule
§ 92.23 INSTALLATION, OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE OF OUTDOOR FURNACES.
   All outdoor furnaces shall comply with the following requirements.
   (A)   All outdoor furnaces shall be installed, operated and maintained in
strict accordance with the requirements of this subchapter and all other
applicable federal, state and local laws, rules and regulations.
   (B)   All outdoor furnaces shall comply with one of the two following
requirements:
      (1)   It shall have installed thereon an exhaust pipe of a height that
exceeds the height of the peak of the roof of the structure being heated by the
furnace; or
      (2)   It may have an exhaust pipe shorter than the peak of the roof of
the structure being heated if the furnace itself is located no closer than 200
feet from nearest property line of any contiguous lots.
   (C)   All exhaust pipes shall be free of leaks and must be properly
maintained and cleaned to prevent any disruption in the proper discharge of
smoke and exhaust fumes.
   (D)   No outdoor furnace shall be installed or operated in a manner that
causes a health or safety risk to the public.
(Ord. 1408, passed 7-20-1998)
FIREWORKS
§ 92.35 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CONSUMER FIREWORKS.
      (1)   Any combustible or explosive composition or any substance or
combination of substances which is intended to produce visible or audible
effects by combustion, is suitable for use by the public, complies with
construction, performance, composition and labeling requirements promulgated by
the Consumer Protection Safety Commission in 16 C.F.R. (relating to commercial
practices) or any successor regulation and complies with the provision for
CONSUMER FIREWORKS as defined in APA 87-1 or any successor standard, the sale,
possession and use of which shall be permitted throughout this Commonwealth.
      (2)   The term does not include devices as ground and hand-held sparkling
devices, novelties or toy caps in APA 87-1 or any successor standard, the sale,
possession and use of which shall be permitted at all times throughout this
Commonwealth.
   DISPLAY FIREWORKS. Large fireworks to be used solely by professional
pyrotechnicians and designed primarily to produce visible or audible effects by
combustion, deflagration or detonation. The term includes but is not limited
to:
      (1)   Salutes that contain more than two grams or 130 milligrams of
explosive.
      (2)   Aerial shells containing more than 60 grams of pyrotechnic
composition; and
      (3)   Other display pieces that exceed the limits of explosive materials
for classification as consume fireworks and are classified fireworks UN0333,
UN0334 or UN0335 under 49 C.F.R. 172.101 (relating to purpose and use of
hazardous materials table).
   LAW. State Fireworks Law, Act 43 of 2017, Article 24 Fireworks.
   NFPA 1124. The National Fire Protection Association Standard 1124, Code for
the Manufacture, Transportation and Storage of Fireworks and Pyrotechnic
Articles, 2006 edition, or any subsequent edition.
   OCCUPIED STRUCTURE. A structure, vehicle or place adapted for overnight
accommodations of persons or for conducting business whether or not a person is
actually present.
   OUTDOOR STORAGE UNIT. A consumer fireworks building, trailer, semitrailer,
metal shipping container or magazine meeting the specifications of NFPA 1124.
   TEMPORARY STRUCTURE. A structure, other than a permanent facility with fixed
utility connections, which is in use or in place for a period of 20 consecutive
calendar days or less and is dedicated to the storage and sale of consumer
fireworks and related items. The term includes temporary retail stands, tents,
canopies and membrane structures meeting the specifications of NFPA 1124. The
term shall not include a facility that is not licensed to sell consumer
fireworks under this subchapter.
(Ord. 1580, passed 6-4-2018)
§ 92.36 PERMITS.
   (A)   Permissible purposes. Display fireworks may be possessed and used by a
person holding a permit from a municipality at the display covered by the
permit or when used as authorized by a permit for any of the following:
      (1)   For agricultural purposes in connection with raising of crops and
the protection of crops from bird and animal damage;
      (2)   By railroads or other transportation agencies or signal purposes or
illumination;
      (3)   In quarrying or for blasting or other industrial use;
      (4)   In the sale or use of blank cartridges for a show or theater;
      (5)   For signal or ceremonial purposes in athletics or sports; or
      (6)   By military organizations or organizations composed of veterans of
the armed forces of the United States.
   (B)   Age limitation. A display fireworks permit may not be issued to a
person under 21 years of age.
   (C)   Bond. The governing body of the municipality shall require a bond
deemed adequate by it from the permittee in a sum not less than $50,000
conditioned for the payment of all damages which may be caused to a person or
property by reason of the display and arising from an act of the permittee or
an agent, an employee or a subcontractor of the permittee.
   (D)   Times. No display fireworks show shall start after 11:00 p.m. except
for New Year’s Eve when the display show can take place between 11:30 p.m. and
12:30 a.m.
   (E)   Permit fee. A permit fee of $500 (billing cost for the Fire
Department) shall be paid to the city for a display fireworks event to cover
the cost of pre-inspection by the Fire Chief or designee and for the Fire
Department being on scene at the time of the display. Permits for all other
uses shall be $50.
(Ord. 1580, passed 6-4-2018)
Editor’s Note:
   See also city’s fee schedule
§ 92.37 REQUEST FOR EXTENSION OF PERMIT.
   (A)   Authorization. If, because of unfavorable weather, the display for
which a permit has been granted does not occur at the time authorized by the
permit, the person to whom the permit was issued may, within 24 hours, apply
for a request for extension to the municipality which granted the permit.
   (B)   Contents of request. The request for extension shall state under oath
that the display was not made, provide the reason that the display was not made
and request a continuance of the permit for a date designated within the
request, which shall be not later than one week after the date originally
designated in the permit.
   (C)   Determination. Upon receiving the request for extension, the
municipality, if it believes that the facts stated within the request are true,
shall extend the provisions of the permit to the date designated within the
request, which shall not be no later that one week after the date originally
designated in the permit.
   (D)   Conditions. The extension of time shall be granted without the payment
of an additional fee and without requiring a bond other than the bond given for
the original permit, the provisions of which shall extend to and cover all
damages which may be caused by reason of the display occurring at the extended
date and in the same manner and to the same extent as if the display had
occurred at the originally designated time in the permit.
(Ord. 1580, passed 6-4-2018)
§ 92.38 USE OF CONSUMER FIREWORKS.
   (A)   Conditions. A person who is at least 18 years of age and meets the
requirements of this section may purchase, possess and use consumer fireworks.
   (B)   Prohibitions. A person may not intentionally ignite and discharge:
      (1)   Consumer fireworks on public or private property without the
express permission of the owner;
      (2)   Consumer fireworks or sparkling devices within, or throw consumer
fireworks or sparkling devices from a motor vehicle or building;
      (3)   Consumer fireworks or sparkling devices into or at a motor vehicle,
building or at another person;
      (4)   Consumer fireworks or sparkling devices while the person is under
the influence of alcohol, a controlled substance or another drug;
      (5)   Consumer fireworks within 150 feet of an occupied structure; or
      (6)   Consumer fireworks or sparkling devices after 11:00 p.m. and prior
to 7:00 a.m. except for New Year’s Eve where they will be permitted from 11:45
p.m. to 12:15 a.m.
(Ord. 1580, passed 6-4-2018) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.39 USE OF CHINESE LANTERNS.
   The use of Chinese lanterns or any other lanterns that use fire to propel
themselves into the sky are prohibited within the city.
(Ord. 1580, passed 6-4-2018) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.40 USE OF DISPLAY FIREWORKS.
   No display fireworks shall be ignited within 300 feet of a facility that
sells consumer and display fireworks or a temporary structure for the sale of
consumer fireworks, as defined by Section 2407 and 2410 of the State Fireworks
Law, Act 43 of 2017, Article 24 Fireworks.
(Ord. 1580, passed 6-4-2018) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.41 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Authorization. Permission shall be given by the governing body of a
municipality under reasonable rules and regulations for display fireworks to be
held within the municipality.
   (B)   Conditions.
      (1)   Each display shall be:
         (a)   Handled by a competent operator; and
         (b)   Of a character and so located, discharged or fired as, in the
opinion of the Fire Chief or other appropriate officer as may be designated by
the governing body of the municipality, after proper inspection, to not be
hazardous to property or endanger any persons.
      (2)   After permission is granted under this section, possession and use
of display fireworks for display shall be lawful for that purpose only.
      (3)   A permit shall be transferable.
(Ord. 1580, passed 6-4-2018)
§ 92.42 AGRICULTURAL PURPOSES.
   (A)   Authorization. The governing body of a municipality may under
reasonable rules and regulations adopted by it, grant permits for the use of
suitable fireworks for agricultural purposes in connection with raising of
crops and the protection of crops from birds and animal damage.
   (B)   Duration of permit. A permit under this section shall remain in effect
for the calendar year in which it was issued.
   (C)   Conditions. After a permit under this section has been granted, sales,
possession and use of fireworks of the type and for the purpose mentioned in
the permit shall be lawful for that purpose only.
(Ord. 1580, passed 6-4-2018) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.43 ATTORNEY GENERAL.
   (A)   Registration. Any business entity which performs, provides or
supervises fireworks displays or exhibitions for profit shall register annually
with the Attorney General.
   (B)   Rules. The Attorney General shall promulgate rules to implement this
section.
(Ord. 1580, passed 6-4-2018)
§ 92.44 DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE.
   The Department of Agriculture, as laid out in the State Fireworks Law, Act
43 of 2017, Article 24 Fireworks shall oversee the following:
   (A)   Sales locations;
   (B)   Licensing fees;
   (C)   Inspections;
   (D)   Conditions of facilities;
   (E)   Temporary structures;
   (F)   Consumer fireworks tax;
   (G)   Disposition of funds;
   (H)   Transition; and
   (I)   Removal, storage and destruction.
(Ord. 1580, passed 6-4-2018)
§ 92.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who violates any provision of §§
92.01 through
92.08 or any order of the city issued pursuant to §§
92.01 through
92.07 commits a summary offense and shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay
a fine of not less than $150 nor more than $2,500 for each separate offense
and, in default of the payment of such fine, may be sentenced to imprisonment
for 90 days for each separate offense. Employees of the city authorized to
conduct inspections or investigations are hereby declared to be law enforcement
officers authorized to issue or file citations for summary violations under §§
92.01 through
92.07, and the City Council is hereby authorized to prosecute these offenses.
For purposes of this division, a summary offense may be prosecuted before any
Magisterial District Justice in the city. There is no accelerated
rehabilitative disposition authorized for a summary offense.
   (B)   Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated or
permitted the violation of the provisions of this §§
92.20 through
92.23 shall, upon being found liable therefore in a civil enforcement
proceeding commenced by the municipality, pay a judgment of not more than $500
plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney fees incurred by the
municipality as a result thereof. No judgment shall commence or be imposed,
levied or payable until the date of the determination of a violation by the
Magisterial District Justice. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals
the judgment, the municipality may enforce the judgment pursuant to the
applicable rules of civil procedure. Each day that a violation continues shall
constitute a separate violation, unless the Magisterial District Justice
determining that there has been a violation further determines that there was
good faith basis for the person, partnership or corporation violating the §§
92.20 through
92.23 to have believed that there was no such violation, in which event there
shall be deemed to have been only one such violation until the fifth day
following the date of the determination of a violation by the Magisterial
District Justice and thereafter each day that a violation continues shall
constitute a separate violation. These remedies are in addition to all other
remedies available under law of equity, including, but in no way limited to,
injunctive relief.
   (C)   (1)   A person in violation of §§
92.38 or
92.39 commits a summary offense and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine
of not less than $25 for the first offense, not less than $50 for the second
offense and not less than $100 for the third and subsequent offenses.
      (2)   A person in violation of §
92.40 commits a summary offense and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine
of not less than $200 for each offense.
      (3)   A person who fails to obtain the required permits as defined in §
92.36 commits a summary offense and upon conviction pay a fine of not less than
three times.
      (4)   All other penalties for selling consumer fireworks, selling display
fireworks and selling federally illegal explosive devices in violation of the
State Fireworks Law, Act 43 of 2017, Article 24 Fireworks, are set forth in
section 2414 in Act 43 of 2017, Article 24 Fireworks.
(Ord. 1408, passed 7-20-1998; Ord. 1518, passed 8-20-2012; Ord. 1580, passed 6-
4-2018; Ord. 1581, passed 7-2-2018)
CHAPTER 93: PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
Section
General Regulations
   
93.01   Trash
   
93.02   Snow and ice removal
Trees
   
93.15   Title
   
93.16   Definitions
   
93.17   Community development objectives
   
93.18   Tree Committee
   
93.19   Tree Committee duties
   
93.20   Shrubbery and trees
   
93.21   Harmony among agencies
   
93.22   Nuisance or hazard
   
93.23   Tree protection (tree lawn or public trees)
   
93.24   Specimen and historic tree preservation
   
93.25   Tree permits
   
93.26   Finance
Grass, Weeds and Other Vegetation
   
93.40   Nuisance vegetation
   
93.41   Restricted areas
   
93.42   Responsibility for removal
   
93.43   Notice to remove
Maintenance Regulations and Quality of Life
   
93.55   Purpose
   
93.56   Definitions
   
93.57   Quality of life violations
   
93.58   Authority for issuance of a quality of life violation ticket
   
93.59   Enforcement
   
93.60   Process for issuing quality of life violation tickets
   
93.61   Abatement of violation
   
93.62   Fines and penalties
   
93.63   Violation ticket penalties
   
93.64   Appeal
 
   
93.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   International Property Maintenance Code, see §
151.01
   Shrubbery and trees, see §
156.113
   Sight line, see §
156.109
GENERAL REGULATIONS
§ 93.01 TRASH.
   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to:
   (A)   Throw any waste paper, sweepings, ashes, household waste, glass,
metal, refuse or rubbish, or any dangerous or detrimental substance into or
upon the road, street, highway or alley, or upon the land of another or into or
upon any stream or other body of water; or
   (B)   Interfere with, scatter or disturb the contents of any receptacle
containing ashes, garbage, household waste or rubbish.
(Ord. 1217, passed 5-17-1976) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.02 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL.
   (A)    It shall be the duty and responsibility of the owner, occupant, or
other person or entity in charge of any property in the city which is adjacent
to any public sidewalk to remove or cause to be removed snow or ice from the
entire width of such sidewalk, including any adjacent curb-cut, up to a maximum
of 48 inches, and if the same cannot be wholly removed, shall apply thereon
sand or other proper substance so that such sidewalk shall be made safe for
public travel.
   (B)   Snow or ice below six inches shall be removed within 24 hours, and six
inches or above shall be removed within 36 hours of the cessation of snow fall
or freezing. Such snow and/or ice shall be completely cleared from the sidewalk
exposing the wearing surface of the sidewalk to a width not less than 48 inches
or the actual width of the sidewalk, whichever is less.
   (C)   No person shall plow, shovel, or blow any snow or ice from a private
property onto a public street, crosswalk, transit stop, sidewalk or any public
property.
   (D)   Authority for issuance of a quality of life violation ticket. Any
person or persons violating any of the terms of this section may, be subjected
to quality of life ticketing. Maximum fine is $100.
(Ord. 1630, passed 12-19-2022)  Penalty, see §
93.99
TREES
§ 93.15 TITLE.
   The official title of this subchapter is the “Corry Tree Ordinance”.
(Ord. 1451, passed 10-18-2004; Ord. 1633, passed 3-20-2023)
§ 93.16 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CITY. The City of Corry.
   CITY COUNCIL. The City of Corry City Council.
   STREET TREES, COMMUNITY FOREST OR SHADE TREES. Trees within and/or
overhanging the city street right-of-way.
   STUB TOPPING. The same as the improper arboricultural practice of TOPPING,
the heading of limbs back to an arbitrarily set line.
   TREE.
      (1)   A woody perennial plant with one main stem or trunk, which develops
many branches; most trees are over ten feet tall.
      (2)   A treelike bush or shrub, such as a rose tree.
   TREE COMMITTEE. The Municipal Tree Committee of the City of Corry.
(Ord. 1451, passed 10-18-2004 ; Ord. 1633, passed 3-20-2023)
§ 93.17 COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT OBJECTIVES.
   This subchapter is intended to promote, protect and facilitate the public
health, safety and general welfare by addressing continual improvement of the
community forest within the city Comprehensive Plan as incorporated in “A
Comprehensive Plan for the City of Corry and Wayne Township”, completed in
1996. an urban forester shall be utilized as a consultant to assist with health
and maintenance of the community forest of the City of Corry.
(Ord. 1451, passed 10-18-2004 ; Ord. 1633, passed 3-20-2023)
§ 93.18 TREE COMMITTEE.
   There is hereby enacted and established a Tree Committee for the city.
   (A)   Intent. The purpose of the Tree Committee shall be promoting perpetual
and continual community forest improvement, educating the public about trees,
promoting responsible tree planting on public and private property, promoting
proper tree maintenance and developing innovative project funding from a
variety of sources.
   (B)   Composition of Tree Committee. The Committee shall consist of five
voting members, said Committee to be known as the Municipal Tree Committee of
the City of Corry.
   (C)   Vacancies on the Tree Committee. City Council shall appoint members as
necessary to fill vacancies on the Committee. Terms of office shall be for
three years.
   (D)   Tree Committee officers. The Committee shall set regular meeting dates
and times and shall establish rules for the organization of the Committee. They
shall annually elect, from their voting membership, officers consisting of a
Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson, Secretary and Treasurer. They shall keep minutes
of each meeting and, together with the city administration, shall keep a record
of all monies and expenditures of the Committee.
   (E)   Tree Committee meetings. All meetings shall be advertised by the city
as provided by law and shall be open to the public and posted on the city’s
website.
   (F)   Tree Committee Procedures. The Tree Committee shall keep a journal of
its activities. it may execute proposed activities upon agreement of a majority
of its voting members and approval of City Council when the activity
constitutes a deviation from either the annual approved plan of work or the
budget. The Tree Committee may retain professionals on specific issues or
problems with approval from City Council.
(Ord. 1451, passed 10-18-2004 ; Ord. 1633, passed 3-20-2023)
§ 93.19 TREE COMMITTEE DUTIES.
   (A)   Duty to provide an annual budget. The Tree Committee shall prepare an
annual budget for monies allocated from the City General Fund.
   (B)   Duty to solicit funds. The Tree Committee shall investigate
availability of and apply for grants, loans or contributions from other
governmental agencies, public or private corporations or entities and
individuals.
   (C)   Tree Committee reserves the right to review Development Plans. Plans
for major subdivisions and land developments shall be reviewed by the Tree
Committee and recommendations made for tree selection and planting locations.
   (D)   Duty to provide standard "Tree Specifications". Permits will be
required to plant, prune or remove a tree from the “tree lawn”. Pruning
branches under three inches in diameter will not require a permit. Trimming
branches three inches or larger in diameter require permit. Spacing and variety
recommendations for planting and maintenance will be provided with permit.
Standards setting forth the species of trees that are suitable for planting in
various situations and locations; prescribing the care and precautions that
should be complied with, should such plantings be undertaken; and other
standards of work practices.
   (E)   Duty to hear complaints. The Tree Committee may investigate complaints
from any person concerning the planting, health and care of trees with the
community forest reporting to the City Code Compliance Officer.
(Ord. 1451, passed 10-18-2004 ; Ord. 1633, passed 3-20-2023)
§ 93.20 SHRUBBERY AND TREES.
   (A)   No tree or shrub of any kind shall be planted closer than 30 inches to
the street line or sidewalk, nor shall be allowed to grow closer than 18
inches, except at heights of ten feet or more, or with a variance approved by
the Zoning Board of Adjustment, upon a recommendation from the Tree Committee.
   (B)   The following trees shall not be planted in front or side yards:
poplar; willow; and cottonwood.
   (C)   The following trees shall not be planted in any area or district
within the city: box elder and American elm.
   (D)   Trees may be planted within the public right-of-way between the
sidewalk and street only if there is a minimum clear area of five feet from
curb to sidewalk. All such plantings shall be centered in the clear area. Where
no curbs exist, trees shall be planted three feet from the public walk, or
future walk location. All trees, planted in the public rights-of-way shall be
acceptable varieties taken from the “Standard Specifications for Street Trees”,
or otherwise approved by the Tree Committee upon recommendation from an
arborist or forester.
(Ord. 1451, passed 10-18-2004 ; Ord. 1633, passed 3-20-2023) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.21 HARMONY AMONG AGENCIES.
   (A)   Cooperation between departments and agencies. Department of Parks and
the Tree Committee shall cooperate and communicate with other Public Works
Department personnel, City Administrator’s office, Planning Department,
Community Development Department and all other city, state and federal agencies
regarding any work planned or taking place.
   (B)   Resolution of conflicts between trees and sidewalks. Where sidewalk or
curb damage due to tree roots occurs, every effort shall be made to correct the
problem without removing or damaging the tree.
   (C)   Exemption for horticultural and agricultural use. Nothing included in
the provisions of this subchapter is intended to prohibit agriculture,
silviculture, horticulture or nursery operations within the city.
(Ord. 1451, passed 10-18-2004 ; Ord. 1633, passed 3-20-2023)
§ 93.22 NUISANCE OR HAZARD.
   (A)   The Tree Committee may make recommendations to remove any tree or part
thereof in the city that is in an unsafe condition or which by reason of its
nature is injurious to humans, sewers, electric power lines, gas lines, water
lines or other public improvements; is affected with any injurious fungus,
insect or other pest; or which has been declared a public nuisance.
   (B)   The following may be declared public nuisances under this subchapter:
      (1)   Any otherwise healthy tree, shrub or other plant, whether located
on city-owned property or on private property which dangerously obstructs the
view in the visibility triangle at the street intersections;
      (2)   Any tree or shrub which obstructs the free passage of pedestrian
(10 feet measured from sidewalk surface) or vehicular traffic or which
obstructs a street light or traffic-control device;
      (3)   Any tree or shrub on public property that is dead or near dead and
constitutes a public safety hazard;
      (4)   The tree interferes with overhead lines and creates a public safety
hazard;
      (5)   Those parts of trees standing on private property, overhanging the
street right-of-way or other public areas.
(Ord. 1451, passed 10-18-2004 ; Ord. 1633, passed 3-20-2023)
§ 93.23 TREE PROTECTION (TREE LAWN OR PUBLIC TREES).
   (A)   Protection from posting and wire. No person shall fasten any rope,
wire, electric attachment, sign or other devices to a tree or to any guard
about such tree not expressly intended to promote the health of the tree.
   (B)   Protection from fire. No person shall allow fire or heat from any
source to come in contact with any tree in the street right-of-way.
(Ord. 1451, passed 10-18-2004 ; Ord. 1633, passed 3-20-2023) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.24 SPECIMEN AND HISTORIC TREE PRESERVATION.
   (A)   Historic tree criteria. Historic tree shall be any tree that has been
designated by the City Council, after public hearing and due notice to the
owner of the tree, as a tree of notable historical interest and value to the
city because of its location or historical association with the community.
   (B)   Designation. Designation as a specimen or historic tree may occur in
any one of the following ways:
      (1)   The Director of Parks shall be authorized to nominate certain
public trees as specimen or historic trees; or
      (2)   A property owner may request such designation at any time. To do
so, the property owner shall submit an expert evaluation by a landscape
architect, horticulturist, urban forester, historian or other recognized
expert.
(Ord. 1451, passed 10-18-2004 ; Ord. 1633, passed 3-20-2023)   
§ 93.25 TREE PERMITS.
   The City Code Compliance Office, as the agent for the Tree Committee, shall
issue the tree permit provided that the proposed activity conforms to the
ordinance regulations and standards. When such permit is issued, it must be
prominately displayed at the work site.
(Ord. 1451, passed 10-18-2004 ; Ord. 1633, passed 3-20-2023)   
§ 93.26 FINANCE.
   (A)   A city tree program shall consider that whenever a bond issue is
passed or appropriation made for the purpose of replacing and/or widening of
any city street, that there be included within such bond issue or appropriation
sufficient funds for the use of the Tree Committee to replace any trees
destroyed or damaged in the course of such improvement and to plant more trees
within the improved area.
   (B)   City Council may allocate funds to the Tree Committee and may
authorize the use of public works employees and equipment, from time to time,
to assist in tree activities.
   (C)   The Tree Committee is authorized to receive contributions from private
agencies, organizations and individuals, in addition to any funds that may be
appropriated for its use by City Council.
   (D)   A presently established account known as the City of Corry Tree Fund
shall be utilized for the deposits of all Tree Committee revenues.
   (E)   All funds raised by the Tree Committee shall be used for promoting the
objectives of the Tree Committee.
(Ord. 1451, passed 10-18-2004 ; Ord. 1633, passed 3-20-2023)   
GRASS, WEEDS AND OTHER VEGETATION
§ 93.40 NUISANCE VEGETATION.
   No person, firm or corporation, owning or occupying any property within the
city, shall permit any grass or weeds or any vegetation whatsoever, not edible
or planted for some useful or ornamental purpose, to grow or remain upon such
premises within certain restricted areas as defined in this subchapter, so as
to exceed a height of 12 inches, or to throw off any unpleasant or noxious
odor, or to conceal any filthy deposit or to create or produce pollen. Any
grass, weeds or other vegetation growing upon any premises in the city in
violation of any of the provisions of this subchapter is hereby declared to be
a nuisance and detrimental to the health, safety, cleanliness and comfort of
the inhabitants of the city.
(Ord. 1142, passed 7-20-1970) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.41 RESTRICTED AREAS.
   The restricted areas, within the intent of this subchapter, shall include
the following:
   (A)   All areas within 50 feet of any building used, intended to be used or
designed for human habitation, and buildings designed for, or used for,
industrial or commercia1 business;
   (B)   All areas within 50 feet of the traveled portion of any public street
or roadway, if such area is within 200 feet of any building included in
division (A) above; and
   (C)   All areas within five feet of any public sidewalk.
(Ord. 1142, passed 7-20-1970)
§ 93.42 RESPONSIBILITY FOR REMOVAL.
   The owner of any premises, as to vacant premises or premises occupied by the
owner, and the occupant thereof, in case of premises occupied by other than the
owner thereof, shall remove, trim or cut all grass, weeds or other vegetation
growing or remaining upon such premises in violation of the provisions of §
93.40.
(Ord. 1142, passed 7-20-1970)
§ 93.43 NOTICE TO REMOVE.
   The City Council, or any officer or employee of the city designated thereby
for the purpose, is hereby authorized to give notice, by personal service or by
United States mail, to the owner or occupant, as the case may be, of any
premises whereon grass, weeds or other vegetation is growing or remaining in
violation of the provisions of §
93.40, directing and requiring such occupant to remove, trim or cut such grass,
weeds or vegetation, so as to conform to the requirements of this subchapter,
within five days after issuance of such notice. Whenever, in the judgment of
the Director of Safety of the city, it shall appear to be impracticable to give
notice as above provided, either because the owner or occupant cannot readily
be found or because a search for the owner or occupant would entail
unreasonable delay, the City Council or any officer or employee of the city
designated thereby for that purpose, may give notice by posting conspicuously
on the property where such nuisance exists, a notice or order directing and
requiring that such nuisance be abated within five days. In case any person,
firm or corporation shall neglect, fail or refuse to comply with such notice
within the period of time stated therein, the city authorities may remove, trim
or cut or cause the same to be removed, trimmed or cut such grass, weeds or
vegetation, and the cost thereof, together with a penalty of 10% of the cost
thereof shall be collected by the city from such person, firm or corporation,
in the manner provided by law.
(Ord. 1142, passed 7-20-1970)
MAINTENANCE REGULATIONS AND QUALITY OF LIFE
§ 93.55 PURPOSE.
   Lack of maintenance of properties, improper storage of trash and rubbish,
storage of inoperable/non-registered vehicles, and use/storage of indoor
furniture outside are costly problems that contribute to the deterioration of
property values and general disorder in a community. These problems degrade the
physical appearance of the city, which reduces business and tax revenue
inhibiting economic development. The quality of life and community pride of the
citizens of Corry are negatively impacted by the occurrences and existence of
these activities. Recognizing these are community problems, the purpose of this
subchapter is to promote the health, safety and general welfare of the city by
helping to create a clean environment for the citizens of Corry. In addition,
this will allow for the quality of life ticket to be used as a tool to enforce
the following code sections and their amendments: City of Corry Property
Maintenance Code (§
151.01), city zoning ordinance (
Chapter 156), city dog and cat disturbance (§§
91.01 -
91.04), city sidewalk snow removal ordinance (§
93.02), and tree ordinance (§§
93.15 through
93.26).
(Ord. 1593, passed 5-6-2019 ; Ord. 1634, passed 3-20-2023)
§ 93.56 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONED VEHICLES. Unused, stripped, junked, wrecked or otherwise usable
vehicles which do not carry a current registration plate or inspection sticker
and which are no longer safely unusable for the purpose of which they were
manufactured and which have been in place for a period of 30 days.
   ANIMAL WASTES. Excreted materials from live animals or products used to bed
animals to include litter, straw, hay or wood shavings.
   CLUTTER. An accumulation of items other than garbage or rubbish in such a
manner that it would be considered unsightly by reasonable living standards.
Examples of this would include but not be limited to construction materials not
associated with a current building project, automobile parts, appliances, etc.
   DEBRIS. Any material upon the premises that is a residue of structural
demolition, or any other material that is not neatly stored, stacked or piled
in such a manner so as not to create a nuisance or become a harboring place or
food supply for insects or rodents.
   GARBAGE. The animal or vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking, and consumption of food.
   INDOOR FURNITURE. Any and all pieces of furniture which are made for inside
use only including, but not limited to, upholstered chairs and sofas, TVs,
electronic items, refrigerators, freezers, etc.
   JUNKED VEHICLE. Any vehicle which is without a currently valid license plate
(s) or inspection sticker and is in either a stripped, rusted, wrecked,
dismantled, partly dismantled, inoperative, or abandoned condition. A junk
vehicle shall be classified as to its condition in one of the two following
categories:
      (1)   Restorable junk vehicle. A vehicle that is in a condition whereby
repairs to same could reasonably be made to place it in operating condition
without exceeding the estimated value when repaired.
      (2)   (a)   Non-restorable junk vehicle. A junk vehicle in such condition
that it is economically unsound to restore same to an operating condition
considering the repairs to be made, age of the vehicle, market value of the
vehicle if it were restored or in such a condition that the Code Compliance
Officer determines that it warrants such classification.
         (b)   If the vehicle has any of the following listed items it will be
classified as non-restorable junk:
            1.   Rusted and/or jagged metal on or protruding from the body of
the vehicle;
            2.   Broken glass or windows on or in the vehicle;
            3.   Leaking of any fluids from the vehicle;
            4.   Unsecured doors, hood, or trunk;
            5.   Storage or placement of the vehicle in an unbalanced
condition, on concrete blocks, or other similar apparatus;
            6.   Harboring of rodents, insects, or other pests; or
            7.   More than two flat tires.
   LITTER. Includes, but is not limited to, all waste material, garbage, trash,
i.e. waste paper, tobacco products, wrappers, food or beverage containers,
newspapers, etc., municipal waste, human waste, domestic animal waste,
furniture or motor vehicle seats, vehicle parts, automotive products, shopping
carts, construction or demolition material, recyclable material, and dirt, mud
and yard waste that has been abandoned or improperly discarded, deposited, or
disposed.
   LOCAL RESPONSIBLE AGENT. Any person residing or working within the City of
Corry designated to accept service on behalf of a legal owner or operator of a
non-owner occupied property.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Any type of mechanical device, capable or at one time capable
of being propelled by a motor, in which persons or property may be transported
upon public streets or highways, and including trailers or semi-trailers pulled
thereby.
   NOTICE OF VIOLATION. A written document issued to a person in violation of a
city ordinance which specifies the violation and contains a directive to take
corrective action within a specified time frame or face further legal action.
   NUISANCE. Any condition, structure, or improvement which constitutes a
danger or potential danger to the health, safety, or welfare of citizens of the
city, or causes a blighting effect in city neighborhoods. See also PUBLIC
NUISANCE.
   OWNER. A person, agent, operator, firm or corporation having a legal or
equitable interest in the property; or recorded in the official records of the
state, county or municipality as holding title to the property; or otherwise
having control of the property including the principals of a limited liability
company or officer, director or shareholder of a corporation if that individual
is responsible for the management and control of the property; including the
guardian of the estate of any such person, and the executor or administrator of
the estate of such person if ordered to take possession of real property by a
court.
   PERSON. Every natural person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
or organization of any kind which is recognized by law as the subject of rights
and duties.
   PRIVATE PROPERTY. Any land and the improvements thereon owned by any person
and includes front, side, and rear yards, vacant lots, buildings, and other
structural improvements, walkways and alleyways, and parking areas, designed or
used either wholly or in part for private residential, industrial, or
commercial purposes, whether inhabited, temporary, continuously uninhabited, or
vacant, including any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule,
or mailbox belonging to or appurtenant to such dwelling, house, building, or
other structure.
   PUBLIC NUISANCE. Any conditions or premises which are unsafe or unsanitary.
   PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY. The total width of any land used, reserved, or
dedicated as a street, alley, driveway, sidewalk, or utility easement,
including curb and gutter areas.
   RUBBISH. Combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except garbage; the
term shall include the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke, and other
combustible materials, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior, rubber,
leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, excessive animal feces, tin cans,
metals, mineral matter, glass, crockery, and dust and other similar materials.
   SIDEWALK AREA. The public right-of-way established for pedestrian use
between the property lawn and curb line or established edge of roadway.
   SNOW REMOVAL. No person shall plow, shovel or blow any snow or ice from a
private property onto a public street, crosswalk, transit stop, sidewalk or any
public property.
   SOLID WASTE. Any waste including, but not limited to, municipal, residual,
or hazardous wastes, including solid, liquid, semisolid, or contained gaseous
materials.
   VEGETATION. Any planting that is cultivated and managed for edible or
ornamental purposes such as vegetable gardens, trees, shrubs, hedges, flowers,
etc.
   VIOLATION TICKET. A form issued by a Code Compliance Officer to a person who
violates a provision of this part. The violation ticket is an offer by the City
of Corry extended to a person to settle a violation by paying the fine in lieu
of a citation being issued against the violator.
   VIOLATOR. The owner and/or occupant of the property at which the violation
occurred.
   WEEDS.
      (1)   All grasses, annual plants, and vegetation, which meet any of the
following criteria:
         (a)   Exceed eight inches in height.
         (b)   Release into the air of unpleasant noxious odors or pollen such
as ragweed, dandelion, and miscellaneous other vegetation commonly referred to
as weeds or brush.
         (c)   May conceal filthy deposits or serve as breeding places for
mosquitoes, other insects, or vermin.
         (d)   May cause a public nuisance.
      (2)   Weeds shall not include cultivated and managed vegetation planted
for edible or ornamental purposes such as vegetable gardens, trees, shrubs,
flowers, etc.
   YARD. An open space on the same lot with a structure.
(Ord. 1593 , passed 5-6-2019; Ord. 1634, passed 3-20-2023)
§ 93.57 QUALITY OF LIFE VIOLATIONS.
   An owner, occupant and/or responsible person commits a quality of life
violation by any of the following:
   (A)   Accumulation of clutter, rubbish or garbage. The accumulation of
clutter, waste, trash, rubbish, or garbage outside of any structure or in the
yard is prohibited.
   (B)   Animal waste/feces clean-up. People owning, harboring, or keeping an
animal within the City of Corry shall not permit any waste matter/feces from
the animal to collect and remain on the property so as to cause or create an
unhealthy, unsanitary, dangerous, or offensive living condition. All waste from
animals must be cleaned up on a daily basis.
   (C)   High weeds, grass or plant growth. All premises and exterior property
shall be maintained free from weeds or plant growth in excess of eight inches.
All noxious weeds shall be prohibited. Weeds shall be defined as all grasses,
annual plants, and vegetation. Cultivated flowers, gardens, trees, and shrubs
shall not be included as a violation of this part.
   (D)   Snow and ice removal. No person shall plow, shovel, or blow any snow
from a private property onto a public street, crosswalk, transit stop, sidewalk
or any public property.
   (E)   Premises identification. Buildings shall have approved address numbers
placed in a position to be plainly legible and visible from the street or read
fronting the property. These numbers shall contrast with their background.
Address numbers shall be Arabic numerals or alphabet letters. Numbers shall be
a minimum of four inches (102 mm) in height with a minimum stroke width of 0.5
inch (12.7 mm).
   (F)   Exterior placement of indoor appliances/furniture/electronics. It is
prohibited to store or place any/all appliances, electronics or furniture
including, but not limited to, televisions, ranges, refrigerators, freezers,
air conditioners, ovens, washers, dryers, microwaves, dishwashers, mattresses,
recliners, sofas, interior chairs, or tables on the exterior of any property
for any reason, except to perform maintenance on said property.
   (G)   Storage containers for waste or trash. The owner of every premises
shall use trash and recycling toters provided by the city, as well as be
responsible for the removal of rubbish. Trash and recycling toters may not be
placed at the curb for collection before 5:00 p.m. (prevailing time) on the day
before the scheduled day for collection, and must be removed within 24 hours
after collection.
   (H)   The provisions of Section 107. Notices and orders of the International
Property Maintenance Code, and any amendments thereto, as adopted by the City
of Corry. Other: various city ordinances.
(Ord. 1593 , passed 5-6-2019; Ord. 1634, passed 3-20-2023)
§ 93.58 AUTHORITY FOR ISSUANCE OF A QUALITY OF LIFE VIOLATION TICKET.
   Upon finding quality of life violations, any Code Compliance Officer of the
City of Corry may issue quality of life violation tickets to the owner,
occupant and/or responsible party of the property at issue.
(Ord. 1593 , passed 5-6-2019; Ord. 1634, passed 3-20-2023)
§ 93.59 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The provisions of this subchapter shall be enforced by City of Corry
Code Compliance Officers.
   (B)   Any violation of the provisions of this subchapter may be cause for a
violation ticket, and/or a notice of violation and citation to be issued to the
violator.
(Ord. 1593 , passed 5-6-2019; Ord. 1634, passed 3-20-2023)
§ 93.60 PROCESS FOR ISSUING QUALITY OF LIFE VIOLATION TICKETS.
   (A)   A Code Compliance Officer of the City of Corry shall serve the quality
of life violation ticket to the violator:
      (1)   By handing the quality of life violation ticket to the violator;
      (2)   By leaving or affixing the quality of life violation ticket to the
property where the violation exists (if applicable);
      (3)   By handing the quality of life violation ticket to the violator's
local responsible agent, or to the person in charge thereof at any office of
usual place of business of the violator; or
      (4)   By mailing the quality of life violation ticket to the violator's
address of record via first class mail with a certificate of mailing.
   (B)   The quality of life violation tickets shall be in writing and shall
identify the property address, include a statement of the violation(s), and
specify the maximum time frame to take corrective action to address the
violation. The fine for the first quality of life violation ticket shall be
$25.
   (C)   If the violation is not addressed to the satisfaction of the Code
Compliance Officer within seven days after the issuance of the first quality of
life violation ticket, the officer shall issue a second quality of life
violation ticket. If the violation is not addressed to the satisfaction of the
Code Compliance Officer within seven days after the issuance of the second
quality of life violation ticket, the officer shall issue a third quality of
life violation ticket. The fine for the second and third violations is $50 and
$100, respectively. If the violation is not addressed within seven days of the
issuance of the third ticket, a citation will be issued by the Code Compliance
Officer with the local Magisterial District Justice.
(Ord. 1593 , passed 5-6-2019; Ord. 1634, passed 3-20-2023)
§ 93.61 ABATEMENT OF VIOLATION.
   Any person or business violating this subchapter is hereby directed to
satisfy the City of Corry and its citizens, upon issuance of a quality of life
ticket, by correcting the violation in question.
(Ord. 1593 , passed 5-6-2019; Ord. 1634, passed 3-20-2023)
§ 93.62 FINES AND PENALTIES.
   (A)   For the first violation of any item outlined in § 93.57(A) through (G)
within a 12-month period, a violation ticket shall be issued in the amount of
$25.
   (B)   For the second violation of any item outlined in § 93.57(A) through
(G) within a 12-month period, a violation ticket shall be issued in the amount
of $50.
   (C)   For the third violation of any item outlined in § 93.57(A) through (G)
within a 12-month period, a violation ticket shall be issued in the amount of
$100.
   (D)   Any persons who receives a quality of life violation ticket for any
violation of this subchapter may, within seven days, admit the violation, waive
a hearing, and pay the fine in full satisfaction.
   (E)   Any person who violates this part shall pay a fine as set forth herein
for each offense:
Violation Description Fine 1 Fine 2 Fine 3 Fine 4
Violation Description                              Fine 1 Fine 2 Fine 3 Fine 4
QOL-001   Accumulation of rubbish or garbage -     $25.00 $50.00 $75.00 $100.00
          IPMC 308
QOL-002   Animal waste - Ord. 1437                 $25.00 $50.00 $75.00 $100.00
QOL-003   High weeds, grass or plant growth - IPMC $25.00 $50.00 $75.00 $100.00
          302.4
QOL-004   Snow and ice removal - Ord. 1630         $25.00 $50.00 $75.00 $100.00
QOL-005   Premises ID - IPMC 304.3                 $25.00 $50.00 $75.00 $100.00
QOL-006   Exterior placement of appliances/        $25.00 $50.00 $75.00 $100.00
          furniture
QOL-007   Storing containers for waste or trash -  $25.00 $50.00 $75.00 $100.00
          IPMC 308.3
QOL-008   Other - violations listed in property    $25.00 $50.00 $75.00 $100.00
          maintenance
 
(Ord. 1593 , passed 5-6-2019; Ord. 1634, passed 3-20-2023)
§ 93.63 VIOLATION TICKET PENALTIES.
   (A)   Failure of the person to make payment or request a hearing within
seven days of a violation ticket shall make the person subject to a citation
for failure to pay.
   (B)   If violations are continuous or egregious, Code Compliance Officials
have the right to issue citations pursuant to the International Property
Maintenance Code without first issuing tickets, provided notice has been given.
Upon issuance of four tickets for the same violation, right is reserved for the
Code Compliance Officials to issue citations for the subsequent offenses.
(Ord. 1593 , passed 5-6-2019; Ord. 1634, passed 3-20-2023)
§ 93.64 APPEAL.
   A person in receipt of a violation ticket for any offense under this
subchapter may within seven calendar days of the service of the quality of life
violation ticket (a) admit the violation and pay the fine in full satisfaction;
or (b) deny the violation and request an appeal in writing before the Property
Maintenance Board of Appeals free of charge. At the appeal, which shall be
scheduled within 30 days of a request for appeal, the person shall have the
right to provide information at that time including the right to question any
witnesses. Only evidence relevant to the violation in question shall be
considered and formal rules of evidence shall not apply. A ruling on the appeal
shall occur not more than seven days after the appeal is heard.
(Ord. 1593 , passed 5-6-2019; Ord. 1634, passed 3-20-2023)
§ 93.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person or persons violating or failing to comply with any of the
provisions of §
93.01 may, upon conviction in a summary proceeding, be subjected to a fine not
exceeding $300 for each offense and in default of payment thereof, imprisonment
in the county jail for a term not in excess of 90 days.
   (C)   Any person or persons violating any of the terms of §
93.02 may, on conviction in a summary proceeding, be subjected to a fine of not
less than $10 nor more than $50 for each offense and in default of payment
thereof, imprisonment in the county jail for a term not in excess of 30 days.
   (D)   (1)   Notice of violation. If the Code Compliance Officer shall find
that any of the provisions of §§
93.15 through
93.26 are being violated, he or she shall notify in writing the person
responsible for such violation, indicating the nature of the violation and
ordering the action and specifying the maximum number of days to correct the
violation. The notice shall include the fact that the recipient has the right
to appeal to the Tree Committee Board within a prescribed period of time.
      (2)   Enforcement on violation. If the notice of violation is not
complied with, the Code Compliance Officer has the authority to institute
enforcement proceedings through Quality of Life Ticketing.
      (3)   Enforcement penalties and remedies. Any person or persons violating
any of the terms of §§
93.15 through
93.26 may be subjected to Quality of Life Ticketing. Maximum fine is $100. May
be applied daily if no good faith efforts have been made to abate.
   (E)   Any person, firm or corporation who or which shall violate or fail,
neglect or refuse to comply with any of the provisions of §§
93.40 through
93.43 shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less
than $5 nor more that $50 and costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment
thereof, imprisonment in the county jail for a term not in excess of 30 days;
provided, each day’s violation shall constitute a separate offense and notice
to the offender shall not be necessary in order to constitute an offense.
(Ord. 1142, passed 7-20-1970; Ord. 1217, passed 5-17-1976; Ord. 1451, passed
10-18-2004; Ord. 1633, passed 3-20-2023)
CHAPTER 94: PARKS AND RECREATION
Section
   
94.01   Locations and descriptions
   
94.02   Hours for parks and recreation fields
 
   
94.99   Penalty
§ 94.01 LOCATIONS AND DESCRIPTIONS.
   The municipal park locations and descriptions are as follows:
   (A)   City Park located in the 300 block of North Center Street described
more fully as parcel #06-022-092.0-001.00;
   (B)   Seneca Park on Seneca Street described more fully as parcel #08-038-
159.0-001.00;
   (C)   Mead Park located on Mead Avenue described more fully as parcel #07-
14-046.0-012.00;
   (D)   Soccer Complex on Sciota Road described more fully as parcel # 06-047-
034.0-001.00; and
   (E)   Beaver Complex on West Washington Street described more fully as
parcel #07-025-049.0-013.00.
(Ord. 1582, passed 9-4-2018)
§ 94.02 HOURS FOR PARKS AND RECREATION FIELDS.
   (A)   Hours of parks including Seneca Park, Mead Park, The Soccer Complex
and the Beaver Complex. The city municipal parks shall be open daily from 7:00
a.m. until 10:00 p.m. No person other than municipal personnel shall be in the
parks at any time between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. An event request may be
submitted by an organized group desiring to use a park for a legitimate purpose
between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. Such request shall be made to
City Council via the event request procedure.
   (B)   Hours of City Park. The hours of the City Park, located on Center
Street shall be utilized from 7:00 a.m. until 11:00 p.m. each day. No person
other than municipal personnel shall be in the parks at any time between 11:00
p.m. and 7:00 a.m. An event request may be submitted by an organized group
desiring to use a park for a legitimate purpose between the hours of 11:00 p.m.
and 7:00 a.m. Such request shall be made to City Council via the event request
procedure. As an exception to this policy, an individual may pass through the
City Park on sidewalks designated for pedestrian use. Those individuals are not
permitted to loiter, congregate or use any other portion of the park during the
hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
(Ord. 1582, passed 9-4-2018) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a summary
offense and shall be fined not less than $50 or not more than $300 and, in
default of payment thereof, shall be imprisoned for not more than 30 days.
(Ord. 1582, passed 9-4-2018)
CHAPTER 95: NUISANCES
Section
Overhead or Above-Ground Tanks or Containers
   
95.01   Erection or construction forbidden
   
95.02   Exceptions
 
   
95.99   Penalty
OVERHEAD OR ABOVE-GROUND TANKS OR CONTAINERS
§ 95.01 ERECTION OR CONSTRUCTION FORBIDDEN.
   The erection or construction of overhead tanks or above-ground tanks or
containers of any description within the city; erected or constructed for the
purpose of containing, holding or storage of gasoline, oil, kerosene or propane
gas; or other inflammable or explosive material is forbidden.
(Ord. 748, passed 8-18-1947) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.02 EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   Excepted from the prohibition set forth in §
95.01 are:
      (1)    Above-ground tanks or containers not exceeding 500 gallons in
capacity used for the containing, holding or storage of fuel oil or propane gas
for household purposes only;
      (2)   Overhead tanks or above-ground tanks or containers erected or
constructed for the purpose of containing, holding or storage of propane gas to
be used as auxiliary fuel for manufacturing concerns within the city for the
purpose of operating their plants or factories;
      (3)   Above-ground tanks or containers used for the containing, holding
or storage of aircraft fuel used for an aircraft service station in the
operation of an airport;
      (4)   Above-ground tanks not exceeding 2,000 gallons in capacity used for
containing, holding or storage of gasoline or diesel fuel to be used as fuel
for by public utilities, government or government agencies; and
      (5)   Above-ground tanks not exceeding 2,000 gallons in capacity used for
the containing, holding or storage of gasoline or diesel fuel to be used by
industrial or commercial businesses, which are conforming uses located in the
appropriate industrial or commercial zoning districts.
   (B)   For all tanks permitted by subsections (2), (3), (4) or (5) above, a
fence which will enclose the tank or equipment shall be required where public
access to the tank is not otherwise restricted. Nothing in the above
subsections (1), (2), (4) or (5) shall be construed to permit the use of above-
ground tanks or containers for the containing, holding or storage of fuels for
wholesale or retail sales.
   (C)   Any overhead tanks or above-ground tanks or containers erected or
constructed under the exceptions set forth in this section shall be so erected
or constructed in compliance with the regulations governing volatile
inflammable liquids as adopted by the Fire Marshal Division of the Pennsylvania
State Police.
(Ord. 748, passed 8-18-1947; Ord. 1375, passed 12-20-1993) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.99 PENALTY.
   Any person, partnership or corporation violating or refusing to comply with
any of the provisions of this chapter shall upon the conviction thereof, before
the Magisterial District Justice, be guilty of a summary offense and shall be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $300 and costs of prosecution or, in
default of payment of such fine and costs, to undergo imprisonment for not more
than 90 days. Each days’ violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be a
separate violation.
(Ord. 748, passed 8-18-1947; Ord. 1375, passed 12-20-1993)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
110.   RENTAL PROPERTIES
      
111.   MINERAL EXCAVATION
      
112.   AMUSEMENTS
      
113.   LICENSES, FEES AND TAXES
      
114.   SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
      
115.   ALCOHOL
CHAPTER 110: RENTAL PROPERTIES
Section
   
110.01   Purpose and intent
   
110.02   Definitions
   
110.03   Residential rental registration
   
110.04   Form of application
   
110.05   Time for application
   
110.06   Registering properties
   
110.07   Inspections
   
110.08   Signature to inspection form required
   
110.09   Fee schedule
   
110.10   Exemptions
   
110.11   Owner’s rights
   
110.12   Administrative guidelines
 
   
110.99   Penalty
§ 110.01 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   The city recognizes the need for an inspection program for residential
rental properties located within the city in order to ensure all residential
rental properties meet minimum standards for the protection of the health and
safety of the residents living in such properties, and to provide an efficient
system for compelling both absentee and local owners and operators of these
properties to correct violations and maintain in proper condition rental
properties within the city. The city recognizes that the most efficient system
to meet these objectives is the creation of a program requiring the inspection
of residential rental properties within the city as defined in this chapter, so
that a verification of compliance exists with the Property Maintenance Code of
the city.
(Ord. 1568, passed 12-19-2016)
§ 110.02 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      BOARDING HOUSE OR BED AND BREAKFAST. A building arranged or used for
lodging for compensation, with or without meals, and not occupied as a single-
family unit.
      DORMITORY. A building used as a group of living quarters for a student
body or religious order as an accessory use to a college, university, boarding
school, convent, monastery or similar institutional use.
      FAMILY. Parent, parent-in-law or adult children currently living in the
house/building and where there is no net income earned by the owner.
      HOTEL. A facility offering transient lodging accommodation to the general
public and which may include additional facilities and services, such as
restaurants, meeting rooms, entertainment, personal services and recreational
facilities, excluding bed and breakfasts.
   (B)   Other relevant definitions can be found in Chapter 2 of the 2012
International Property Maintenance Code (IPMC), which is made a portion hereof
by reference.
(Ord. 1568, passed 12-19-2016)
§ 110.03 RESIDENTIAL RENTAL REGISTRATION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to operate, let or
rent to another for occupancy any single residential dwelling or multi-family
dwelling unit unless it has been registered with the city’s Code Compliance.
(Ord. 1568, passed 12-19-2016) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.04 FORM OF APPLICATION.
   Applications for registration shall be made to the Code Compliance Officer
on forms furnished by the office of Code Compliance. The application shall
include, among other information, the following.
   (A)   Required application information:
      (1)   The name of and address of the owner and of the operator, if the
latter has been designated in the application;
      (2)   The location of the structure by street and number;
      (3)   The number of units, rooms or dwelling units available for
occupancy and the number of persons who may be accommodated in each; and
      (4)   Such other related information as the Code Compliance Officer may
require.
   (B)   All information provided on the applications form shall be accurate
and complete. The registration form shall be signed by the property owner(s) or
the designated responsible operator, if any.
   (C)   When the owner is not a natural person, the owner information shall be
that of the president, general manager or other chief executive of the
organization, who shall be designated as the responsible party. When more than
one person has an ownership interest, the required information shall be
provided for each owner.
   (D)   No person shall provide inaccurate information for the registration of
a rental property or fail to provide the information required for such
registration. If any information is determined by the Code Compliance Officer
to be inaccurate, the applicant owner(s) and/or the operator shall be subject
to a fine and/or penalty as hereinafter provided.
(Ord. 1568, passed 12-19-2016) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.05 TIME FOR APPLICATION.
   With respect to existing housing units requiring residential rental
registration as stipulated by section §
110.03, all applications for registration shall be made on or before January 31
and every year beginning January 31, 2017.
(Ord. 1568, passed 12-19-2016)
§ 110.06 REGISTERING PROPERTIES.
   (A)   The Code Compliance Officer shall initially register the property to
the applicant upon proper application, which shall allow the applicant to
temporarily continue to operate, let or rent the unit(s) for which the
registration has been granted.
   (B)   The application for and processing of the registration shall
constitute consent for inspection of the subject rental premises by the Code
Compliance Officer and/or his or her designee.
   (C)   The Code Compliance Officer shall thereafter conduct inspections of
the structure to determine compliance with the city’s Property Maintenance Code
as amended.
   (D)   The results of the inspection shall result in one or more of the
following actions:
      (1)   If the residential rental premises comply with all of the
provisions of the city’s Property Maintenance Code, the Code Compliance Officer
shall schedule future inspections based on stipulated schedule or due to
reports of complaints of non-compliant conditions;
      (2)   If the rental premises do not comply with the provisions of the
city’s Property Maintenance Code, the Code Compliance Officer shall proceed to
enforce all of the provisions of said city’s Property Maintenance Code; and/or
      (3)   In addition to the enforcement of all other remedies as set forth
in the city’s Property Maintenance Code, noncompliance with orders and notices
of the Code Compliance Officer shall result in the revocation of the permission
to let or rent the property, and in such event, the subject premises may not
thereafter be rented to other persons, except that current tenants may continue
to occupy such premises until the earlier of:
         (a)   The expiration of current lease term;
         (b)   The termination of tenancy; or
         (c)   The expiration of 60 days.
   (E)   Notwithstanding any provision herein to the contrary, if such premises
has been determined by the Code Compliance Officer to be unfit for human
occupancy, then in such case, the Code Compliance Officer may require the
current tenants to immediately vacate the premises. No further occupancy will
be authorized until such time as the Code Compliance Officer determines that
the premises are fit for human occupancy.
(Ord. 1568, passed 12-19-2016)
§ 110.07 INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   Inspections may be made to obtain and maintain compliance with the
standards of this chapter and the city’s Property Maintenance Code based on one
of the following:
      (1)   A complaint received by the city, the Code Compliance Officer or
any law enforcement agency, indicating that there is a violation of the
standards or the provisions of any ordinance or law adopted by the city, county
or state;
      (2)   An observation by any city code enforcement official, law
enforcement officer or member of the city’s Fire Department of a violation of
the standards or the provisions of any ordinance or law adopted by the city,
county or state;
      (3)   A report or observation of a dwelling that is unoccupied and
unsecured or a dwelling that is damaged by fire;
      (4)   The failure to register or comply in any manner with the provisions
as required by this chapter or the city’s Property Maintenance Code;
      (5)   The need to determine compliance with a notice or an order issued
by the Code Compliance Officer;
      (6)   An emergency observed or reasonable believed to exist;
      (7)   A request for an inspection by the property owner;
      (8)   Requirements of law where a dwelling is to be demolished by the
city or ownership is to be transferred to the city; or
      (9)   There is a concern that the building/residence poses a life, health
or safety risk to the occupants or general public.
   (B)   Access to property for inspection shall be made in accordance with
local, state and federal laws.
   (C)   If, upon inspection, the unit is found to be in violation of the
city’s Property Maintenance Code, a written notice of the violation(s) shall be
issued to the owner, operator or responsible manager of the unit and the Code
Compliance Officer shall give sufficient time to make repairs and bring the
unit up to the minimum standards of the Code. Once the time has passed for
conducting the necessary repairs, the Code Compliance Officer or his or her
agent shall conduct a follow-up inspection of the premises to determine if the
repairs have been completed.
(Ord. 1568, passed 12-19-2016)
§ 110.08 SIGNATURE TO INSPECTION FORM REQUIRED.
   The Code Compliance Officer’s signature, or that of his or her designee,
shall be affixed to every registration form.
(Ord. 1568, passed 12-19-2016)
§ 110.09 FEE SCHEDULE.
   The registration fee to be charged for a rental registration application
will be established by the city fee resolution, except for the exceptions
listed in §
110.10, which shall be charged an application fee in lieu of the full
registration fee; such fee to be similarly established by the city fee
resolution.
(Ord. 1568, passed 12-19-2016)
§ 110.10 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   Inspections and full fees shall not apply to:
      (1)   All property owned by the Housing Authority of the city which is
inspected by the city Housing Authority to assess conformance with federal
standards;
      (2)   Hospitals, nursing homes, personal care homes, group homes or other
rental units used for habitation, where such facilities are subject to county,
state or federal licensing and inspection (inspections of these facilities must
be at a level which meets or exceeds the local code). Documentation of said
inspection must be filed with City Hall;
      (3)   Single-family dwellings where a family member of the owner remains
in occupancy and no net income is earned by the owners; and
      (4)   Land contracts where the owner is the mortgage holder and the
tenant is the buyer, a copy of the contract must be on file at City Hall.
   (B)   In order to obtain exemption, the owner shall provide a copy of the
most recent inspection report and the required documentation at time of the
request for exemption. Exemption must be applied for annually with the same
deadline of January 31 each year beginning January 31, 2017.
(Ord. 1568, passed 12-19-2016)
§ 110.11 OWNER’S RIGHTS.
   The terms and provisions of this chapter are not intended to bar, preclude
or affect the right of the owner to pursue judicial relief against a tenant for
damage caused to a property or for which a tenant is legally responsible, or as
provided by law.
(Ord. 1568, passed 12-19-2016)
§ 110.12 ADMINISTRATIVE GUIDELINES.
   The Code Compliance Officer shall establish administrative guidelines for
the implementation of this chapter. Such administrative guidelines need not be
advertised, but copies thereof shall be kept on file in the City Clerk’s office
for inspection by the public. The administrative guidelines and the amendments
or modifications thereto shall be approved by City Council.
(Ord. 1568, passed 12-19-2016)
§ 110.99 PENALTY.
   Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
chapter by:
   (A)   Failure to apply for a rental registration;
   (B)   Providing false information in a registration application; or
   (C)   Any act in violation of the provisions of this chapter, shall, upon
conviction thereof in a summary proceeding before a District Judge, be
sentenced to pay a fine of up to $500, together with attorney fees and all
costs of prosecution and any fee or fees, and all costs of prosecution and any
fee or fees, for each offense, or imprisonment not to exceed 30 days, or both
fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has
been served shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 1568, passed 12-19-2016)
CHAPTER 111: MINERAL EXCAVATION
Section
   
111.01   Definitions
   
111.02   Permit required
   
111.03   Application and permits
   
111.04   Permit fee
   
111.05   Restoration bond
   
111.06   Requirements during development phase
   
111.07   Requirements after development phase
   
111.08   Violations
 
   
111.99   Penalty
§ 111.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   EXCAVATION. Any activity, other than agricultural activities, which disturbs
the surface of the land including, but not limited to, drilling or boring
holes, embankments, land development, mineral extraction and moving
disposition, or storing of minerals, soil or rock.
   MINERAL. Any valuable inert or lifeless substance formed or deposited in its
present position through natural agencies alone and which is found in or upon
the soil of the earth or in the rocks beneath the soil; and shall include, but
not be limited to, not only the various ores of the precious metals, but also
coal, gravel, clay, marble, stone of various sorts, slate, salt, sand, natural
gas, petroleum and water.
   ONE ACRE OR MORE. The combined total area used for access and haul roads,
stockpile and storage areas, and all other areas disturbed or used incidental
to the project.
   OPERATOR. Any person, partnership, company or corporation engaged in the
excavation of minerals.
   PERMITTEE. Any person, partnership, company or corporation to which a permit
has been legally granted under this chapter.
   STABILIZATION. The proper placing, grading and/or covering of soil or rock
to ensure their resistance to erosion, sliding or other movement.
   WELL. A borehole in the earth for the purpose of or to be used for
producing, extracting or injecting any gas, oil, water or other mineral.
(Ord. 1278, passed 10-19-1981)
§ 111.02 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   A permit shall be required for all mineral excavation within the city
which disturbs one acre or more. A separate permit shall be required for each
mineral excavation site.
   (B)   The fee to be charged to obtain a mineral excavation permit in the
city shall be and is hereby fixed at the rate of $500.
(Ord. 1278, passed 10-19-1981; Res. passed 10-19-1981)
Editor’s Note:
   See also city’s fee schedule
§ 111.03 APPLICATION AND PERMITS.
   (A)   Application for a mineral excavation permit shall be made by the land
owner, lease holder, owner of the mineral rights on or under said land or their
assigns. If the applicant is not the land owner, the applicant shall show
written evidence of approval by the land owner for mineral excavation on such
property.
   (B)   The land owner, lease holder, owner of the mineral rights and/or their
assigns shall each and/or all be responsible to obtain the aforesaid permit.
   (C)   No site work shall begin unless the operator has first made
application for a permit and then has obtained a mineral excavation permit from
the city.
   (D)   No mineral excavation permit shall be approved unless the applicant
has first obtained a permit from the state’s Department of Environmental
Resources in accordance with Title 25, Part I, Chapter 102 Erosion Control, as
amended, plus any laws and regulations subsequent thereto. The applicant shall
have an approved soil erosion and sedimentation control plan which shall comply
with all Department of Environmental Resources rules and regulations, together
with all comments and/or approvals from the County Conservation District. A
copy of these approvals, plus all submitted back up data required to obtain
such approvals, shall be submitted to the city a minimum of 15 days prior to
issuance of any mineral excavation permit. All soil erosion and sedimentation
control measures shall meet the approval of the city.
(Ord. 1278, passed 10-19-1981)
§ 111.04 PERMIT FEE.
   A fee in an amount established by Council resolution shall be paid to the
city for each permit for mineral excavation.
(Ord. 1278, passed 10-19-1981)
§ 111.05 RESTORATION BOND.
   (A)   A bond in the amount of $100,000 shall be submitted to the city prior
to issuance of a permit. Said bond shall be either cash or a bond guaranteed by
a surety company authorized to do business in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
and shall be in a form acceptable to the city. A separate bond in the amount of
$100,000 shall be submitted for each site. The bond shall serve as a guarantee
that the permittee shall comply with the terms, conditions and requirements of
this chapter and all state and federal laws and regulations.
   (B)   If the permittee shall fail to comply with any of the terms,
conditions and requirements of this chapter or requirements of the state and
federal governments, the permittee and the surety company shall be notified. If
the condition is not corrected following such notification, the city may
proceed to bring said failure or violation into conformance with the applicable
laws or regulations and initiate action to recover the cost thereof from the
surety company holding said bond.
(Ord. 1278, passed 10-19-1981)
§ 111.06 REQUIREMENTS DURING DEVELOPMENT PHASE.
   (A)   The permittee shall comply with all soil erosion and sedimentation
control measures established in the permit, and shall bear the final
responsibility for the installation and maintenance of all required erosion
control measures as required by the state’s Department of Environmental
Resources, the County Conservation District and the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   The permittee shall not place, or cause to be placed, any soil or
other debris on any street within the city. If such soil or debris is placed on
said street(s) and is not removed within 12 hours, the city shall be authorized
to clear such street of same and the charge therefor shall be assessed against
the permittee.
   (C)   The permittee shall not damage any street improvements (i.e., roadway,
curbs, drainage facilities and the like), and shall assure that street drainage
facilities are kept clear and open at all times.
(Ord. 1278, passed 10-19-1981)
§ 111.07 REQUIREMENTS AFTER DEVELOPMENT PHASE.
   (A)   The permittee shall maintain all soil erosion and sedimentation
control measures until restoration of the land is complete.
   (B)   The permittee shall restore all disturbed surfaces to former grade,
except where modifications shown on the soil erosion and sedimentation control
plan may be necessary for access roads and accessory structures. All land
surfaces, except access roads, shall be seeded, fertilized, mulched or
otherwise stabilized. If such site restoration has not been completed within 30
days after completion of the development phase, the city shall notify the
permittee and the surety company in writing of such violation. The city may
allow an extension of time when severe weather conditions exist. If said
violations are not corrected within 30 days following the date stipulated in
the written notice, the city may, with permission of the land owner, complete
the restoration work and the cost of said work shall be assessed as damages
against the permittee.
   (C)   All equipment and other apparatus not used directly for ongoing
mineral extraction shall be removed from the site.
(Ord. 1278, passed 10-19-1981) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.08 VIOLATIONS.
   Whenever, by the provisions of this chapter, the performance of any act is
required, or the performance of any act is prohibited, a failure to comply with
such provisions shall constitute a violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 1278, passed 10-19-1981)
§ 111.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof in a summary proceeding, be sentenced to pay a fine of not
more than $500. In default of payment of the fine, such person shall be liable
to imprisonment for not more than 60 days in the county jail. Any person
continuing any such violation beyond one calendar day shall be deemed to have
committed a separate offense for each calendar day such violation continues.
(Ord. 1278, passed 10-19-1981)
CHAPTER 112: AMUSEMENTS
Section
   
112.01   Mechanical devices and machines
   
112.02   License fees
§ 112.01 MECHANICAL DEVICES AND MACHINES.
   On or after February 1, 1954, it shall be unlawful for any person, firm or
corporation to own, lease as lessor or lessee, or have in his, her, its or
their possession and available for use or play by any person, any mechanical
device or machine for the playing of games of amusement and/or skill, commonly
known as pinball machines, television games and the like, and for the playing
of music, commonly known as juke boxes, which are either operated by a coin or
for which a charge for use of such machine or device is made, unless such
owner, lessor, lessee or possessor shall have first secured a license as
hereinafter set forth.
(Ord. 1271, passed 2-2-1981) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 112.02 LICENSE FEES.
   The annual license fee for each machine or device as defined in §
112.01 shall be $50 for devices used for playing games of skill and/or
amusement, and $25 for devices used for playing music, and such license must be
secured for each such machine or device for the calendar year on or before
February 1 of such calendar year. In the case of machines first made available
for use on or after July 1 of any calendar year, but prior to October 1 of such
calendar year, the license fee for the balance of such calendar year shall be
$35 for devices used for playing games of skill and/or amusement, and $20 for
devices used for playing music. In the case of machines first made available
for use on or after October 1 of any calendar year, the license fee for the
balance of such calendar year shall be $20 for devices used for playing games
of skill and/or amusement, and $15 for devices used for playing music.
(Ord. 1271, passed 2-2-1981)
Editor’s Note:
   See also city’s fee schedule
CHAPTER 113: LICENSES, FEES AND TAXES
Section
Occupational Privilege Tax
   
113.01   Definitions
   
113.02   Levy and tax rate
   
113.03   Exemption and refunds
   
113.04   Duties of employers to collect
   
113.05   Tax returns
   
113.06   Dates for determining tax liability and payment
   
113.07   Self-employed individuals
   
113.08   Individuals engaged in more than one occupation or employed in more
than one political subdivision
   
113.09   Employers and self-employed individuals residing beyond city limits
   
113.10   Administration of tax
   
113.11   Suits for collection
   
113.12   Applicability
Miscellaneous Fees
   
113.25   Billboard tax
   
113.26   Peddlers and solicitors
   
113.27   Traveling amusements
 
   
113.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Local services tax, see §
32.21
OCCUPATIONAL PRIVILEGE TAX
§ 113.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COLLECTOR. The Local Services Tax Collector, as appointed by the City
Council.
   DCED. The Department of Community and Economic Development of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
   EARNED INCOME COMPENSATION. As defined in Section 13 of the Local Tax
Enabling Act, P.L. 1257 § 13, as amended, 53 P.S. § 6913, as amended.
   EMPLOYER. An individual, partnership, association, limited liability
corporation, limited liability partnership, corporation, governmental body,
agency or other entity employing one or more persons on a salary, wage,
commission or other compensation basis, including a self-employed person.
   INDIVIDUAL. Any person, male or female, engaged in any occupation, trade or
profession within the corporate limits of the city.
   NET PROFITS. The net income from the operation of a business, profession, or
other activity, as this term is defined in Section 13 of the Local Tax Enabling
Act, P.L. 1251, § 13, as amended, 53 P.S. § 6913, as amended.
   OCCUPATION. Any trade, profession, business or undertaking of any type, kind
or character, including services, domestic or other, earned on or performed
within the corporate limits of the city for which compensation is charged or
received; whether by means of salary, wages, commission or fees for services
rendered.
   POLITICAL SUBDIVISION. The area within the corporate limits of the city.
   TAX. The Local Services Tax levied and assessed by this subchapter.
   TAX YEAR. The period from January 1 until December 31 in any year; a
calendar year.
(Ord. 1480, passed 12-3-2007)
§ 113.02 LEVY AND RATE OF TAX.
   (A)   For specific revenue purposes, an annual tax is hereby levied and
assessed, commencing January 1, 2008; upon the privilege of engaging in an
occupation with a primary place of employment within the city during the tax
year. Each natural person who exercises such privilege for any length of time
during any tax year shall pay the tax for that year in the amount of $52,
assessed on a pro rata basis, in accordance with the provisions of this
subchapter.
   (B)   This tax may be used solely for the following purposes as the same may
be allocated by the City Council from time to time:
      (1)   Emergency services, which shall include emergency medical services,
police sendees and/or fire sendees;
      (2)   Road construction and/or maintenance;
      (3)   Reduction of property taxes; or
      (4)   Property tax relief through implementation of a homestead and
farmstead exclusion in accordance with 53 Pa.C.S. Ch. 85, Subch. F (relating to
homestead property exclusion).
   (C)   The political subdivision shall use no less than 25% of the funds
derived from the tax for emergency services. This tax is in addition to all
other taxes of any kind or nature heretofore levied by the political
subdivision. The tax shall be no more than $52 on each person for each calendar
year, irrespective of the number of political subdivisions within which a
person maybe employed.
(Ord. 1480, passed 12-3-2007)
§ 113.03 EXEMPTION AND REFUNDS.
   (A)   Exemption. Any person whose total earned income and net profits from
all sources within the political subdivision is less than $12,000 for any
calendar year in which the tax is levied is exempt from the payment of the tax
for that calendar year. In addition, the following persons are exempt from
payment of the tax:
      (1)   Any person who has served in any war or armed conflict in which the
United States was engaged and is honorably discharged or released under
honorable circumstances from active service if, as a result of military
service, the person is blind, paraplegic or a double or quadruple amputee or
has a service-connected disability declared by the United States Veterans’
Administration or its successor to be a total one hundred percent disability.
      (2)   Any person who serves as a member of a reserve component of the
armed forces and is called to active duty at any time during the taxable year.
For the purposes of this subsection, “reserve component of the armed forces”
shall mean the United States Army Reserve, United States Navy Reserve, United
States Marine Corps Reserve, United States Coast Guard Reserve, United States
Air Force Reserve, the Pennsylvania Army National Guard or the Pennsylvania Air
National Guard.
   (B)   Procedure to claim exemption.
      (1)   A person seeking to claim an exemption from the local sendees tax
may annually file an exemption certificate with the political subdivision and
with the person’s employer affirming that the person reasonably expects to
receive earned income and net profits from all sources within the political
subdivision of less than $12,000 in the calendar year for which the exemption
certificate is filed. In the event the political subdivision utilizes a tax
collection officer, it shall provide a copy of the exemption certificate to
that officer. The exemption certificate shall have attached to it a copy of all
the employee’s last pay stubs or W-2 forms from employment within the political
subdivision for the year prior to the fiscal year for which the employee is
requesting to be exempted from the tax. Upon receipt of the exemption
certificate and until otherwise instructed by the political subdivision or
except as required by subsection (2) below, the employer shall not withhold the
tax from the person during the calendar year or the remainder of the calendar
year for which the exemption certificate applies. Employers shall ensure that
the exemption certificate forms are readily available to employees at all times
and shall furnish each new employee with a form at the time of hiring. The
exemption certificate form shall be the uniform form provided by the political
subdivision.
      (2)   With respect to a person who claimed an exemption for a given
calendar year from the tax, upon notification to an employer by the person or
by the political subdivision that the person has received earned income and net
profits from all sources within the political subdivision equal to or in excess
of $12,000 in that calendar year or that the person is otherwise ineligible for
the tax exemption for that calendar year, or upon an employer’s payment to the
person of earned income within the municipality in an amount equal to or in
excess of $12,000 in that calendar year, an employer shall withhold the local
services tax from the person under subsection (3) below.
      (3)   If a person who claimed an exemption for a given calendar year from
the tax becomes subject to the tax for the calendar year under subsection (2)
above, the employer shall withhold the tax for the remainder of that calendar
year. The employer shall withhold from the person, for the first payroll period
after receipt of the notification under subsection (2) above, a lump sum equal
to the amount of tax that was not withheld from the person due to the exemption
claimed by the person under this subsection, plus the per payroll amount due
for that first payroll period. The amount of tax-withheld per payroll period
for the remaining payroll periods in that calendar year shall be the same
amount withheld for other employees. In the event the employment of a person
subject to withholding of the tax under this clause is subsequently severed in
that calendar year, the person shall be liable for any outstanding balance of
tax due, and the political subdivision may pursue collection under this
subchapter.
      (4)   Except as provided in subsection (2) above, it is the intent of
this subsection that employers shall not be responsible for investigating
exemption certificates, monitoring tax exemption eligibility or exempting any
employee from the local services tax.
   (C)   Refunds. The City Council, in consultation with the Collector and
DCED, shall establish procedures for the processing of refund claims for any
tax paid by any person who is eligible for exemption, which procedures shall be
in accord with provisions of the general municipal law relating to refunds of
overpayments and interest on overpayments. Refunds made within 75 days of a
refund request or 75 days after the last day the employer is required to remit
the tax for the last quarter of the calendar year, whichever is later, shall
not be subject to interest. No refunds shall be made for amounts overpaid in a
calendar year that do not exceed $1. The City Council or the Collector shall
determine eligibility for exemption and provide refunds to exempt persons.
(Ord. 1480, passed 12-3-2007)
§ 113.04 DUTIES OF EMPLOYERS TO COLLECT.
   (A)   Each employer within the city, as well as those employers situated
outside the city but who engage in business within the city, is hereby charged
with the duty of collecting the tax from each of his or her employees engaged
by him or her or performing for him or her within the political subdivision and
making a return and payment thereof to the Collector. Further, each employer is
hereby authorized to deduct this tax for each employee in his or her employ,
whether said employee is paid by salary, wage or commission and whether or not
all such services are performed within the political subdivision.
   (B)   A person subject to the tax shall be assessed by the employer a pro
rata share of the tax for each payroll period in which the person is engaging
in an occupation. The pro rata share of the tax assessed on the person for a
payroll period shall be determined by dividing the rate of the tax levied for
the calendar year by the number of payroll periods established by the employer
for the calendar year. For purposes of determining the pro rata share, an
employer shall round down the amount of the tax collected each payroll period
to the nearest one-hundredth of a dollar. Collection of the tax shall be made
on a payroll period basis for each payroll period in which the person is
engaging in an occupation, except as provided in division (D) of this section.
For purposes of this division (B), combined rate shall mean the aggregate
annual rate of the tax levied by the school district and the municipality.
   (C)   No person shall be subject to the payment of the local sendees tax by
more than one political subdivision during each payroll period.
   (D)   In the case of concurrent employment, an employer shall refrain from
withholding the tax if the employee provides a recent pay statement from a
principal employer that includes the name of the employer, the length of the
payroll period and the amount of the tax withheld and a statement from the
employee that the pay statement is from the employee’s principal employer and
the employee will notify other employers of a change in principal place of
employment within two weeks of its occurrence. The employee’s statement shall
be provided on the form approved by DCED.
   (E)   The tax shall be no more than $52 on each person for each calendar
year, irrespective of the number of political subdivisions within which a
person may be employed. The political subdivision shall provide a taxpayer a
receipt of payment upon request by the taxpayer.
   (F)   No employer shall be held liable for failure to withhold the tax or
for the payment of the withheld tax money to the political subdivision if the
failure to withhold taxes arises from incorrect information submitted by the
employee as to the employee’s place or plates of employment, the employee’s
principal office or where the employee is principally employed. Further, an
employer shall not be liable for payment of the local services tax in an amount
exceeding the amount withheld by the employer if the employer complies with the
provisions of §
113.03(B) of this subchapter and this section and remits the amount so withheld
in accordance with this subchapter.
   (G)   Employers shall be required to remit the local services taxes 30 days
after the end of each quarter of a calendar year.
(Ord. 1480, passed 12-3-2007)
§ 113.05 TAX RETURNS.
   Each employer shall prepare and file a return showing a computation of the
tax on forms to be supplied to the employer by the Collector. If an employer
fails to file the return and pay the tax, whether or not the employer makes
collection thereof from the salary, wages or commissions paid by him or her to
an employee, except as provided hereafter in this subchapter, the employer
shall be responsible for the payment of the tax in full as though the tax had
been originally levied against the employer.
(Ord. 1480, passed 12-3-2007)
§ 113.06 DATES FOR DETERMINING TAX LIABILITY AND PAYMENT.
   In each tax year, each employer shall use his or her employment records to
determine the number of employees from whom such tax shall be deducted and paid
over to the Collector on or before the 30th day following the end of each
calendar quarter of each such tax year.
(Ord. 1480, passed 12-3-2007)
§ 113.07 SELF EMPLOYED INDIVIDUALS.
   Each self-employed individual who performs services of any type or kind or
engages in any occupation or profession within a primary place of employment
within the political subdivision shall be required to comply with this
subchapter and pay the pro rata portion of the tax due to the Collector on or
before the 30th day following the end of each quarter.
(Ord. 1480, passed 12-3-2007)
§ 113.08 INDIVIDUALS ENGAGED IN MORE THAN ONE OCCUPATION OR EMPLOYED IN MORE
THAN ONE POLITICAL SUBDIVISION.
   (A)   The situs of the tax shall be the place of employment on the first day
the person becomes subject to the tax during each payroll period. In the event
a person is engaged in more than one occupation, that is, concurrent
employment, or an occupation which requires the person working in more than one
political subdivision during a payroll period, the priority of claim to collect
the local services tax shall be in the following order:
      (1)   First, the political subdivision in which a person maintains his or
her principal office or is principally employed;
      (2)   Second, the political subdivision in which the person resides and
works if the tax is levied by that political subdivision; and
      (3)   Third, the political subdivision in which a person is employed and
which imposes the tax nearest in miles to the person’s home.
   (B)   In case of dispute, a tax receipt of the taxing authority for that
calendar year declaring that the taxpayer has made prior payment constitutes
prima facie certification of payment to all other political subdivisions.
(Ord. 1480, passed 12-3-2007)
§ 113.09 EMPLOYERS AND SELF-EMPLOYED INDIVIDUALS RESIDING BEYOND CITY LIMITS.
   All employers and self-employed individuals residing or having their places
of business outside of the city but who perform services of any type or kind or
engage in any occupation or profession within the city do, by virtue thereof,
agree to be bound by and subject themselves to the provisions, penalties and
regulations promulgated under this subchapter with the same force and effect as
though they were residents of the city. Further, any individual engaged in an
occupation within the city and an employee of a nonresidential employer may,
for the purpose of this subchapter, be considered a self-employed person, and
in the event his or her tax is not paid, the city shall have the option of
proceeding against either the employer or employee for the collection of this
tax as hereinafter provided.
(Ord. 1480, passed 12-3-2007)
§ 113.10 ADMINISTRATION OF TAX.
   (A)   The Collector shall be appointed by resolution of the city. It shall
be the duty of the Collector to accept and receive payments of this tax and to
keep a record thereof showing the amount received by him or her from each
employer of self-employed person, together with the date the tax was received.
   (B)   The Collector is hereby charged with the administration and
enforcement of this subchapter and is hereby charged and empowered, subject to
municipal approval, to proscribe, adopt and promulgate rules and regulations
relating to any matter pertaining to the administration and enforcement of this
subchapter, including provisions for the examination of payroll records of any
employer subject to this subchapter, the examination and correction of any
return made in compliance with this article and any payment alleged or found to
be incorrect or as to which overpayment is claimed or found to have occurred.
Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Collector shall have the right to
appeal to the Court of Common Pleas of Erie County as in other cases provided.
   (C)   The Collector is hereby authorized to examine the books and payroll
records of any employer in order to verify the accuracy of any return made by
an employer or, if no return was made, to ascertain the tax due. Each employer
is hereby directed and required to give the Collector the means, facilities and
opportunity for such examination.
(Ord. 1480, passed 12-3-2007)
§ 113.11 SUITS FOR COLLECTION.
   (A)   In the event that any tax under this subchapter remains due or unpaid
30 days after the due dates above set forth, the Collector may sue for the
recovery of any such tax due or unpaid under this subchapter, together with
interest and penalty.
   (B)   If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate
of 6% on the amount of such tax shall be calculated beginning with the due date
of the tax and a penalty of 5% shall be added to the flat rate of such tax for
nonpayment thereof. Where suit is brought for the recovery of this tax or other
appropriate remedy undertaken, the individual liable therefor shall, in
addition, be responsible and liable for the costs of collection.
(Ord. 1480, passed 12-3-2007)
§ 113.12 APPLICABILITY.
   This subchapter shall not apply to any person or property as to whom or
which it is beyond the legal power of the City Council to impose the tax or
duties herein provided for.
(Ord. 1480, passed 12-3-2007)
MISCELLANEOUS FEES
§ 113.25 BILLBOARD TAX.
   (A)   A license tax is hereby imposed on each billboard within the city
limits of the city in the amount of $150 annually. For the purpose of this
subchapter, a BILLBOARD shall consist of a billboard with one sign, and each
sign shall constitute a separate and distinct billboard. Billboards having
signs on each side of the billboard shall constitute two or more billboards.
Such tax shall be levied and collected against the person, firm or company
erecting and maintaining the advertising on the signs.
   (B)   Immediately after the adoption of this subchapter, the Chief of Police
shall inventory all existing billboards within the city (and annually
thereafter) to determine the person, firm or company who erected and maintains
the advertising on same. Prompt notification by copy of this subchapter in the
first instance shall be transmitted via certified mail to any such person, firm
or company, together with a statement of the license tax now due and payable to
the city.
(Ord. 985, passed 7-2-1962)
§ 113.26 PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS.
   (A)   Each hawker or peddler who goes from door to door selling his or her
goods and wares, each solicitor who goes from door to door taking orders for
subsequent delivery, and every firm, corporation or person entering into or
beginning a transient retail business in the city for the sale of goods, wares
and merchandise shall secure a license prior to any such activity.
   (B)   The amount of the fee for such license under this section shall be
$25, and, in the case of a company engaging in such business with a number of
representatives, the license fee shall be $25 per annum, plus an additional $5
for each person in excess of one engaged in such business in the city.
   (C)   Application for such permit or license shall be made to the Chief of
Police on a form prepared by the Chief of Police and available at the office of
the Chief of Police.
   (D)   No permit shall be issued until 15 days after the original application
therefor, during which time the Chief of Police shall make such investigation
as may be proper to determine the reliability and responsibility of the
applicant and any salesperson operating for such applicant.
   (E)   No license or permit shall be required under this section for any
person who is a bona fide resident of the city for a period of at least one
year prior to the date of the activities set forth in this section.
   (F)   No license shall be required from farmers or other people selling food
products, and the Chief of Police is further empowered to waive the license fee
for any other such activities the entire proceeds of which, less a reasonable
allowance for expenses, inure to the benefit of a recognized charity.
   (G)   The Chief of Police or other designated employee of the city shall
erect suitable signs at the entrances to the city, indicating in general that
licenses provided for under this section are required.
(Ord. 985, passed 7-2-1962)
Editor’s Note:
   See also city’s fee schedule
§ 113.27 TRAVELING AMUSEMENTS.
   (A)   A license shall be secured by each theatrical company, public show,
circus or other type of amusement which comes into the city for a short period
of time.
   (B)   The amount of the license fee for such theatrical performance,
amusements and the like shall be $25 per day for each show or performance, and
application for such permit shall be filed with the Chief of Police.
   (C)   No such license shall be issued under this section until the
expiration of 15 days from the filing of the application for the license, and
each person filing such application shall submit a list of all the names of his
or her employees together with their Social Security numbers.
(Ord. 985, passed 7-2-1962)
Editor’s Note:
   See also city’s fee schedule
§ 113.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Whoever makes any false or untrue statement on any return required by
§§
113.01 through
113.12, or whoever refuses inspection of the books, records or accounts in his
or her custody and control setting forth the number of employees subject to
this tax who are in his or her employment, or whoever fails or refuses to file
any return required by this §§
113.01 through
113.12 shall be guilty of a violation and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600 and costs of prosecution, and, in
default of payment of such fine and costs, to imprisonment for not more than 30
days. The action to enforce the penalty herein prescribed may be instituted
against any person in charge of the business of any employer who shall have
failed or who refuses to file a return required by §§
113.01 through
113.12.
   (C)   Any person convicted of violation of any provision of §§
113.25 through
113.27 in a summary proceedings before any Alderman of the city shall be
subject to a fine of not less than $25 nor more than $100, and in default of
payment thereof, shall be sentenced to confinement in jail for a period not to
exceed 30 days.
(Ord. 985, passed 7-2-1962; Ord. 1069, passed 12-19-1966; Ord. 1480, passed 12-
3-2007)
CHAPTER 114: SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS
Section
   
114.01   Definitions
   
114.02   Display of materials
   
114.03   Prohibited businesses
 
   
114.99   Penalty
§ 114.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADULT BOOK STORE. An enclosed building providing books, magazines,
photographs, reading material, literature or other objects representing
material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting or
relating to specified sexual activities for distribution, purchase, observation
or review by patrons therein.
   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER. An enclosed building with a capacity of three
or more persons used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by
an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specific sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas, as defined herein, for observation by
patrons therein.
   MASSAGE PARLORS. An enclosed building or enclosed area within a building in
which any service offered or provided to the patrons, of said enclosed building
or enclosed area within a building, consists of body massages, body rubs or
other physical manipulation of the patron’s body. This chapter shall not apply
to medical doctors or chiropractic doctors licensed to practice in the State of
Pennsylvania.
   OBSCENE. That which, to the average person applying contemporary community
standards, has as its dominant theme, taken as a whole, an appeal to prurient
interest.
   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS.
      (1)   Less than completely and opaquely covered:
         (a)   Human genitals, pubic region;
         (b)   Buttock; and
         (c)   Female breast below a point immediately above the top of the
areola; and
      (2)   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if
completely and opaquely covered.
   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES.
      (1)   Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal;
      (2)   Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy; and
      (3)   Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttock or female breast.
(Ord. 1238, passed 4-17-1978)
§ 114.02 DISPLAY OF MATERIALS.
   Any establishment displaying books, magazines, photographs, reading material
or literature depicting specified anatomical areas, as defined herein, shall
not have items displayed so as to be visible from outside the establishment.
(Ord. 1238, passed 4-17-1978) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.03 PROHIBITED BUSINESSES.
   It shall be a violation of this chapter to conduct any business which is of
an obscene nature or to operate an adult book store, adult motion picture
theater or massage parlor, as defined herein, within the city.
(Ord. 1238, passed 4-17-1978) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.99 PENALTY.
   Any person or persons violating any of the provisions of this chapter may,
upon conviction in a summary proceeding, be subjected to a fine not exceeding
$300 for each offense, and in default of payment thereof, imprisonment in the
county jail for a term not to exceed 90 days. Each week shall constitute a
separate offense. A week shall be construed to mean seven calendar days.
(Ord. 1238, passed 4-17-1978)
CHAPTER 115: ALCOHOL
Section
Open Containers
   
115.01   General regulations
   
115.02   Public property under control of other public authorities
   
115.03   Other public property
   
115.04   State and federal laws
Sales to Minors
   
115.15   Definitions
   
115.16   Minor in possession
   
115.17   Minor qualification
   
115.18   Distribution regulations
   
115.19   False representation of age
 
   
115.99   Penalty
OPEN CONTAINERS
§ 115.01 GENERAL REGULATIONS.
   No person shall consume any alcoholic beverage or be in possession of any
alcoholic beverage in an open container in any public park in the city, nor on
any public street, roadway, alley or sidewalk within the city, nor in or
adjacent to any public facility of the city, nor shall any person consume any
alcoholic beverages or be in possession of any alcoholic beverage in an open
container while in a vehicle parked on or in any public vehicle parking area,
or in or adjacent to any public park or public facility of the city.
(Ord. 1250, passed 11-5-1979) Penalty, see §
115.99
§ 115.02 PUBLIC PROPERTY UNDER CONTROL OF OTHER PUBLIC AUTHORITIES.
   Unless otherwise restricted by City Council, governmental agencies, public
authorities, public commissions and public boards who have direct
responsibility for the operation of specific parcels of public property, shall
have the option to allow or disallow the consumption of alcoholic beverages or
the possession of alcoholic beverages in an open container on the property
which is within said agency, authority, commission or board jurisdiction to
operate.
(Ord. 1250, passed 11-5-1979)
§ 115.03 OTHER PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   If approved by City Council, permission may be granted to allow consumption
of alcoholic beverages and possession of alcoholic beverages in open containers
on other public property not covered under §
115.02.
(Ord. 1250, passed 11-5-1979)
§ 115.04 STATE AND FEDERAL LAWS.
   All state and federal laws which pertain to the consumption and use of
alcoholic beverages shall apply.
(Ord. 1250, passed 11-5-1979)
SALES TO MINORS
§ 115.15 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES. Include both liquor and malt or brewed beverages.
   LIQUOR. Includes any alcoholic, spiritous, vinous, fermented or other
alcoholic beverages, or combination of liquors or mixed liquors a part of which
is spiritous, vinous, fermented or otherwise alcoholic, including all drinks or
drinkable liquids, preparations or mixtures, and reused, recovered or
redistilled denatured alcohol, or taxable for beverage purposes which contain
more than 0.5% of alcohol by volume, except pure ethyl alcohol or malt or
brewed beverages.
   MALT OR BREWED BEVERAGES. Any beer, lager beer, ale, porter or similar
fermented malt beverages containing 1.5% or more of alcohol by volume, by
whatever name such beverage may be called.
(Ord. 981, passed 2-5-1962)
§ 115.16 MINOR IN POSSESSION.
   Possession and/or consumption of alcoholic beverages by minors in any public
place within the city, whether on public roads, streets, ways, alleys, walks,
courts, parks, lanes or parking areas is hereby prohibited.
(Ord. 981, passed 2-5-1962) Penalty, see §
115.99
§ 115.17 MINOR QUALIFICATION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, all persons under the age of 21 years
shall be considered as minors.
(Ord. 981, passed 2-5-1962)
§ 115.18 DISTRIBUTION REGULATIONS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, furnish or give in any public
place any liquor or malt or brewed beverages or to permit any liquor or malt or
brewed beverages to be sold, furnished or given in any public place to any
person visibly intoxicated or to any insane person or to any minor or to any
habitual drunkard or person of known intemperate habits.
(Ord. 981, passed 2-5-1962) Penalty, see §
115.99
§ 115.19 FALSE REPRESENTATION OF AGE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years knowingly and
falsely to represent himself or herself to be 21 years of age or older to any
licensed dealer or other person for the purpose of securing or having furnished
to him or her any intoxicating liquor.
(Ord. 981, passed 2-5-1962) Penalty, see §
115.99
§ 115.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person or persons violating or failing to comply with any of the
provisions of §§
115.01 through
115.04 may, upon conviction in a summary proceeding, be subjected to a fine not
exceeding $300 for each offense and in default of payment thereof, imprisonment
in the county jail for a term not in excess of 90 days.
   (C)   Any person violating the provisions of §§
115.15 through
115.19 shall be subject to a fine of no less than $25 and no more than $100
after conviction thereof before any police magistrate or other magistrate in
the city in a summary proceedings.
(Ord. 981, passed 2-5-1962; Ord. 1250, passed 11-5-1979)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
      
130.   GENERAL REGULATIONS
      
131.   LOITERING
CHAPTER 130: GENERAL REGULATIONS
Section
   
130.01   Curfew
§ 130.01 CURFEW.
   (A)   From and after the effective date of this section, it shall be
unlawful for any child under the age of 16 years to be on or about the streets,
lanes, alleys, parks or in or about any other public place within the city
after 11:00 p.m. on any day and until 6:00 a.m. on each following day.
   (B)   This section does not apply to a minor who is:
      (1)   Accompanied by the minor’s parent or guardian;
      (2)   On an errand at the direction of the minor’s parent or guardian,
without any detour or stop;
      (3)   In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;
      (4)   Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home
from an employment activity, without any detour or stop;
      (5)   Involved in an emergency;
      (6)   On the sidewalk abutting the minor’s residence or abutting the
residence of a next-door neighbor if the neighbor did not complain to the
police department about the minor’s presence;
      (7)   Attending an official school, religious, or other recreational
activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city, a civic organization,
or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor, or going to
or returning home from, without any detour or stop, an official school,
religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by
the city, a civic organization, or another similar entity that takes
responsibility for the minor;
      (8)   Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States
Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the
right of assembly; or
      (9)   Married or had been married or had disabilities of minority removed
in accordance with state law.
(Ord. 965, passed 3-20-1961) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 131: LOITERING
Section
   
131.01   Title
   
131.02   Definitions
   
131.03   Public places; annoyance
   
131.04   Signs or notice required
 
   
131.99   Penalty
§ 131.01 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known and cited as the “Corry Loitering Ordinance”.
(Ord. 1470, passed 2-6-2006)
§ 131.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   LOITERING. Remaining idle essentially in one location; lingering; spending
time idly; loafing or walking aimlessly in one vicinity or neighborhood; or
hanging around.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Any place to which the public has access, including any public
street or public sidewalk, the front of or the area immediately adjacent to any
school, parking lot, store, restaurant, tavern or other place of business, and
also public grounds, areas or parks.
(Ord. 1470, passed 2-6-2006)
§ 131.03 PUBLIC PLACES; ANNOYANCE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to:
   (A)   Loiter, loaf, wander, stand or remain idle either alone or in consort
with others in a public place in such a manner so as to obstruct any public
street, public highway, public sidewalk or any other public place or building
by hindering or impeding, or tending to hinder or impede, the free and
uninterrupted passage of vehicles, traffic or pedestrians;
   (B)   Commit in or upon any public place, public highway, public sidewalk or
any other public place or building an act of which is an obstruction or
interference to the free and uninterrupted use of property or with any business
lawfully conducted by anyone in or upon, facing or fronting on any such public
street, public highway, public sidewalk or other public place or building, all
of which prevents the free and uninterrupted ingress, egress and regress
therein, thereon and thereto; and
   (C)   Create or cause to be created any annoyance to any person or persons.
(Ord. 1470, passed 2-6-2006) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.04 SIGNS OR NOTICE REQUIRED.
   No person shall be guilty of a violation of this chapter unless:
   (A)   The property owner, tenant or other responsible and authorized person
posts the property with “No Loitering” signs or other notices of like meaning
at the entrance or entrances to the property and at intervals of, at a maximum,
every 75 feet measured from the side of the building which contains an entrance
(s). Property of 75 feet or less, measured on the entrance side of building,
may contain only one sign; or
   (B)   The person to be charged with loitering has been asked by the property
owner, tenant, police officer or other responsible and authorized person to
leave the property and has failed to leave.
(Ord. 1470, passed 2-6-2006)
§ 131.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who causes or commits any of the conditions above shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600 plus costs
and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment
not to exceed 30 days.
(Ord. 1470, passed 2-6-2006)
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   BUILDING CODES
      
151.   PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
      
152.   STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
      
153.   FLOODPLAINS
      
154.   SUBDIVISIONS
      
155.   SCHEDULE OF FEES
      
156.   ZONING
CHAPTER 150: BUILDING CODES
Section
General Provisions
   
150.01   Construction, erection of signs and the like near streets
   
150.02   Sidewalk repair
   
150.03   Fee for failing to secure a permit
   
150.04   Uniform numbering of buildings and lots
Regulations for Airport Facilities
   
150.15   Definitions
   
150.16   Hangar area and lots
   
150.17   Lease of land for permanent hangars
   
150.18   Improvements
   
150.19   Application, permits, construction and maintenance
   
150.20   Construction materials
   
150.21   Portable hangars
   
150.22   Liability
Street Excavations
   
150.35   Applications
   
150.36   Evacuation methods
   
150.37   Replacement of base
   
150.38   Replacement of pavement
   
150.39   Winter excavations
   
150.40   Wet excavations
   
150.41   Responsibility
   
150.42   Enforcement
Housing Code
   
150.55   Definitions
   
150.56   Inspections
   
150.57   Enforcement; service of notice; hearings
   
150.58   Demolition of substandard dwelling units
   
150.59   Adoption of rules and regulation by the Housing Officer
   
150.60   Minimum standards for basic equipment and facilities
   
150.61   Minimum standards for light, ventilation and heating
   
150.62   General requirements relating to maintenance
   
150.63   Minimum space, use and location requirements
   
150.64   Responsibility of owners and occupants
   
150.65   Rooming houses
   
150.66   Designation of unfit dwellings and legal procedure of condemnation
   
150.67   Conflict of ordinances
 
   
150.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 150.01 CONSTRUCTION, ERECTION OF SIGNS AND THE LIKE NEAR STREETS.
   (A)   Wherever in this section the word APPLICANT is used, the same shall
refer to the owner of the premises or contractor doing work for the owner or
tenant of the premises, or occupant of the premises by whom the work is being
done or for whom the work is being done.
   (B)   Before any work is done in connection with the construction,
excavation, erection of signs and tree trimming or removal, and painting or
repair work within the street limits or within five feet of the street limits,
the applicant shall secure a permit from the city.
   (C)   No such permit shall be issued until the applicant furnishes a
liability insurance policy as set forth in this section.
   (D)   In the case of excavation, construction work, tree trimming or removal
and painting or repairs, the applicant shall indemnify the city against all
claims for restoration of property to its former condition prior to said work.
   (E)   The City Council, or any officer or employee of the city designated
thereby for that purpose, is hereby authorized to give notice, by personal
service or certified mail, to the applicant of premises worked on for failure
to restore the premises to its former condition for any condition remaining in
violation of the provisions of this section, directing and requiring said
applicant to conform to the requirements of this section. In the event the
applicant refuses or fails to comply within five days after receipt of said
notice, the city authorities may restore the premises to its former or prior
condition, subject nevertheless to proper changes or alterations which occurred
to the premises for which the permit was issued. Any costs incurred by the city
for work performed as aforesaid, together with a penalty of 10% of the costs
thereof, shall be collected by the city from such applicant in the manner
provided by law.
   (F)   Applicant shall save and hold harmless the city and shall pay and
discharge all lawful claims for injury to persons and property caused by the
negligence of the owner, applicant, employees or agents of owner or applicant
or of any independent contractor hired by same, and shall provide proof of
liability insurance with limits of $100,000 and $300,000, approved by the city.
(Ord. 1294, passed 8-15-1983)
§ 150.02 SIDEWALK REPAIR.
   (A)   From and after the passage of this section, all improved sidewalks
shall be on the grade as established by the City Engineer.
   (B)   From and after the passage of this section, all sidewalks within the
limits of the city shall be of concrete excepting only that in sparsely settled
areas where the foot traffic does not, in the opinion of the City Council,
require the use of concrete, the City Council may, on request of the property
owner, permit walks of a different material.
   (C)   All material used in the repair of existing sidewalks shall be the
same material as used in the original construction of such sidewalk, provided,
however, that a material which is more durable than the material in the
original sidewalk may be used for such repairs.
   (D)   Minor repairs to brick sidewalks may be made with the use of brick.
Major repairs of such sidewalks, however, shall be of a material that would be
permitted under the other provisions of this section, excepting only that the
City Council may, at the request of the property owner, permit the use of brick
in a major repair of a brick sidewalk.
   (E)   Any person constructing a sidewalk or re-laying a sidewalk or making
major repairs thereto shall first secure a permit from the City Engineer’s
office for such work.
   (F)   In the event that any person constructs or repairs a sidewalk contrary
to the provisions of this section, the City Council may serve notice on such
individual to re-lay the walk or to redo the repairs in a manner which meets
the requirements of the provisions of this section within such period of time
as Council may direct. On default of such action on the part of the property
owner, the City Council may then order the work done and assess the cost of the
work against the property owner in the same manner and to the same effect as
original sidewalk liens may be assessed against the property.
(Ord. 973, passed 8-7-1961)
§ 150.03 FEE FOR FAILING TO SECURE A PERMIT.
   (A)   Any person doing or performing any act within the city for which,
under any ordinance of the city then in force, a permit is required shall first
secure such permit.
   (B)   Any contractor, worker or person performing or doing an act for
another person for which, under the terms of any ordinance of the city then in
force, a permit is required, shall see that such permit is secured prior to the
doing or performing of any of such acts.
(Ord. 974, passed 8-21-1961)
§ 150.04 UNIFORM NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS AND LOTS.
   (A)   All property in the city and abutting on the streets of the city is
hereby divided into lots of 20 feet frontage for numbering purposes. Each lot
is to be given one number as hereinafter provided. There shall be made a map of
each ward showing the streets of the said wards with the number, lots and their
numbers. The said maps to be made on a scale of 200 feet to one inch. The maps
are to be placed on file in the Office of the City Engineer. The lots are to be
numbered in the following manner:
      (1)   All lots on streets running east and west shall begin at Center
Street and number each lot east and west therefrom;
      (2)   Beginning with number one on the north side of each street and the
alternate numbers directly opposite on the south side of the street and
continuing in like manner to the next street;
      (3)   Then beginning with number 100 and so on, by beginning the numbers
in each block with an even hundred; and
      (4)   On like manner, all number lots on all streets running north and
south shall be numbered by beginning at the center line of the main track of
the Erie Railroad land and number from there north and south in the same manner
or system as above specified, except that number one and all odd numbers shall
be on the west side of the streets and all even numbers shall be on the east
side of said streets.
   (B)   The owners of all commercial, residential, industrial and public
buildings located on any street in the city shall within 60 days after the
adoption of this section, place or cause to be placed the designated number
prominently on or near the front door or doors of each store, house, dwelling
unit or other building fronting on the street.
   (C)   The designated number as assigned by the City Engineer shall be
visible from the street; shall be a minimum of three inches in height and of a
width proportionate to the height; and shall be placed on a contrasting
background.
   (C)   The designated number shall be displayed in numerical characters.
Alpha characters shall not be permitted as a substitute to numeric characters
in the primary number display required by this section.
   (D)   If the door is not easily visible from the street, the number shall
also be displayed on a post, fence or similar structure at or near the driveway
entrance.
   (E)   In the case of multiple units in a structure, the designation of each
individual occupancy shall be displayed on all doors exiting that unit.
(Ord. 134, passed 1-21-1901; Ord. 1361, passed 8-3-1992) Penalty, see §
150.99
REGULATIONS FOR AIRPORT FACILITIES
§ 150.15 DEFINITIONS.
   Except where specifically defined herein, all words used in this subchapter
shall carry their customary meanings. Words used in the present tense shall
include the future. The singular number shall include the plural, and the
plural the singular. The word “shall” is always mandatory and not permissive.
The word “uses” or “occupied” as applied to any land or building shall be
construed to include the words “intended, arranged or designed to be used or
occupied”.
   AIRPORT. The municipal airport of the city known as Corry Lawrence Airport.
   APPLICATION. The official request by a company or individual, submitted on
forms provided by the city/authority, to erect a building in a designated
hangar area at the airport to be used for approved aviation activities.
   AUTHORITY. The airport authority of the city.
   CITY. The City of Corry, Pennsylvania, owner of Corry Lawrence Airport.
   CITY ENGINEER. The appointed City Engineer of the city.
   HANGAR. Any building or shelter designed or erected for the purpose of
storing aircraft, including, but not limited to, fixed wing aircraft, gliders,
helicopters and the like, together with attached or detached storage and
maintenance facilities.
   HANGAR AREA. The area or areas designated in the official Master Plan and
Airport Layout Plan of the airport as the hangar area.
   OWNER/LESSEE. An individual, partnership, corporation or other legal entity
which owns the hangar or hangars which are located on the demised premises,
under the terms of the lease.
   PORTABLE HANGARS. Any building or shelter designed or erected for the
purpose of storing aircraft, which can be disassembled in sections and which is
specifically manufactured for the purpose of being easily taken apart and
transported.
(Res. passed 8- -1988)
§ 150.16 HANGAR AREA AND LOTS.
   (A)   Location. Permanent hangars may be constructed only within the
designated hangar area and on the hangar lots as shown on the Terminal Area
Plan (as amended at the date of application). See §
150.21 for portable hangars.
   (B)   Terminal Area Plan. The Terminal Area Plan and all notes thereon are
hereby made a part of this subchapter.
(Res. passed 8- -1988)
§ 150.17 LEASE OF LAND FOR PERMANENT HANGARS.
   (A)   Lease. No land shall be sold by the city for hangar construction
purposes. All land for this purpose shall be leased from the city.
   (B)   Terms. The lease for land on which to erect a hangar shall be for a
period of 25 years, at the following cost per year, payable January 1 of each
year:
      (1)   Tee hangars or other hangars which have individual doors for each
aircraft space: $20 per aircraft space per year, plus real estate taxes, if
any; and
      (2)   Open bay hangars: $20 per 1,200 square feet of interior aircraft
space, or portion thereof, per year, plus real estate taxes, if any.
   (C)   Commercial business. No commercial maintenance or sales may be
conducted from a hangar, unless approved by the authority.
   (D)   Non-aviation activities. Activities which are not aircraft related
shall be prohibited on the premises. This includes boat and vehicle storage,
warehousing, manufacturing, retailing, residential uses and the like. (An
exception to this regulation may be approved by the authority when the owner
can show that the space cannot be leased for aircraft storage at rents that are
typical for the area. Permission for such storage shall be reviewed by the
authority on an annual basis.)
   (E)   Termination. At the end of 25 years, or such earlier date as may be
agreed to by the hangar owner, the hangar and all permanent fixtures shall
become the property of the city.
   (F)   Removal of hangar. No permanent hangar may be moved from the premises
during the period of the lease, except as authorized by the authority.
   (G)   Transfer or assign. The leasehold may be transferred or assigned
during the 25-year period, with authority approval, but the lease shall
terminate at the end of the original 25-year period.
(Res. passed 8- -1988)
Editor’s Note:
   See also city’s fee schedule
§ 150.18 IMPROVEMENTS.
   All improvements to the land and buildings, utility service connections and
all other services required by the owner of the building shall be installed and
paid for at the owner’s expense. All improvements shall conform to applicable
codes and FAA regulations. The owner shall notify the authority of the
location, type of construction and other details relating to such improvements.
(Res. passed 8- -1988)
§ 150.19 APPLICATION, PERMITS, CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   Applications. All applications shall be made to the authority in
writing. The application shall be submitted on forms furnished by the
authority, dated, signed by the applicant and shall contain the following
minimum information:
      (1)   Horizontal dimensions of the hangar;
      (2)   Height of hangar (inside clearance and total exterior);
      (3)   Door location, type and width;
      (4)   Materials to be used on construction;
      (5)   Location on hangar lot, lot number or numbers, and dimensional
sketch of plan;
      (6)   Facilities to be included in hangar construction (i.e., storage,
radio, utilities, fuel storage, aircraft maintenance facilities and the like);
      (7)   Maximum weight and class of aircraft to be accommodated, and
numbers of each; and
      (8)   Size and type of approach apron or taxiway.
   (B)   Building permits. A building permit from the city shall be obtained
after approval is given by the authority. (Fee will be waived by the city.)
   (C)   Approvals. The application shall be reviewed for approval by the
authority, and approved if space is available and all requirements are met.
   (D)   Start construction. Construction of the facility shall commence within
60 days from the date the application is approved, or such approval shall be
automatically voided.
   (E)   Time for completion. Construction of the apron, outside walls and
roof, and the cleanup of construction materials shall be accomplished within
six months of approval (winter weather excluded).
   (F)   Pavement to permanent hangar. The owner shall pave an approach apron
from the hangar to the hangar taxiway when, and if, the taxiway is paved.
Gravel or sod may be used if the taxiway is turf.
   (G)   Maintenance of hangar and lot. The hangar shall be maintained by the
owner during the term of the lease, and shall include all work necessary to
maintain the structural integrity and neat appearance of the hangar. The
authority retains the right to inspect the hangars. The entire hangar lot or
lots on which any hangar is constructed shall be maintained by the hangar
owner. This shall generally include the area between the taxiway and hangar,
and within ten feet of the hangar on the sides and back of the building. This
shall include general good housekeeping. No gasoline, or other Class I liquid,
shall be stored in the hangar except in the aircraft’s fuel cells.
   (H)   Siting and drainage. Building floor elevations, and drainage adjacent
to hangars, shall be subject to approval by the City Engineer.
(Res. passed 8- -1988)
§ 150.20 CONSTRUCTION MATERIALS.
   (A)   Approved by authority. Construction materials shall be indicated
clearly on the application and shall be subject to approval by the authority.
   (B)   Roof. All roof surfaces shall be of non-combustible materials, unless
otherwise approved.
   (C)   Exterior building walls. All exterior building walls shall be of non-
combustible materials (excluding framing), and shall meet one of the following
requirements.
      (1)   Tee hangars or other hangars.
         (a)   Tee hangars or other hangars which have individual doors for
each aircraft space shall have one hour firewalls located so as to separate
every four aircraft spaces.
         (b)   Building separation of ten feet or more shall be created between
each group of four aircraft spaces.
      (2)   Open bay hangars. Buildings shall have a separation of ten feet or
more, or a one-hour fire rated wall between each hangar. Hangars shall not
exceed 10,000 square feet between separations or firewalls, unless otherwise
approved.
   (D)   Fire extinguishers. All hangars shall be equipped with one currently
inspected fire extinguisher (Type ABC, 20 pound minimum) for each aircraft
space.
   (E)   Variations. Variations to the hangar requirements may be approved by
the authority if such variations meet the intent of these regulations. The
approval of variations must be in writing.
(Res. passed 8- -1988)
§ 150.21 PORTABLE HANGARS.
   (A)   Placement. The authority may temporarily permit a portable hangars to
be placed on airport property only if just cause is shown (i.e., off-
construction season or special events), but such permit shall be for no more
than one year.
   (B)   Reversion clause. If such building remains on the city property for a
period of over one year, it shall be considered permanent and automatically be
subject to the provisions of §
150.17.
   (C)   Lease amount. The cost for lease of land to accommodate a portable
hangar shall be the annual lease fee as designated for permanent hangars. Fees
shall be due and payable when building is placed and shall not be prorated.
   (D)   Commercial business. No commercial maintenance or sales may be
conducted from a portable building unless approved by the authority.
   (E)   Relocation. No portable building may be moved to a new location on the
premises without prior approval of the authority, and no building may be
removed from the premises without proper notice being given to the authority.
(Res. passed 8- -1988)
§ 150.22 LIABILITY.
   (A)   Hold harmless. The city and the airport authority of the city, and
their employees, officers and agents, shall not be liable for damages to any
person or property caused from fire, wind, vandalism or other hazards which may
occur, or which may be alleged to have occurred, upon the premises occupied by
the lessee. The lessee shall save and hold harmless the city and the airport
authority of the city, and their employees, officers and agents, from and
against all suits or claims based upon any alleged injury to any person or
property which may occur, or which may be alleged to have occurred, on or near
the premises occupied by the lessee and, at his or her expense, defend any and
all such actions and shall, at his or her expense, pay all charges of attorneys
and all costs and other expenses arising therefrom or incurred in connection
therewith; and if any judgment shall be rendered against the city or the
airport authority of the city, and their employees, officers and agents, in any
such action or actions, the lessee shall, at his or her own expense, satisfy
and discharge the same.
   (B)   Hangar and contents.
      (1)   The owner shall provide liability insurance coverage of not less
than $1,000,000 and shall name the city and the airport authority of the city
as additional insureds.
      (2)   The owner shall provide fire and extended coverage insurance, and
shall name the city and the airport authority of the city as additional
insureds as their interest may appear.
(Res. passed 8- -1988)
STREET EXCAVATIONS
§ 150.35 APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   No excavation shall be made within the right-of-way of any public
street of the city, unless the excavator has first obtained a permit at the
City Engineer’s office, and has deposited bond in the amount of $5,000.
   (B)   A fee as established by resolution shall be paid to the city for each
permit obtained to excavate in the streets. In the event that the excavation is
not made, the fee will be returned to the applicant.
   (C)   In the case that permission is requested to excavate within the paved
area of a street that has been constructed, repaved or resurfaced within the
past three years, the fee to obtain a permit shall be as established by
resolution.
   (D)   No excavator shall be released from his or her bond until the
excavation has been completely restored, and until such restoration has been
approved by the City Engineer or other city officials.
   (E)   No excavation shall be begun unless the excavator has first checked
with the city and with utility companies regarding the location of sewers,
water lines, gas lines and the like, and no permit shall be granted unless the
excavator is willing to sign a statement that he or she has done so. The
excavator shall be solely responsible for damage to any sewers, water lines,
gas lines and the like, or other property, public or private. Street curbs are
specifically included. Monuments of concrete, iron, brass or other lasting
material set for the purpose of locating or preserving the lines of any street
or property subdivision, or a precise survey reference point or a permanent
survey bench mark within the city, shall not be removed or disturbed unless
permission to do so is first obtained in writing from the City Engineer.
Permission shall be granted only upon condition that the excavator shall pay
all expenses incident to the proper replacement of the monument.
   (F)   The City Council may, from time to time, permit utility companies to
file a blanket bond covering all excavations rather than requiring an
individual bond from each utility for each particular excavation.
(Ord. 1019, passed 9-14-1964; Ord. 1261, passed 8-18-1980)
§ 150.36 EVACUATION METHODS.
   (A)   Before any excavation is begun, the excavator shall make provisions to
re-route traffic, if necessary, shall place flags and barriers, or flares if at
night, and in case of a deep excavation or excavation in loose material, shall
be equipped to shore up the sides of the excavation with trench jacks or
cribbing.
   (B)   All safety devices and precautions for work on state routes shall be
in strict accordance with current specifications and regulations of the state’s
Department of Highways.
   (C)   The paving to be removed shall first be scored with a scoring tool. It
shall then be broken with a paving breaker. The cut through the paving shall be
vertical and shall be squared to include the area to be removed. Paving shall
be removed a minimum of six inches and a maximum of one foot beyond the edge of
the proposed trench.
   (D)   (1)   The width of the trench shall be no wider than is required for
the work to be done, with allowance for shoring, when necessary. The walls of
the trench shall be vertical. The length of a transverse trench shall be
limited to one-half of the roadway width. In the case of three or more lanes of
paving, this may be extended to two-thirds of the roadway.
      (2)   If absolutely necessary to repair or install a facility in one
length, across the entire width of the roadway, a combination of open trench
and tunneling will be permitted, if the applicant agrees to backfill the tunnel
with gunite sand, concrete or other material as may be approved by the City
Engineer.
   (E)   If the excavation has been made in basically granular native soil, it
may be backfilled with the material removed, compacted by flooding or by
tamping while moist. In the case of deep trenches in native soils which are not
granular, the excavation may be backfilled with sand and gravel, suitably
compacted, to a level just below the frost penetration. The remainder of the
excavation will then be backfilled with native soil, as specified in division
(G) below.
   (F)   When the excavation has exposed city-owned storm or sanitary sewers,
the initial lift to the top of pipes larger than 24 inches’ nominal diameter,
or to one foot above the top of smaller pipes, shall be placed and compacted as
follows.
      (1)   Selected granular material shall be placed by hand or by suitable
equipment in such manner as not to disturb the pipe. Such material shall not
include any rocks larger than two inches in the maximum dimension, hard or
frozen lumps which could damage the pipe.
      (2)   This material shall be compacted with mechanical tampers in four-
inch layers.
   (G)   The remainder of the trench shall then be backfilled as follows.
Native soil free from frozen lumps and vegetable matter shall be placed in six-
inch layers and compacted with power equipment. The degree of compaction shall
be such that there will be no appreciable settlement of the finished fill. The
excavation shall be filled thusly to the level of the existing subgrade.
(Ord. 1019, passed 9-14-1964)
§ 150.37 REPLACEMENT OF BASE.
   (A)   For concrete or bituminous paving over a granular, sand or natural
soil base, the base shall be replaced to the same thickness and with comparable
materials as the base of the original paving. Crushed rock, crushed gravel and
granulated slag are acceptable materials. This base shall be compacted
mechanically to a density comparable to the original. The base so formed shall
be brought to an elevation that will provide for the proper pavement thickness
as hereinafter specified. The thickness of the base under bituminous paving
shall be 12 inches minimum, and shall be six inches minimum under concrete
paving.
   (B)   For bituminous paving on a concrete or soil cement base, the base
shall be replaced with concrete as follows. Prior to pouring the concrete, old
concrete or soil cement shall be cleaned and the sides and bottom of the hole
shall be dampened. High early cement shall be used. The concrete shall be
vibrated or rodded to remove all voids between it and the existing base.
Concrete with a slump of one and one-half inches shall be used. The surface of
the poured concrete shall be rodded or vibrated and screened slightly above the
surface of the existing concrete or soil cement and then reduced to the proper
level by floating after the concrete is partially set. Provision shall be made
by the excavator for proper curing of the concrete.
(Ord. 1019, passed 9-14-1964)
§ 150.38 REPLACEMENT OF PAVEMENT.
   (A)   For bituminous patches, the material used shall be a hot-mixed and
hot-applied asphaltic concrete meeting the state’s Department of Highways
specifications for FJ-1 or 1D-2 surface course or 1D-2 base course. The
compacted thickness shall be a minimum of three inches.
   (B)   The following procedure shall be followed for all bituminous patches.
      (1)   The sides of the original paving shall be cleaned and covered with
a thin coat of cutback asphalt, such as RC-1.
      (2)   The patch material will be raked into the edges and mounded high
enough so that when compacted it will form a smooth surface, flush with the
original paving.
      (3)   The finished patch shall be protected from traffic for not less
than six hours.
      (4)   The joint around the patch shall be sealed with a surface
application of suitable asphaltic sealer.
   (C)   For concrete paving, the same procedure shall be followed as in
division (B) above, with the additional provision that any joints in the
original concrete paving shall be carried through the patch.
   (D)   For brick paving, the brick shall be replaced with good workmanship on
a one-half inch course of sand over a concrete base. The concrete base shall be
installed in accordance with §
150.37. Asphaltic concrete patches over a concrete base or concrete patches six
inches thick may be installed in brick streets if approved by the City
Engineer.
(Ord. 1019, passed 9-14-1964)
§ 150.39 WINTER EXCAVATIONS.
   (A)   Whenever weather conditions do not permit proper restoration of an
excavation, the excavation shall be closed to the best of the excavator’s
ability, with the express understanding that the excavation shall be correctly
restored, following the above outlined procedure, as soon as weather permits.
This specifically includes proper compaction of the trench, if needed.
   (B)   Cold-mixed asphaltic concrete patches may be used during winter
months, but they must be replaced with a permanent patch as hereinbefore
specified as soon as weather permits.
(Ord. 1019, passed 9-14-1964)
§ 150.40 WET EXCAVATIONS.
   Whenever the backfill in an excavation shall obtain a moisture content too
high for proper compaction, whether due to groundwater, rain or surface water,
the contractor shall remove the wet material and import dry material. The
backfill shall then be compacted as hereinbefore specified.
(Ord. 1019, passed 9-14-1964)
§ 150.41 RESPONSIBILITY.
   (A)   Whenever for any reason the pavement cannot be replaced immediately,
the filled-in excavation shall be maintained by the excavator, so as not to
create a hazard or nuisance to vehicles or pedestrians, until the pavement can
be replaced.
   (B)   If any settlement or failure in a restored area occurs within a period
of two years from the date of completion of the permanent restoration, the
patch shall be replaced by the excavator at his or her expense.
   (C)   The city may, by agreement with any particular utility, provide that
the replacement of the pavement shall be done by the city and the cost thereof
charged against or billed to such utility
(Ord. 1019, passed 9-14-1964)
§ 150.42 ENFORCEMENT.
   If a city official or police officer shall determine that an untended
filled-in excavation has become a hazard or a nuisance to vehicles or
pedestrians, the excavator shall be notified in writing of the same. The
excavator shall correct the situation within 36 hours of receipt of said
notice.
(Ord. 1019, passed 9-14-1964)
HOUSING CODE
§ 150.55 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. Whenever
the words “dwelling”, “dwelling unit”, “rooming house”, “rooming unit” or
“premises” are used in this subchapter, they shall be construed as though they
were followed by the words “or any part thereof”.
   BASEMENT. A portion of a building located partly underground, but having
less than half its clear floor-to-ceiling height below the average grade of the
adjoining ground.
   CELLAR. A portion of a building located partly or wholly underground and
having half or more than half of its clear floor-to-ceiling height below the
average grade of the adjoining ground.
   DWELLING. Any building which is wholly or partly used or intended to be used
for living or sleeping by human occupants; provided, that temporary housing as
hereinafter defined shall not be regarded as a DWELLING.
   DWELLING UNIT. Any room or group of rooms located within a dwelling and
forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are used or intended to
be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating.
   ENERGY EFFICIENT BUILDING. A building which was originally designed or which
has been remodeled to include special provisions for heating and ventilating
which by their nature do not function properly with windows that are opened for
ventilation.
   EXTERMINATION. The control and elimination of insects, rodents or other
pests by eliminating their harborage places; by removing or making inaccessible
materials that may serve as their food; by poisoning, spraying, fumigating or
trapping; or by other recognized and legal pest elimination methods approved by
the Housing Officer.
   GARBAGE. The animal and vegetable waste remaining from the handling,
preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
   HABITABLE ROOM. A room or enclosed floor space used or intended to be used
for living, sleeping, cooking or eating purposes, excluding bathrooms, water
closet compartments, laundries, pantries, foyers or communicating corridors,
closets and shortage spaces.
   HOUSING COMMITTEE. Such committee as may be designated by the City Council
for the purpose of conducting hearings for violation of this subchapter.
   HOUSING OFFICER. The legally designated Housing Officer of the City of
Corry, or his or her authorized representative. His or her authorized
representative may be the County Department of Health if so designated by the
city.
   INFESTATION. The presence within or around a dwelling of any insects,
rodents or other pests.
   MULTIPLE DWELLING. Any dwelling containing more than two dwelling units.
   OCCUPANT. Any person over one year of age, living, sleeping, cooking or
eating in, or having actual possession of a dwelling unit or rooming unit.
   OPERATOR. Any person who has charge, care or control of a building or part
thereof, in which dwelling units or rooming units are let.
   ORDINARY MINIMUM WINTER CONDITIONS. The temperature 15°F above the lowest
recorded temperature for the previous ten-year period.
   OWNER. Any person who alone or jointly, or severally with others:
      (1)   Shall have legal title to any dwelling or dwelling unit, with or
without accompanying actual possession thereof; or
      (2)   Shall have charge, care or control of any dwelling or dwelling
unit, as owner or agent of the owner or as executor, executrix, administrator,
administratrix, trustee or guardian of the estate of the owner. Any such person
thus representing the actual OWNER shall be bound to comply with the provisions
of this subchapter, and of rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, to
the same extent as if he or she were the owner.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, corporation, association or partnership.
   PLUMBING. All the following supplied facilities and equipment: gas and oil
pipes; gas and oil burning equipment; water pipes; garbage disposal units;
waste pipes; water closets (toilets); sinks; installed dishwashers; lavatories;
bathtubs; shower baths; installed clothes washing machines; catch basins;
drains; vents; and any other similar supplied fixtures, together with all
connections to water, sewer, gas or oil lines.
   ROOMING HOUSE. Any dwelling or that part of any dwelling containing one or
more rooming units, in which space is let by the owner or operator to three or
more persons who are not husband or wife, son or daughter, mother or father, or
sister or brother of the owner or operator.
   ROOMING UNIT. Any group of rooms forming a single habitable unit used or
intended to be used for living and sleeping, but not for cooking or eating
purposes.
   RUBBISH. Combustible and non-combustible waste materials, except garbage,
and the term shall include the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke and
other combustible material, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior,
rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals, mineral
matter, glass crockery and dust.
   SUPPLIED. Paid for, furnished or provided by or under the control of the
owner or operator.
   TEMPORARY HOUSING. Any tent, trailer or other structure used for human
shelter which is designated to be transportable and which is not attached to
the ground to another structure, or to any utilities system on the same
premises for more than 30 consecutive days.
   UNDERGROUND BUILDING. A building, or portion of a building, which was
originally designed to be all or partially underground and which includes at
least one area where the roof system is beneath the surface of the ground.
(Ord. 1060, passed 5-16-1966; Ord. 1066, passed 9-19-1966; Ord. 1273, passed 5-
4-1981)
§ 150.56 INSPECTIONS.
   The Housing Officer is hereby authorized and directed to make inspections to
determine the condition of dwellings, dwelling units, rooming units and
premises located within this city, in order that he or she may perform his or
her duty of safeguarding the health and safety of the occupants of dwellings
and of the general public. For the purpose of making such inspections, the
Housing Officer is hereby authorized to enter, examine and survey at all
reasonable times all dwellings, dwelling units, rooming units and premises. The
owner or occupant of every dwelling, dwelling unit and rooming unit, or the
person in charge thereof, shall give the Housing Officer free access to such
dwelling, dwelling unit or roaming unit and its premises at all reasonable
times for the purpose of such inspection, examination and survey. Every
occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall give the owner thereof, or his or
her agent or employee, access to any part of such dwelling or dwelling unit, or
its premises, at all reasonable times for the purpose of making such repairs or
alterations as are necessary to effect compliance with the provisions of this
subchapter or with any lawful rule or regulation adopted or any lawful order
issued pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter.
(Ord. 1060, passed 5-16-1966)
§ 150.57 ENFORCEMENT; SERVICE OF NOTICES; HEARINGS.
   (A)   Whenever the Housing Officer determines that there are reasonable
grounds to believe that there has been a violation of any provision of this
subchapter or of any rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto, he or she
shall give notice of such alleged violation to the person or persons
responsible therefor, as hereinafter provided. Such notice shall:
      (1)   Be put in writing;
      (2)   Include a statement of the reasons why it is being issued;
      (3)   Allow a reasonable time for the performance of any act it requires;
      (4)   Be served upon the owner or his or her agent, or the occupant, as
the case may require; provided, that such notice shall be deemed to be properly
served upon such owner or agent, or upon such occupant, if a copy thereof is
served upon him or her personally; or if a copy thereof is posted in a
conspicuous place in or about the dwelling affected by the notice; or if he or
she is served with such notice by any other method authorized or required under
the laws of this state; and
      (5)   Such notice may contain an outline of remedial action which, if
taken, will effect compliance with the provisions of this subchapter and with
rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto.
   (B)   Any persons affected by any notice which has been issued in connection
with the enforcement of any provision of this subchapter, or of any rule or
regulation adopted pursuant thereto, may request and shall be granted a hearing
on the matter before the Housing Committee; provided that such a person file in
the office of the Housing Officer a written petition requesting such hearing
and setting forth a brief statement of the grounds therefor within ten days
after the day the notice was served. Upon receipt of such petition, the Housing
Officer shall set a time and place for such hearing and shall give the
petitioner written notice thereof. At such hearing, the petitioner shall be
given an opportunity to be heard and to show why such notice should be modified
or withdrawn. The hearing shall be commenced not later than ten days after the
day on which the petition was filed; provided, that upon application of the
petitioner, the Housing Officer may postpone the date of the hearing for a
reasonable time beyond such a ten-day period, if in his or her judgment the
petitioner has submitted a good and sufficient reason for such postponement.
   (C)   After such hearing, the Housing Officer shall sustain, modify or
withdraw the notice, depending on the findings as to whether the provisions of
this subchapter and of the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto have
been complied with. If the Housing Officer sustains or modifies such notice, it
shall be deemed to be an order. Any notice served pursuant to division (A)
above shall automatically become an order if a written petition for a hearing
is not filed in the office of the Housing Officer within ten days after such
notice is served. After a hearing in the case of any notice suspending any
permit required, by this subchapter or by any rule or regulation adopted
pursuant thereto, when such notice has been sustained by the Housing Officer,
the permit shall be deemed to have been revoked. Any such permit which has been
suspended by a notice shall be deemed to be automatically revoked if a petition
for a hearing is not filed in the office of the Housing Officer within ten days
after such notice is served.
   (D)   The proceedings at such hearings, including the findings and decisions
of the Housing Committee, shall be summarized, reduced to writing and entered
as a matter of public record in the office of the Housing Officer. Such record
shall also include a copy of every notice or order issued in connection with
the matter. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Housing Officer may
seek relief therefrom in any court of competent jurisdiction, as provided by
the laws of this state.
   (E)   Whenever the Housing Officer finds that an emergency exists which
requires immediate action to protect the public health, he or she may, without
notice or hearing, issue an order reciting the existence of such an emergency
and requiring that such action be taken as he or she deems necessary to meet
the emergency. Notwithstanding the other provisions of this subchapter, such
order shall be effective immediately. Any person to whom such an order is
directed shall comply therewith immediately, but upon petition to the Housing
Officer shall be afforded a hearing as soon as possible. After such hearing,
depending upon the finding as to whether the provisions of this subchapter and
of the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto have been complied with,
the Housing Officer shall continue such order in effect, modify it or revoke
it.
(Ord. 1060, passed 5-16-1966; Ord. 1066, passed 9-19-1966; Ord. 1273, passed 5-
4-1981)
§ 150.58 DEMOLITION OF SUBSTANDARD DWELLING UNITS.
   (A)   The Housing Officer shall make periodic inspections of any dwelling
vacated as unfit for human habitation or any other vacant structure. Whenever
an inspection of the structure discloses that the structure by reason of its
being a rat harborage or for any other reason has become a public nuisance or a
hazard to the health, safety or welfare of the public, the Housing Officer
shall issue a written notice requiring the owner, within a reasonable time
specified in the notice, to rectify the conditions constituting the nuisance,
or to remove or demolish the structure. Such removal or demolition shall not be
ordered unless the cost of such repair, alteration or improvement shall exceed
50% of the market value of the structure. If requested by the two interested
parties, a board of three appraisers shall be appointed to decide the market
value. Each party shall select one appraiser; who in turn shall select the
third. Any fee engendered through action shall be borne by the property owner.
At the time of action, service of the notice shall be made in accordance with §
150.57.
   (B)   If the owner fails to rectify the said conditions and the cost of
rectifying the same shall be less than 50% of the market value of the
structure, the Housing Officer may cause such repairs, alterations or
improvements to be made. The amount of such cost of alterations or
improvements, or vacating, closing, removal or demolition shall be a municipal
lien against the real property upon which the cost was incurred. If the
structure is removed or demolished by order of the Housing Officer, he or she
shall sell the materials of such structure for the best price attainable, and
shall credit the proceeds of such sale against the cost of removal or
demolition, and any such balance remaining shall be disbursed to the owner.
(Ord. 1060, passed 5-16-1966; Ord. 1066, passed 9-19-1966)
§ 150.59 ADOPTION OF RULES AND REGULATION BY THE HOUSING OFFICER.
   The Housing Officer is hereby authorized to make and, after a public hearing
has been held in accordance with the laws governing the conduct of public
hearings by the Housing Officer, to adopt such written rules and regulations as
approved by City Council and as may be necessary for the proper enforcement of
the provisions of this subchapter; provided, that such rules and regulations
shall not be in conflict with the provisions of this subchapter. The Housing
Officer shall file a certified copy of all rules and regulations which he or
she may adopt with the City Clerk. Such rules and regulations shall have the
same force and effect as the provisions of this subchapter, and the penalty for
violation thereof shall be the same as the penalty for violation of the
provisions of this subchapter, as hereinafter provided.
(Ord. 1273, passed 5-4-1981)
§ 150.60 MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR BASIC EQUIPMENT AND FACILITIES.
   No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or let to another for occupancy any
dwelling or dwelling unit, for the purpose of living, sleeping, cooking or
eating therein, which does mot comply with the following requirements.
   (A)   Every dwelling unit shall contain a kitchen sink in good working
condition and properly connected to a water and sewer system approved by the
Housing Officer.
   (B)   Every dwelling unit, except as otherwise permitted under division (D)
below, shall contain a room which affords privacy to a person within said room
and which is equipped with a flush water closet (toilet) and a lavatory basin
in good working condition and properly connected to a water and sewer system
approved by the Housing Officer.
   (C)   Every dwelling unit shall contain, within a room which affords privacy
to a person within said room, a bathtub or shower in good working condition and
properly connected to a water and sewer system approved by the Housing Officer.
   (D)   The occupants of no more than one dwelling unit may share a single
flush water closet, a single lavatory basin and a single bathtub or shower.
   (E)   Every kitchen sink, lavatory basin and bathtub or shower required
under the provisions of divisions (A) through (D) above shall be properly
connected with both hot and cold water lines.
   (F)   Every dwelling unit shall be supplied with adequate rubbish storage
facilities, type and location of which are approved by the Housing Officer.
   (G)   Every dwelling unit shall have adequate garbage disposal facilities or
garbage storage containers, type and location of which are approved by the
Housing Officer.
   (H)   Every dwelling shall have supplied water-heating facilities which are
properly installed, are maintained in safe and good working condition, are
properly connected with the hot water lines required under the provisions of
division (E) above, and are capable of heating water to such a temperature as
to permit an adequate amount of water to be drawn at every required kitchen
sink, lavatory basin, bathtub or shower at a temperature of not less than
110°F. Such supplied water heating facilities shall be capable of meeting the
requirements of this section when the dwelling or dwelling unit heating
facilities required under the provisions of §
150.61(H) are not in operation.
   (I)   Every dwelling unit shall have safe, unobstructed means of egress
leading to safe and open space at ground level, as required by the laws of this
state and this city.
(Ord. 1060, passed 5-16-1966; Ord. 1097, passed 2-19-1968; Ord. 1273, passed 5-
4-1981) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.61 MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR LIGHT, VENTILATION AND HEATING.
   No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or let to another for occupancy any
dwelling or dwelling unit for the purpose of living therein, which does not
comply with the following requirements.
   (A)   Every habitable room shall have at least one window or skylight facing
directly to the outdoors. The minimum total window area, measured between
stops, for every habitable room shall be 4% of the floor area of such room.
Whenever walls or other portions of structures face a window of any such room
and such light-obstruction structures are located less than three feet from the
window and extend to a level above that of the ceiling of the room, such a
window shall not be deemed to face directly to the outdoors and shall not be
included as contributing to the required minimum total window area, but shall
be considered as a skylight type window. Whenever the only window in a room is
a skylight type window in the top of such room, or is considered as such as
hereinbefore noted, the total window area of such skylight shall equal at least
6% of the total floor area of such room.
   (B)   Every habitable room shall have at least one window or skylight which
can be easily opened, or such other device as will adequately ventilate and
provide emergency access to the room. The total of openable window area in
every habitable room shall be equal to at least 45% of the minimum window area
size or minimum skylight-type window size as required in division (A) above,
except where there is supplied some other approved device affording adequate
ventilation and access (entry and exit).
   (C)   In no case shall the minimum window size for at least one window or
skylight in all rooms used for sleeping purposes be less than two feet by one
and one-half feet, unless other equal direct fire access from the outside is
provided, without passing through other rooms. This minimum size for fire
access to sleeping rooms shall be measured between window stops with sash
removed.
   (D)   The requirements for windows and skylights in kitchens may be met by
increasing the window area in an adjacent room if no door or other closure is
provided between the kitchen and other room and the opening between the two
rooms is no less than 40 square feet.
   (E)   Light and ventilation requirements for interior rooms in remodeled
existing structures, except for basement areas, and light and ventilation
requirements for energy efficient buildings and underground buildings, shall be
considered as special situations, but must meet the following minimum
requirements:
      (1)   Where design permits, sleeping rooms shall be located where light
and ventilation can be obtained conventially, and shall be in accordance with
the above mentioned criteria; or
      (2)   Where light and ventilation cannot be provided conventially,
automatic forced ventilation shall be provided, which shall consist of
mechanical ventilation providing no less than two air changes per hour to all
habitable rooms. All equipment must be approved.
   (F)   Every bathroom and water closet compartment shall comply with the
light and ventilation requirements for habitable rooms contained in divisions
(A) and (B) above, except that no window or skylight shall be required in
adequately ventilated bathrooms and water closet compartments equipped with a
ventilation system which operate when any light in the room is on.
   (G)   Every habitable room of such dwelling shall contain at least two
separate floor or wall type electric convenience outlets, or one such
convenience outlet and one supplied ceiling type electric light fixture; and
every water closet compartment, bathroom, laundry room, furnace room and public
hall shall contain at least one supplied ceiling or wall type electric light
fixture. Every such outlet and fixture shall be properly installed, shall be
maintained in good and safe working condition and shall be connected to the
source of electric power in a safe manner.
   (H)   Every dwelling shall have heating facilities which are properly
installed and maintained in safe and good working condition, and are capable of
safely and adequately heating all habitable rooms, bathrooms and water closet
compartments in every dwelling unit located therein to a temperature of at
least 70°F at a distance three feet above floor level under ordinary minimum
winter conditions.
   (I)   Every public hall and stairway in every multiple-dwelling where said
hall serves five or more dwelling units shall be adequately lighted at all
times. Every public hall and stairway in structures devoted solely to dwelling
occupancy and containing not more than four dwelling units may be supplied with
conveniently located light switches, controlling an adequate lighting system
which may be turned on when needed, instead of full-time lighting.
   (J)   During that portion of each year when the Housing Officer deems it
necessary for protection against mosquitoes, flies and other insects, every
door opening directly from a dwelling unit to outdoor space shall have supplied
screens and a self-closing device; and every window or other device with
openings to outdoor space, used, or intended to be used for ventilation, shall
likewise be supplied with screens; provided, that such screens shall not be
required during such period in rooms deemed by the Housing Officer to be
located high enough in the upper stories of buildings as to be free from such
insects, and in rooms located in areas of this city which are deemed by the
Housing Officer to have so few such insects as to render screens unnecessary.
   (K)   Every basement or cellar window used or intended to be used for
ventilation, and every other opening to a basement which might provide an entry
for rodents, shall be supplied with a screen or such other device as will
effectively prevent their entrance.
(Ord. 1273, passed 5-4-1981) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.62 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS RELATING TO MAINTENANCE.
   No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or let to another for occupancy any
dwelling or dwelling unit, for the purpose of living therein, which does not
comply with the following requirements.
   (A)   Every foundation floor, wall, ceiling and roof shall be reasonably
weather-tight, water-tight and rodent-proof; shall be capable of affording
privacy; and shall be kept in good repair.
   (B)   Every window, exterior door and basement hatchway shall be reasonably
weather-tight, water- tight and rodent-proof; and shall be kept in sound
working condition and good repair.
   (C)   Every inside and outside stair, every porch and every appurtenance
thereto shall be so constructed as to be safe to use and capable of supporting
the load that normal use may cause to be placed thereon and shall be kept in
sound condition and good repair.
   (D)   Every plumbing fixture and water and waste pipe shall be properly
installed and maintained in good sanitary working condition, free from defects
and obstructions.
   (E)   Every water closet compartment floor surface and bathroom floor
surface shall be constructed and maintained so as to be reasonably impervious
to water and so as to permit such floor to be easily kept in a clean and
sanitary condition.
   (F)   Every supplied facility, piece of equipment or utility which is
required under this subchapter shall be constructed or installed that it will
function safely and effectively, and shall be maintained in satisfactory
working condition.
   (G)   No owner, operator or occupant shall cause any service facility,
equipment or utility which is required under this subchapter to be removed from
or shut off from, or discontinued for any occupied dwelling let or occupied by
him or her, except for such temporary interruption as may be necessary while
actual repairs or alterations are in process or during temporary emergency when
discontinuance of service is approved by the Housing Officer.
   (H)   No owner shall occupy or let any other occupant any vacant dwelling
unit unless it is clean, sanitary and fit for human occupancy.
   (I)   All yards, lawns and open spaces shall be graded or drained in such
manner that no stagnant water shall accumulate on the premises.
(Ord. 1060, passed 5-16-1966; Ord. 1097, passed 2-19-1968) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.63 MINIMUM SPACE, USE AND LOCATION REQUIREMENTS.
   No person shall occupy or let to another for occupancy any dwelling or
dwelling unit, for the purpose of living therein, which does not comply with
the following requirements.
   (A)   Every dwelling unit shall contain at least 150 square feet of floor
space for the first occupant thereof, and at least 100 additional square feet
for every additional occupant thereof, the floor space to be calculated on the
basis of total habitable room area.
   (B)   In every dwelling unit of two or more rooms, every room occupied for
sleeping purposes by one occupant shall contain at least 60 square feet of
floor space, and every room occupied for sleeping purposes by more than one
occupant shall contain at least 40 square feet of floor space for each occupant
thereof.
   (C)   No dwelling or dwelling unit containing two or more sleeping rooms
shall have such room arrangements that access to a bathroom or water closet
compartment intended for use by occupants of more than one sleeping room can be
had only by going through another sleeping room; nor shall room arrangements by
such that access to a sleeping room can be had only by going through another
sleeping room or a bathroom or water closet compartment.
   (D)   At least one-half of the floor area of every habitable room shall have
a ceiling height of at least seven feet, and the floor area of that part of any
room where the ceiling height is less than five feet shall not be considered as
part of the floor areas in computing the total floor area of the room for the
purpose of determining the maximum permissible occupancy thereof.
   (E)   (1)   No cellar space shall be used as a habitable room or dwelling
unit.
      (2)   The total of window area in each room shall be in accordance with §
150.61.
   (F)   No basement space shall be used as a habitable room or dwelling unit
unless:
      (1)   The floor and walls are impervious to leakage of underground and
surface runoff water and are insulated against dampness;
      (2)   The total of window area in each room is equal to at least the
minimum window area sizes as required in §
150.61(A);
      (3)   Such required minimum window area is located entirely above the
grade of the ground adjoining such window area; and
      (4)   The total of openable window area in each room is equal to at least
the minimum as required under §
150.61(B), except where there is supplied some other device affording adequate
ventilation and approved by the Housing Officer.
(Ord. 1060, passed 5-16-1966; Ord. 1273, passed 5-4-1981) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.64 RESPONSIBILITY OF OWNERS AND OCCUPANTS.
   (A)   Every owner of a dwelling containing two or more dwelling units shall
be responsible for maintaining in a clean and sanitary condition the shared or
public areas of the dwelling and premises thereof.
   (B)   Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall keep in a clean
and sanitary condition that part of the dwelling, dwelling unit and premises
thereof which he or she occupies and controls.
   (C)   Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall dispose of all his
or her rubbish in a clean and sanitary manner by placing it in the rubbish
containers required by §
150.60(F).
   (D)   Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall dispose of all his
or her garbage and any other organic waste which might provide food for rodents
in a clear and sanitary manner, by placing it in the garbage disposal
facilities or garbage storage containers required by §
150.60(G). It shall be the responsibility of the owner to supply such
facilities or containers for all dwelling units in a dwelling containing more
than four dwelling units and for all dwelling units located on premises where
more than four dwelling units share the same premises. In all other cases it
shall be the responsibility of the occupant to furnish such facilities or
containers.
   (E)   Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall be responsible for
hanging all screens and double or storm doors and windows whenever the same are
required under the provisions of this subchapter or of any rule or regulation
adopted pursuant thereto, except where the owner has agreed to supply such
service.
   (F)   Every occupant of a dwelling containing a single dwelling unit shall
be responsible for the extermination of any insects, rodents or other pests
therein or on the premises; and every occupant of a dwelling unit in a dwelling
containing more than one dwelling unit shall be responsible for such
extermination whenever his or her dwelling unit is the only one infested.
Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this division (F), whenever
infestation is caused by failure of the owner to maintain a dwelling in a rat-
proof or reasonably insect-proof condition, extermination shall be the
responsibility of the owner. Whenever infestation exists in two or more of the
dwelling units in any dwelling, or in the shared or public parts of any
dwelling containing two or more dwelling units, extermination thereof shall be
the responsibility of the owner.
   (G)   Every occupant of a dwelling unit shall keep all plumbing fixtures
therein clean and sanitary and shall be responsible for the exercise of
reasonable care in the proper use and operation thereof.
(Ord. 1060, passed 5-16-1966)
§ 150.65 ROOMING HOUSES.
   No person shall operate a rooming house or shall occupy or let to another
for occupancy any rooming unit in any rooming house except in compliance with
the provisions of every section of this subchapter, except the provisions of §§
150.60 and
150.64.
   (A)   No person shall operate a rooming house unless he or she holds a valid
rooming house permit issued by the Housing Officer in the name of the operator
and for the specific dwelling or dwelling unit. The operator shall apply to the
Housing Officer for such permit which shall be issued by the Housing Officer
upon compliance by the operator with the applicable provisions of this
subchapter and of any rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto. This
permit shall be displayed in a conspicuous place within the rooming house at
all times. No such permit shall be transferable. Every person holding such a
permit shall give notice in writing to the Housing Officer within 24 hours
after having sold, transferred, given away or otherwise disposed of ownership,
of interest in or control or any rooming house. Such notice shall include the
name and address of the person succeeding to the ownership or control of such
rooming house. Every rooming house permit shall expire at the end of one year
following its date of issuance, unless sooner suspended or revoked as
hereinafter provided.
   (B)   Any person whose application for a permit to operate a rooming house
has been denied may request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter under
the procedure provided by §
150.57.
   (C)   Whenever upon inspection of any rooming house the Housing Officer
finds that conditions or practices exist which are in violation of any
provision of this subchapter or of any rules, or give notice in writing to the
operator of such rooming house that unless conditions or practices are
corrected within a reasonable period, to be determined by the Housing Officer,
the operator’s rooming house permit will be suspended. At the end of such
period, the Housing Officer shall reinspect such rooming house and, if he or
she finds that such conditions or practices have not been corrected, he or she
shall give notice in writing to the operator that the latter’s permit has been
suspended. Upon receipt of notice of suspension, such operator shall
immediately cease operation of such rooming house and no person shall occupy
for sleeping or living purposes any rooming unit therein.
   (D)   Any person whose permit to operate a rooming house has been suspended
or who has received notice from the Housing Officer that his or her permit is
to be suspended unless existing conditions or practices at his or her rooming
house are corrected may request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter
before the Housing Committee under the procedure provided by §
150.57; provided, that if no petition for such hearing is filed within ten days
following the day on which such permit was suspended, such permit shall be
deemed to have been automatically revoked.
   (E)   At least one flush water closet, lavatory basin and bathtub or shower,
properly connected to a water and sewer system approved by the Housing Officer
and in good working condition, shall be supplied for each eight persons or
fraction thereof residing within a rooming house, including members of the
operator’s family wherever they share the use of the said facilities; provided,
that in a rooming house where rooms are let only to males, flush urinals may be
substituted for not more than one-half the required number of water closets.
All such facilities shall be so located within the dwelling as to be reasonably
accessible from a common hall or passageway to all persons sharing such
facilities. Every lavatory basin and bathtub or shower shall be supplied with
hot water at all times. No such facilities shall be located in a basement or
cellar except by written approval of the Housing Officer.
   (F)   The operator of every rooming house shall change supplied bed linen
and towels therein at least once a week, and prior to the letting of any room
to any occupant. The operator shall be responsible for the maintenance of all
supplied bedding in a clean and sanitary manner.
   (G)   Every room occupied for sleeping purposes by one person shall contain
at least 60 square feet of floor space, and every room occupied for sleeping
purposes by more than one person shall contain at least 40 square feet of floor
space for each occupant thereof.
   (H)   (1)   Every rooming unit shall have safe, unobstructed means of egress
leading to safe and open space at ground level, as required by the laws of this
state and this city.
      (2)   Every rooming house shall be required to have fire warning
equipment installed and maintained in proper working condition. All such
equipment shall comply with the National Fire Protection Association Standard
for the installation, maintenance and use of household fire warning equipment,
NFPA No. 74-1975.
      (3)   Every rooming house shall be required to have approved fire
extinguishers installed and maintained in proper working condition. All such
equipment shall comply with the National Fire Protection Association Standard
for portable fire extinguishers, NFPA No. 10-1975.
   (I)   The operator of every rooming house shall be responsible for the
sanitary maintenance of all walls, floors and ceilings, and for maintenance of
a sanitary condition in every other part of the rooming house; and he or she
shall be further responsible for the sanitary maintenance of the entire
premises where the entire structure or building is leased or occupied by the
operator.
   (J)   Every provision of this subchapter which applies to rooming houses
shall also apply to hotels, except to the extent that any such provision may be
found in conflict with laws of this state or within the lawful regulations of
any state board or agency.
(Ord. 1060, passed 5-16-1966; Ord. 1066, passed 9-19-1966; Ord. 1273, passed 5-
4-1981) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.66 DESIGNATION OF UNFIT DWELLINGS AND LEGAL PROCEDURE OF CONDEMNATION.
   The designation of dwelling or dwelling units as unfit for human habitation
and the procedure for the condemnation and placarding of such unfit dwellings
or dwelling units shall be carried out in compliance with the following
requirements.
   (A)   Any dwelling or dwelling unit which shall be found to have any of the
following defects shall be condemned as unfit for human habitation and shall be
so designated and placarded by the Housing Officer:
      (1)   One which is so damaged, decayed, dilapidated, insanitary, unsafe
or vermin-infested that it creates a serious hazard to the health or safety of
the occupants or of the public;
      (2)   One which lacks illumination, ventilation or sanitation facilities
adequate to protect the health or safety of the occupants or of the public; or
      (3)   One which because of its general condition or location is
unsanitary, or otherwise dangerous to the health or safety of the occupants or
of the public.
   (B)   Any dwelling or dwelling unit condemned as unfit for human habitation,
and so designated and placarded by the Housing Officer, shall be vacated within
a reasonable time as ordered by the Housing Officer.
   (C)   No dwelling or dwelling unit which has been condemned and placarded as
unfit for human habitation shall again be used for human habitation until
written approval is secured from, and such placard is removed by, the Housing
Officer. The Housing Officer shall remove such placard whenever the defect or
defects upon which the condemnation and placarding action were based have been
eliminated.
   (D)   No person shall deface or remove the placard from any dwelling or
dwelling unit which has been condemned as unfit for human habitation and
placarded as such, except as provided in division (C) above.
   (E)   Any person affected by any notice order relating to the condemning and
placarding of a dwelling or dwelling unit as unfit for human habitation may
request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the Housing
Committee under the procedure set forth in §
150.57.
(Ord. 1060, passed 5-16-1966; Ord. 1066, passed 9-19-1966; Ord. 1273, passed 5-
4-1981) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.67 CONFLICT OF ORDINANCES.
   In any case where a provision of this subchapter is found to be in conflict
with a provision of any zoning, building, fire, safety or health ordinance or
code of this city existing on the effective date of this subchapter, the
provision which establishes the higher standard for the promotion and
protection of the health and safety of the people shall prevail. In any case
where a provision of this subchapter is found to be in conflict with a
provision of any other ordinance or code of this city existing on the effective
date of this subchapter which establishes a lower standard for the promotion
and protection of the health and safety of the people, the provisions of this
subchapter shall be deemed to prevail and such other ordinances or codes are
hereby declared to be repealed to the extent that they may be found in conflict
with this subchapter.
(Ord. 1060, passed 5-16-1966)
§ 150.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any applicant violating any of the provisions of §
150.01 may, on conviction in a summary proceeding, be subjected to a fine of
not less than $10 nor more than $300 for each offense, together with costs of
prosecution, and in default of payment thereof, imprisonment in county jail for
a term not in excess of 30 days. Each day that a violation continues may
constitute a separate offense.
   (C)   Any person violating the provisions of §
150.03 shall, after conviction before any Alderman of the city, be sentenced to
pay a fine of not less than $10 nor more than $100, and in default thereof, to
be sentenced to serve not less than three days nor more than 30 days in the
county prison.
   (D)   Any person who shall violate any provisions of §
150.04 shall upon conviction before the Magisterial District Justice be guilty
of a summary offense and shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $300
and costs of prosecution or, in default of payment of such fine and costs, to
undergo imprisonment for not more than 90 days.
   (E)   Any person violating any of the provisions of §§
150.35 to 150.42 may, on conviction of a summary proceedings, be subjected to a
fine of not less than $10 nor more than $100 for each offense together with
costs of prosecution, and in default of payment thereof, imprisonment in county
jail for a term not in excess of 30 days.
   (F)   Any person who shall violate any provision of §§
150.55 through
150.67, or any provision of any rule or regulation adopted by the Housing
Officer pursuant to authority granted by §§
150.55 through
150.67, shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not less than $10 or
more than $100 or by imprisonment for not less than ten days or more than 30
days and each day’s failure to comply with any such provision shall constitute
a separate violation.
(Ord. 134, passed 1-21-1901; Ord. 974, passed 8-21-1961; Ord. 1019, passed 9-
14-1964; Ord. 1060, passed 5-16-1966; Ord. 1294, passed 8-15-1983; Ord. 1361,
passed 8-3-1992)
CHAPTER 151: PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
Section
International Codes
   
151.01   International Property Maintenance Code
State Construction Code
   
151.15   Adoption of Uniform Construction Code
   
151.16   Application of codes and standards
   
151.17   General application
   
151.18   Application of other ordinances
   
151.19   UCC administration services
   
151.20   Municipal fees, forms and procedures
   
151.21   Fees for UCC plan review, inspections and certifications
   
151.22   Deposits
   
151.23   Prompt payment of fees and deposits required
   
151.24   Inter-municipal agreement
   
151.25   Board of Appeals
   
151.26   Appeals to Board of Appeals
   
151.27   Action on appeals
   
151.28   Fees for appeals
   
151.29   Civil and criminal enforcement actions
   
151.30   Liability for municipal officials
   
151.31   Liability of retained Building Code and Construction Code Officials
   
151.32   Liability of retained person(s) and firm(s)
   
151.33   Enforcement of other ordinances
   
151.34   Reports by retained construction officials
   
151.35   Coordination with other inspections
INTERNATIONAL CODES
§ 151.01 INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE.
   (A)   Adoption of Corry Property Maintenance Code. A certain document, one
copy of which is on file in the office of the City Manager of the City of
Corry, being marked and designated as "The International Property Maintenance
Code," 2018 Edition, as published by the International Code Council, Inc., be
and is hereby adopted as the Property Maintenance Code for the City of Corry,
State of Pennsylvania, for regulating and governing the conditions and
maintenance of all property, buildings, and structures; by providing the
standards for supplied utilities and facilities and other physical things and
conditions essential to ensure that structures are safe, sanitary, and fit for
occupation and use; and the condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for
human occupancy and use, and the demolition of existing structures as provided
therein; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor;
and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions, and
terms of said Property
Maintenance Code on file in the office of the City Manager of the City of
Corry, Erie County, Pennsylvania, are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a
part thereof, as if fully set out in Ord. 1596, with the additions, insertions,
deletions, and changes, if any, prescribed in division (B) below.
   (B)   Revisions. The following sections of the 2018 Edition of the
International Property Maintenance Code are hereby revised.
      (1)   Section 101.1 shall be amended to read as follows: 101.1 Title.
These regulations shall be known as the International Property Maintenance Code
of the City of Corry, Erie County, Pennsylvania, hereinafter referred to as
"this code."
      (2)   (a)   Section 103.5 shall be amended to read as follows: 103.5
Fees. The fees for activities and services performed by the department in
carrying out its responsibilities under this Code shall be in accordance with
the Property Maintenance Code Fee Schedule.
         (b)   Appendix A: Fees
            1.   Administration fee - $25.00
            2.   Reports - $25.00 each
            3.   Labor hourly rate - $50.00/hour
            4.   Materials - total material cost paid by the city
            5.   Mowing fee - total cost paid by city to have property mowed +
Administration fee.
      (3)   Section 112.4 shall be amended to read as follows: 112.4 Failure to
comply. Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a
stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to
remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable to a fine of not less
than ONE HUNDRED DOLLARS ($100.00) or more than FIVE HUNDRED ($500.00) DOLLARS.
      (4)   The first paragraph of Section 302.4 shall be amended to read as
follows: 302.4 Weeds. All premises and exterior property within the following
restricted areas shall be maintained free from weeds or plant growth in excess
of eight (8") inches in height. Restricted areas shall include: a. All areas
within fifty (50) feet of any building used for or intended to be used for
human habitation, or institutional, or industrial or commercial use.; b. All
areas within fifty (50) feet of the traveled portion of any public street or
roadway, if such area is within two hundred (200) feet of any building
described in prior subsection (a.).; c. AU areas within ten (10) feet of any
public sidewalk. All noxious weeds shall be prohibited. Weeds shall be defined
as all grasses, annual plants and vegetation, other than trees or shrubs
provided; however, this term shall not include cultivated flowers and gardens.
Other paragraphs in this section shall remain unchanged.
      (5)   The first paragraph of Section 302.8 shall be amended to read as
follows: 302.8 Motor Vehicles. Except as provided in other regulations, no
inoperative or unlicensed motor vehicle shall be parked, kept or stored on any
premises, and no vehicle shall remain in a state of major disassembly,
disrepair, or in the process of being stripped or dismantled, for a period in
excess of forty-five (45) days. Painting of vehicles is prohibited unless
conducted inside an approved spray booth. The exception therein shall remain
unchanged. All openly stored vehicles shall be classified as one of 3 following
classes by the code enforcement officer.
         (a)   Restorable junk vehicle- A vehicle that is in a condition
whereby repairs to same could reasonably be made to place it in operating
condition without exceeding the estimated value when repaired. The vehicle must
be titled to an occupant of the property where said vehicle is located. Number
of restorable junk vehicles is limited to one (1) per property in residential
zoned areas per Zoning Ordinance 1347 Section 619.
         (b)   Non-restorable junk vehicle - junk vehicle in such condition
that it is economically unsound to restore same to an operating condition
considering the repairs to be made, age of the vehicle, market value of the
vehicle if it were restored or in such a condition that the Code Compliance
Officer determines that it warrants such classification.
         (c)   Abandoned vehicle - Unused, stripped, junked, wrecked or
otherwise usable vehicles which do not carry a current registration plate or
inspection sticker and which are no longer safely usable for the purpose of
which they were manufactured and which have been in place for a period of
thirty (30)
days.
      (6)   Section 304.14 shall be amended to read as follows:
         (a)   304.14 Insect screens. During the period from May 1st to October
1st, every door, window and other outside opening required for ventilation of
habitable rooms, food preparation areas, food service areas or any areas where
products to be included or utilized in food for human consumption are
processed, manufactured, packaged or stored shall be supplied with approved
tightly fitting screens of minimum 16 mesh per inch (16 mesh per 25 mm), and
every screen door used for insect control shall have a self-closing device in
good working condition.
         (b)   Exception: Screens shall not be required where other approved
means, such as air curtains or insect repellent fans, are employed.
      (7)   Section 308.2.3 Add exterior placement of indoor furniture/
appliances/electronics. Under section 308.2 add 308.2.3 - It is prohibited to
store or place any/all appliances, electronics or furniture including, but not
limited to televisions, ranges, refrigerators, freezers, air conditioners,
ovens, washers, dryers, microwaves, dishwashers, mattresses, recliners, sofas,
interior chairs, or tables on the exterior of any property for any reason,
except to perform maintenance on said property.
      (8)   Section 602.3 is hereby amended to read as follows: 602.3 Heat
supply. Every owner and operator of any building who rents, leases or lets one
or more dwelling units or sleeping units on terms, either expressed or implied,
to furnish heat to the occupants thereof shall supply heat during the period
from October 1st to May 1st to maintain a minimum temperature of 68°F (20°C) in
all habitable rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms. The Exceptions therein listed
shall remain unchanged.
      (9)   Section 602.4 is hereby amended to read as follows: 602.4
Occupiable work spaces. Indoor occupiable work spaces shall be supplied with
heat during the period from October 1st to May 1st to maintain a minimum
temperature of 65°F (18°C) during the period the spaces are occupied. The
Exceptions therein listed shall remain unchanged.
   (C)   Penalties and violations.
      (1)   Each person in violation of this section shall upon conviction of a
first offense, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $75 and not more
than $100. Each person upon conviction of a second offense shall be sentenced
to a fine not less than $100 and not more than $200. Each person convicted of a
third offense shall not pay a fine of less than $300 and not more than $1,000.
Each person convicted of a fourth and subsequent offense shall not pay a fine
less than $1,000 and in default of the payment of such fine, may be sentenced
to imprisonment for not more than 90 days. This penalty division shall apply to
all sections of this code except for Section 112.4 whose fine is already set in
§
151.01(B)(3).
      (2)   Quality of life violations. Each person who has been issued a
quality of life ticket by Code Enforcement Officers for violations of this
section and fails to pay the quality of life ticket in the time frame
established on the ticket, a citation shall be issued for failure to pay. Upon
conviction, said person shall be subject to fines established in §
151.01(C)(1) and the sum of the fines issued through quality of life tickets as
set in §
93.62(E).
(Ord. 1596 , passed 11-18-2019)
STATE CONSTRUCTION CODE
§ 151.15 ADOPTION OF UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE.
   (A)   The state’s Construction Code Act, 35 P.S. §§ 7210.101 et seq., as may
in the future be amended, is hereby adopted as the Building Code of the city.
   (B)   The city adopts and incorporates by reference those codes recited at
34 Pa. Code § 403.21, as may in the future be amended, as its Construction
Code; provided, that the city does not adopt administrative and enforcement
provisions of said codes insofar as such provisions are inconsistent with or
conflict with the UCC, regulations at 34 Pa. Code §§ 401.1 et seq. and this
subchapter.
   (C)   The city adopts by reference regulations governing training and
certification, administration and other matters governing implementation of the
UCC as adopted by the Department of Labor and Industry, as may in the future be
amended.
(Ord. 1450, passed 6-21-2004)
§ 151.16 APPLICATION OF CODES AND STANDARDS.
   Codes adopted by this subchapter to govern construction and other regulated
activities shall also govern the use, occupancy and condition of buildings and
structures following issuance of a UCC certificate of occupancy. City Council
shall have authority to designate persons responsible for administration and
enforcement of such codes following construction and other activity regulated
by the UCC, and such code administration and enforcement personnel shall have
all authority to inspect premises, issue notices (including stop work, unsafe
building and other orders) and take other actions as are necessary to ensure
compliance with standards of said codes.
(Ord. 1450, passed 6-21-2004)
§ 151.17 GENERAL APPLICATION.
   This subchapter shall apply to and govern the construction, alteration,
repair, movement, equipment, removal, demolition, location, maintenance,
occupancy or change of occupancy of every building or structure and to the
installation, enlargement, alteration, repair, removal, conversion or
replacement of electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems which occurs on
or after the effective date of this subchapter and all existing buildings or
structures which are not legally occupied. Exceptions to application of the UCC
as set forth in the Act and/or administrative regulations shall apply and are
incorporated herein by reference.
(Ord. 1450, passed 6-21-2004)
§ 151.18 APPLICATION OF OTHER ORDINANCES.
   (A)   This subchapter shall not be deemed to modify or amend any other
municipal ordinances, including, but not limited to, the subdivision and land
development ordinance, the zoning ordinance and the stormwater management
ordinance, except as expressly stated in this subchapter or in the UCC. This
subchapter is intended to apply to and govern construction and other activities
which are expressly subject to the UCC and to continuing use, occupancy and
maintenance of buildings and structures after issuance of a UCC certificate of
occupancy as provided in the adopted codes.
   (B)   No application for construction permit shall be accepted, nor shall
any proposed construction plan be considered for any property in the city until
the applicant has first complied with all other state and city regulations
governing the proposed activity, these include, but not limited to,
subdivision, land development, zoning and stormwater management regulations,
where applicable.
   (C)   If applicable, prior to submitting an application for a construction
permit under the UCC, the property owner or other qualified applicant shall
submit to the city’s Zoning Administrator an application for a zoning permit on
a form prescribed by City Council. A zoning permit shall not be issued unless
the application complies with all regulations exclusive of those under this
subchapter. Any appeal from issuance or denial of a zoning permit shall be
taken to the Zoning Hearing Board in accordance with provisions of the Zoning
Ordinance.
   (D)   Upon issuance of a zoning permit for the proposed activity, all
construction design, plans and activity shall be conducted in accordance with
terms of the issued zoning permit, and with regulations of other city
ordinances and approved subdivision, development and/or stormwater management
plans.
   (E)   In performance of plan review, inspection and other services required
under the UCC, the retained Building Code Officials and Construction Code
Officials shall ensure that such construction is designed and conducted in
strict conformity with the approved zoning permit. Failure to design or perform
construction in conformity with the issued zoning permit shall be grounds for
issuance of corrective notices, stop work orders and other administrative
enforcement measures under the UCC. The retained Building Code Official, in
writing, shall notify the city’
   (F)   Location of building(s) must be in accordance with the zoning permit
as issued. During a foundation inspection, the retained Building Code Official
or Construction Code Official shall review and certify compliance with location
of buildings and structures as shown on the zoning permit by confirmation of
location on a copy of the zoning permit. If such inspection discloses a
violation of the zoning permit, the city’s Zoning Officer shall be notified
immediately. In other cases, the Zoning Officer shall be furnished with a copy
of the confirmed zoning permit site plan within seven days after the foundation
inspection.
   (G)   No approval of any stage of construction shall be issued where such
construction is in violation of or deviates from terms of the issued zoning
permit.
   (H)   No UCC certificate of occupancy shall be issued where the construction
is in violation of terms of an issued zoning permit.
   (I)   A UCC certificate of occupancy issued by the retained Building Code
Official shall constitute a certification that construction has been performed
which meets requirements of the UCC. Such UCC certificate of occupancy shall be
delivered to the Zoning Administrator, with written certification of any
violations of or deviation from the issued zoning permit as have been noted.
   (J)   Within five business days after receipt of the UCC certificate of
occupancy, the Zoning Administrator shall determine whether all requirements in
the zoning permit and other city ordinances have been complied with. If so, the
Zoning Administrator shall issue a zoning certificate of occupancy, if
applicable, which shall authorize occupancy and use of the constructed
improvement(s). If all such requirements have not been complied with, the
Zoning Administrator, in writing, shall advise applicant of those measures
required for a zoning certificate of occupancy to be issued.
   (K)   Where an application for permit pertains only to the installation,
repair, removal, maintenance or alteration of equipment, does not involve or
pertain to construction activity requiring a zoning permit, and further does
not involve construction activity other than to the interior of a building or
structure, a change of use of the building or property and/or activity which
would require subdivision, land development or stormwater management
regulation, an application for zoning permit shall not be required prior to
receipt of and action on a UCC permit. This exception shall be strictly
construed and is not intended to apply when such activities are conducted in
circumstances that do involve local regulations.
(Ord. 1450, passed 6-21-2004)
§ 151.19 UCC ADMINISTRATION SERVICES.
   (A)   Administration and enforcement of the Code within this city shall be
undertaken in any of the following ways as determined by the governing body of
this city from time to time by resolution:
      (1)   By the designation of an employee of the city to serve as the
Municipal Code Official to act on behalf of the city;
      (2)   By the retention of one or more Construction Code Officials or
third-party agencies to act on behalf of the city;
      (3)   By agreement with one or more other municipalities for the joint
administration and enforcement of this Act through an inter-municipal
agreement;
      (4)   By entering into a contract with another municipality for the
administration and enforcement of this Act on behalf of the city; or
      (5)   By entering into an agreement with the state’s Department of Labor
and Industry for plan review, inspections and enforcement of structures other
than one-family or two-family dwelling units and utility and miscellaneous use
structures.
   (B)   All services pertaining to review and approval of construction plans,
UCC applications for construction permits, inspection or construction,
consideration of requests for variances or extensions of time under the UCC,
administrative enforcement of the UCC and this subchapter, issuance of a UCC
certificate of occupancy, notices to the city’s Zoning Administrator and
representation in proceedings before the Board of Appeals, and as witness(es)
in civil or criminal enforcement proceedings prosecuted by the city shall be
performed by the Building Code Official(s), Construction Code Official(s) and
other persons employed or contracted by the firm retained by the city under
written contract to provide such services.
(Ord. 1450, passed 6-21-2004)
§ 151.20 MUNICIPAL FEES, FORMS AND PROCEDURES.
   (A)   City Council, by resolution, is authorized to establish and amend fees
and deposits for services provided by the city in the administration of this
subchapter and matters relating to applications submitted and permits or
certificates issued pursuant to this subchapter, and is authorized to specify
the time period(s) by which such fees or deposits shall be paid. City Council,
by resolution, is authorized to adopt forms for use in administration and
enforcement of this subchapter and to establish and amend rules, regulations
and procedures to implement this subchapter.
   (B)   Permits for approval of construction under the UCC shall be on such
form(s) as are adopted for use by City Council, as may in the future be
amended.
   (C)   Except as expressly authorized in the UCC or in the administrative
regulations governing its implementation, no construction or other activity
regulated by the UCC shall be conducted or commence without a permit therefor
first being issued.
   (D)   A construction permit shall be valid for a period of one year from the
date of issuance, provided that construction shall commence within six months
after the date of issuance. Upon written request and with good cause shown
prior to the deadline for commencement of construction, the Building Code
Official in his or her or her discretion may extend the deadline for
commencement of construction for a period not exceeding six months. Upon
written request and with good cause shown prior to expiration of a permit’s
term, the City Council, in its discretion, may extend the validity of a permit
for a period not to exceed one year.
   (E)   An applicant’s application for a permit prior to the applicant’s being
prepared to commence construction shall not constitute good cause.
   (F)   City Council shall have exclusive authority over requests for
extension as to permits issued prior to the effective date of this subchapter,
if applicable.
   (G)   Permits, applications for permits and actions on permits pertaining
solely to repair or replacement of equipment shall be administered as set forth
at 34 Pa. Code §§ 401.1 et seq., as may in the future be amended.
(Ord. 1450, passed 6-21-2004)
§ 151.21 FEES FOR UCC PLAN REVIEW, INSPECTIONS AND CERTIFICATIONS.
   Fees for review and approval of construction plans, inspections,
certifications and other services by a third party firm retained by the city
which are required under the UCC and this subchapter with respect to regulated
construction activity shall be as established in contract(s) entered into
between the city and such firm(s). Such retained firm(s) shall further be
entitled to assess fees for additional services (including meetings, additional
inspections, proceedings, copies and the like) required or requested as to
particular matters, as authorized by resolution adopted by City Council.
(Ord. 1450, passed 6-21-2004)
§ 151.22 DEPOSITS.
   (A)   City Council, by resolution, is authorized to require payment by
applicants of deposits to be applied to payment of fees as incurred by the city
and/or the firm(s) retained by the city for performance of services required by
the UCC and this subchapter. Deposit payments in excess of final fees shall be
refunded to the payor upon issuance of the final certificate required by the
retained firm(s) or the city, as is applicable.
   (B)   Deposits payable to the city shall be held by the Treasurer in an
interest-bearing account restricted to use for payment of fees imposed for
services provided by the city. Interest on such funds shall be retained by the
city.
   (C)   Deposits payable to the firm(s) retained by the city for performance
of duties under the UCC shall be payable to said firm(s) and shall be retained
by said firm(s) for that specific purpose. Said firm(s) shall be obligated to
account to the payor for disposition of said sums. No application for UCC
construction permit shall be accepted unless accompanied by the required
deposit.
(Ord. 1450, passed 6-21-2004)
§ 151.23 PROMPT PAYMENT OF FEES AND DEPOSITS REQUIRED.
   (A)   All fees and deposits imposed or required by resolution adopted by
City Council and/or under contract with the firm(s) retained by the city to
perform services required by the UCC and this subchapter shall be payable in
full to the proper entity by the date(s) set forth in such resolution(s) and
contract.
   (B)   No application for a permit, certificate or other service to be
provided by the city shall be accepted unless all fees and deposits required
therefor are paid with the application or other request.
   (C)   No application for UCC construction permit or construction plan
approval shall be accepted or referred to the retained firm(s) unless all fees
and deposits required therefor are paid with such application.
   (D)   If an initial deposit fund has been or soon will be exhausted, the
City Zoning Administrator or the retained firm(s), as the case may be, shall
have authority to require that the applicant pay one or more additional
deposits toward fees for additional services.
   (E)   If a fee or deposit due under this subchapter, resolution of City
Council or contract with retained firm(s) is not paid in full by the date
required therefor, the city or the retained firm, as the case may be, shall not
perform any inspection, review or other service and shall not issue any permit,
report or certificate until such time as the required fee or deposit has been
paid in full.
(Ord. 1450, passed 6-21-2004)
§ 151.24 INTER-MUNICIPAL AGREEMENT.
   City Council is authorized to enter into one or more inter-municipal
agreements with other municipalities, to provide for enactment of consistent
ordinances implementing, administering and enforcing the UCC and for retention
by said municipalities of one or more firm(s) to provide plan review,
inspection and administrative enforcement services required under the Act and
this subchapter.
(Ord. 1450, passed 6-21-2004)
§ 151.25 BOARD OF APPEALS.
   (A)   A joint Board of Appeals shall be established in accordance with 35
P.S. § 7210.501(C) and administrative regulations adopted by the Department of
Labor and Industry to hear appeals from decisions of the Building Code Official
and/or Construction Code Official.
   (B)   Such Board of Appeals shall be constituted and serve as to appeals
from decisions involving regulated activity in all of the municipalities
participating in the inter-municipal agreement with this city. To the extent
residency of a board member is material under the UCC, it shall be sufficient
that the member resides in one of the municipalities participating in the
inter-municipality agreement.
   (C)   A person meeting qualifications who does not reside in one of the
municipalities participating in the inter-municipal agreement may be appointed
to fill a position on the Board of Appeals when the participating
municipalities cannot find a person residing in one of the municipalities who
satisfies requirements for membership.
   (D)   No member of a municipality’s governing body may serve on the Board of
Appeals.
   (E)   A member of the Board of Appeals shall be qualified by training and
experience to pass on matters pertaining to building construction.
   (F)   Members of the joint Board of Appeals shall be appointed by majority
vote of the municipalities participating in the inter-municipality agreement.
   (G)   A member of the Board of Appeals holds office at the pleasure of the
governing bodies of the municipalities participating in the inter-municipal
agreement, and may be removed with or without cause by majority vote of the
governing bodies of participating municipalities.
   (H)   A member of the Board of Appeals may not cast a vote or participate in
any hearing on any appeal, request for variance or request for extension of
time in which the member has a personal, professional or financial interest.
   (I)   The Board of Appeals may not act upon appeals, requests for variance
or requests for extension of time which relate to accessibility under the Act.
Such appeals or requests shall be filed with the Accessibility Advisory Board
under administrative regulations of the Department of Labor and Industry.
   (J)   The Board of Appeals may not act upon appeals, requests for variance
or requests for extension of time which relate to matters regulated and
governed by state laws and city ordinances other than the UCC and this
subchapter.
(Ord. 1450, passed 6-21-2004)
§ 151.26 APPEALS TO BOARD OF APPEALS.
   (A)   Requests for variance from or for extension of time as to regulations
of the UCC shall initially be submitted to the Building Code or Construction
Code Official retained by the city, who shall make a determination with due
regard for requirements and objectives of the UCC.
   (B)   An owner or agent of the owner may appeal from the decision of the
Building Code or Construction Code Official on a request for variance or
request for extension of time or other matter subject to the UCC by filing a
petition with the Building Code Official or that Official’s designee on a form
as adopted by the city.
   (C)   The postmark date or date of personal service shall establish the
filing date of the appeal and request for variance or extension of time.
   (D)   An appeal or request for variance or extension of time to the Board of
Appeals shall automatically suspend an action to enforce an order to correct
until the matter is resolved; provided, that such appeal shall not constitute
any basis for the appellant’s continuation of unlawful construction or any
excuse therefor.
   (E)   An action pertaining to an unsafe building, structure or equipment or
any other matter subject to the Building Code Official’s authority at 34 Pa.
Code §§ 403.81 through 403.84 shall not be stayed by virtue of an appeal.
   (F)   The Board of Appeals shall decide an appeal or request for variance or
for extension of time by reviewing documents and written brief or argument,
unless the owner requests a hearing. In the event an owner requests a hearing,
the owner shall with such request pay all additional fees therefor as are
imposed by resolution of City Council.
(Ord. 1450, passed 6-21-2004)
§ 151.27 ACTION ON APPEALS.
   (A)   The Board of Appeals shall hold a hearing within 60 days after the
date of an applicant’s request and payment of required fees therefor unless the
applicant has agreed in writing to an extension of time. The Board of Appeals
shall notify the owner, the Building Code Official and the respective
municipality’s Zoning Administrator of the date, time and place of the hearing.
   (B)   An application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true
intent of the UCC or regulations adopted under it have been incorrectly
interpreted, that the provisions of the UCC do not fully apply or that an
equivalent form of construction is to be used. In considering appeals under
this section (which recites 35 P.S. § 7210, Act § 501(C)(2)), the Board of
Appeals shall only consider the following in making its decision:
      (1)   Whether the true intent of the UCC and this subchapter have been
correctly interpreted by the Building Code or Construction Code Official;
      (2)   Whether provisions of the UCC and this subchapter do not apply; and
      (3)   Whether an equivalent form of construction is to be used.
   (C)   The Board of Appeals may consider the following factors when ruling
upon a request for extension of time or a request for variance from
regulations:
      (1)   The reasonableness of application of the UCC and this subchapter’s
additional standards to the particular case;
      (2)   The extent to which the granting of a variance or an extension of
time will pose a violation of the UCC and/or additional standards in this
subchapter or an unsafe condition;
      (3)   The availability of professional or technical personnel needed to
come into compliance;
      (4)   The availability of materials and equipment needed to come into
compliance;
      (5)   The efforts being made to come into compliance as quickly as
possible; and
      (6)   Compensatory features that will provide an equivalent degree of
protection to the UCC and additional standards in this subchapter.
   (D)   Economic cost shall not furnish justification for granting an appeal
or a variance or extension of time.
   (E)   In considering an appeal or a request for variance, the Board of
Appeals may deny the request in whole or in part, grant the request in whole or
in part, grant the request upon certain conditions being satisfied or grant
other appropriate relief.
   (F)   The Board of Appeals shall provide written notice of its decision to
the owner and the Building Code Official. The Building Code Official shall
provide a copy of said decision to the city’s Zoning Administrator within seven
days after his or her or her receipt thereof.
(Ord. 1450, passed 6-21-2004)
§ 151.28 FEES FOR APPEALS.
   (A)   City Council, by resolution, may impose fees for appeals. Such fees
shall be paid contemporaneously with submission of an appeal petition.
   (B)   The firm(s) retained by the city may, by schedule approved by City
Council, establish fees for additional services required of it in appeals.
   (C)   City Council, by resolution, is authorized to establish fees to be
paid to members of the Board of Appeals for services rendered.
   (D)   The municipality involved in a proceeding before the Board of Appeals
shall be responsible for payment of fees due to Board members for such
proceeding. Fees established for appeals may include such costs as City Council
deems reasonable.
(Ord. 1450, passed 6-21-2004)
§ 151.29 CIVIL AND CRIMINAL ENFORCEMENT ACTIONS.
   (A)   Actions to enforce the UCC and/or this subchapter and actions to
enjoin unlawful construction or activities or compel action to remedy
violations brought in the District Justice Court or Court of Common Pleas be
instituted and prosecuted in the name of the city. The Building Code Official
retained by the city under contract shall assist in prosecution of such
actions, including, but not limited to, providing testimonial and documentary
evidence. If the city is required to commence an action for enforcement of this
subchapter or for other relief in equity or at law as a consequence of a
violation, the city’s Zoning Administrator and Solicitor are authorized to
prosecute said actions, and the city, in addition to fines for violation and
other relief, shall be entitled to recover from the violator all costs and all
attorney’s fees incurred in the proceeding. The city’s remedies shall be deemed
to be cumulative. Election of one remedy shall not foreclose any alternative
remedy.
   (B)   This section is not intended to modify provisions of the
administrative regulations at 34 Pa. Code §§ 401.1 and 403.81 through 403.84,
pertaining to authority of the Building Code Official.
(Ord. 1450, passed 6-21-2004)
§ 151.30 LIABILITY FOR MUNICIPAL OFFICIALS.
   Municipal code, zoning and other municipal officers or employees charged
with the civil or criminal enforcement of this Code, while acting for the
municipality and within the scope of their employment, shall not thereby be
rendered liable personally, and are hereby relieved from all personal liability
for any damage accruing to persons or property as a result of an act required
or permitted in the discharge of official duties.
(Ord. 1450, passed 6-21-2004)
§ 151.31 LIABILITY OF RETAINED BUILDING CODE AND CONSTRUCTION CODE OFFICIALS.
   Building Code Officials and Construction Code Officials (including
inspectors) charged with administration and administrative enforcement of this
Code, while acting for the retained firm(s) under contract with the city and
within the scope of their employment, shall not thereby be rendered liable
personally, and are hereby relieved from personal liability for any damage
accruing to persons or property as a result of an act required or permitted in
the discharge of such duties.
(Ord. 1450, passed 6-21-2004)
§ 151.32 LIABILITY OF RETAINED PERSON(S) AND FIRM(S).
   Notwithstanding the foregoing, the city shall not be liable for claims,
actions, actions or causes of action, demands or expenses of any nature
whatsoever arising from performance of plan review, inspection, administration,
administrative enforcement, issuance of inspection reports or UCC occupancy
certificates or other matters within the scope of duties of the firm(s)
retained by the city for performance of such services. All contracts with firms
or persons for performance of such services shall specify that such person(s)
or firm(s) shall be independent contractors solely responsible for the proper
performance of such services, and that such retained person(s) or firm(s) shall
hold the city harmless against and indemnify the city for any and all claims,
actions, actions or causes of action, demands or expenses of any nature
whatsoever arising from performance of plan review, inspection, administration,
administrative enforcement, issuance of inspection reports or UCC occupancy
certificates or other matters performed under contract with the city.
(Ord. 1450, passed 6-21-2004)
§ 151.33 ENFORCEMENT OF OTHER ORDINANCES.
   This subchapter is not intended and shall not be interpreted to amend or
limit the city’s authority to administer and enforce other ordinances governing
development, land use or stormwater management. In the event of a violation of
any other city ordinance in connection with development of land, construction
or use which pertains to matters other than construction standards governed by
the UCC, the city shall have full authority to enforce such other ordinances
without regard to the owner’s compliance with the UCC. Where authorized by such
other ordinances, the city shall issue stop work, cease and desist and other
orders necessary to ensure compliance with other regulations, such orders to
control when in conflict with regulations of the UCC and this subchapter.
(Ord. 1450, passed 6-21-2004)
§ 151.34 REPORTS BY RETAINED CONSTRUCTION OFFICIALS.
   The person(s) or firm(s) retained by the city under contract to provide
services under the UCC and this subchapter shall retain for the city and as
property of the city all documents received and generated in performance of its
duties, and shall provide to the Zoning Administrator such reports and
documents as are required in the contract(s), these to include at a minimum:
   (A)   Written certification of approval of construction plan;
   (B)   Copy of site plan after foundation inspection certifying location of
all buildings;
   (C)   Monthly report of inspections conducted;
   (D)   Weekly reports of building activity;
   (E)   Decisions of Board of Appeals pertaining to the municipality;
   (F)   Final inspection reports; and
   (G)   UCC certificate of occupancy.
(Ord. 1450, passed 6-21-2004)
§ 151.35 COORDINATION WITH OTHER INSPECTIONS.
   The Building Code Official(s) and Construction Code Official(s) retained
under contract with the city shall not be obligated to perform inspections of
construction of improvements other than are subject to the UCC and additional
standards of this subchapter. Said retained officials shall, however, provide
to the city, water and sewer authorities and other entities responsible for
regulating construction of improvements or connections to water and sewer lines
such notices of scheduled inspections and construction status as is deemed
necessary by the city to put such other entities on notice so that they may
inspect matters subject to their authority in timely fashion as construction
activities proceed.
(Ord. 1450, passed 6-21-2004)
CHAPTER 152: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
Section
General Provisions
   
152.001   Short title
   
152.002   Statement of findings
   
152.003   Purpose
   
152.004   Statutory authority
   
152.005   Applicability
   
152.006   Compatibility with other ordinance requirements
   
152.007   Duty of persons engaged in the development of land
   
152.008   Municipal liability disclaimer
   
152.009   Definitions
Stormwater Management Standards
   
152.020   General provisions
   
152.021   Exemptions/modifications
   
152.022   Waivers
   
152.023   Volume controls
   
152.024   Rate controls
E&S Standards
   
152.035   Erosion and sedimentation requirements during earth disturbance
activities
Design Criteria
   
152.050   Design criteria for stormwater management and drainage facilities
   
152.051   Calculation methodology
SWM Site Plan and Report Requirements
   
152.065   General requirements
   
152.066   SWM Site Plan and Report contents
   
152.067   SWM Site Plan and Report submission
   
152.068   SWM Site Plan and Report review
   
152.069   Modification of plans
   
152.070   Resubmission of disapproved SWM Site Plan and Report
   
152.071   Authorization to construct and term of validity
   
152.072   Record drawings, completion certificate and final inspection
Easements
   
152.085   Easements
Maintenance Responsibilities
   
152.100   Financial guarantee
   
152.101   Maintenance responsibilities
   
152.102   Maintenance agreement for privately owned stormwater facilities
Inspections
   
152.115   Schedule of inspections
   
152.116   Right of entry
Enforcement
   
152.130   Notification
   
152.131   Enforcement
   
152.132   Public nuisance
   
152.133   Suspension and revocation
   
152.134   Appeals
Prohibitions
   
152.145   Prohibited discharges and connections
   
152.146   Roof drains
   
152.147   Alteration of BMPs
Fees and Expenses
   
152.160   General
   
152.161   Expenses covered by fees
   
152.162   Recording of approved SWM Site Plan and related agreements
 
   
152.999   Penalty
   
Appendix A: Operation and maintenance agreement
   
Appendix B: Low impact development practices
   
Appendix C: Stormwater management design criteria
   
Appendix D: Review fee reimbursement agreement
   
Appendix E: Small project SWM plan application
   
Appendix F: Release rate map
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 152.001 SHORT TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “City of Corry
Stormwater Management Ordinance”.
(Ord. 1508, passed 12-20-2010)
§ 152.002 STATEMENT OF FINDINGS.
   The governing body of the city finds that:
   (A)   Inadequate management of accelerated stormwater runoff resulting from
development throughout a watershed increases flood flows and velocities,
contributes to erosion and sedimentation, overtaxes the carrying capacity of
existing streams and storm sewers, greatly increases the cost of public
facilities to convey and manage stormwater, undermines floodplain management
and flood reduction efforts in upstream and downstream communities, reduces
groundwater recharge, threatens public health and safety and increases non-
point source pollution of water resources;
   (B)   A comprehensive program of stormwater management, including reasonable
regulation of development and activities causing accelerated runoff, is
fundamental to the public health, safety, welfare and the protection of the
people of the city and all the people of the state, their resources and the
environment;
   (C)   Inadequate planning and management of stormwater runoff resulting from
land development and redevelopment throughout a watershed can also harm surface
water resources by changing the natural hydrologic patterns; accelerating
stream flows (which increase scour and erosion of streambeds and stream banks
thereby elevating sedimentation); destroying aquatic habitat; and elevating
aquatic pollutant concentrations and loadings such as sediments, nutrients,
heavy metals and pathogens. Groundwater resources are also impacted through
loss of recharge;
   (D)   Stormwater is an important water resource which provides groundwater
recharge for water supplies and base flow of streams, which also protects and
maintains surface water quality;
   (E)   Public education on the control of pollution from stormwater is an
essential component in successfully addressing stormwater issues;
   (F)   Federal and state regulations require certain municipalities to
implement a program of stormwater controls. These municipalities are required
to obtain a permit for stormwater discharges from their separate storm sewer
systems under the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES); and
   (G)   Non-stormwater discharges to municipal separate storm sewer systems
can contribute to pollution of waters of the state.
(Ord. 1508, passed 12-20-2010)
§ 152.003 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to promote health, safety and welfare within
the city, by minimizing the harms and maximizing the benefits described in §
152.002 through provisions intended to:
   (A)   Meet legal water quality requirements under state law, including
regulations at 25 Pa. Code Chapter 93 to protect, maintain, reclaim and restore
the existing and designated uses of the waters of the state;
   (B)   Manage accelerated runoff and erosion and sedimentation problems close
to their source, by regulating activities that cause these problems;
   (C)   Preserve the natural drainage systems as much as possible;
   (D)   Maintain groundwater recharge, to prevent degradation of surface and
groundwater quality, and to otherwise protect water resources;
   (E)   Maintain existing flows and quality of streams and watercourses;
   (F)   Preserve and restore the flood-carrying capacity of streams and
prevent scour and erosion of stream banks and streambeds;
   (G)   Manage stormwater impacts close to the runoff source, with a minimum
of structures and a maximum use of natural processes;
   (H)   Provide procedures, performance standards and design criteria for
stormwater planning and management;
   (I)   Provide proper operations and maintenance of all stormwater management
facilities and best management practices (BMPs) that are constructed and
implemented; and
   (J)   Provide standards to meet the NPDES permit requirements.
(Ord. 1508, passed 12-20-2010)
§ 152.004 STATUTORY AUTHORITY.
   (A)   Primary authority. The city is empowered to regulate these activities
by the authority of the Act of October 4, 1978, 32 P.S., P.L. 864 (Stormwater
Management Act), 32 P.S. §§ 680.1 et seq., as amended, the Stormwater
Management Act (32 P.S. §§ 680.1 et seq.), and the Third Class City Code, 11
Pa.C.S. §§ 10101 et seq.
   (B)   Secondary authority. The city also is empowered to regulate land use
activities that affect runoff by the authority of the Act of July 31, 1968,
P.L. 805, No. 247, the state’s Municipalities Planning Code, as amended, 53
P.S. §§ 10101 et seq.
(Ord. 1508, passed 12-20-2010)
§ 152.005 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   This chapter shall apply to all areas of the city, any regulated
activity within the city and all stormwater runoff entering into the city’s
separate storm sewer system from lands within the boundaries of the city.
   (B)   REGULATED ACTIVITIES are any earth disturbance activities or any
activities that involve the alteration or development of land in a manner that
may affect stormwater runoff. REGULATED ACTIVITIES include, but are not limited
to, the following listed items:
      (1)   Earth disturbance activities;
      (2)   Land development;
      (3)   Subdivision;
      (4)   Construction of new or additional impervious or semi-pervious
surfaces;
      (5)   Construction of new buildings or additions to existing buildings;
      (6)   Diversion or piping of any natural or human-made stream channel;
      (7)   Installation of stormwater management facilities or appurtenances
thereto; and
      (8)   Installation of stormwater BMPs.
   (C)   See §
152.021 for exemption/modification criteria.
(Ord. 1508, passed 12-20-2010)
§ 152.006 COMPATIBILITY WITH OTHER ORDINANCE REQUIREMENTS.
   Approvals issued and actions taken pursuant to this chapter do not relieve
the applicant of the responsibility to comply with or to secure required
permits or approvals for activities regulated by any other applicable codes,
laws, rules, statutes or ordinances. To the extent that this chapter imposes
more rigorous or stringent requirements for stormwater management, the specific
requirements contained in this chapter shall be followed.
(Ord. 1508, passed 12-20-2010)
§ 152.007 DUTY OF PERSONS ENGAGED IN THE DEVELOPMENT OF LAND.
   Notwithstanding any provision(s) of this chapter, including exemptions, any
landowner or any person engaged in the alteration or development of land which
may affect stormwater runoff characteristics shall implement such measures as
are reasonably necessary to prevent injury to health, safety or other property.
Such measures also shall include actions as are required to manage the rate,
volume, direction and quality of resulting stormwater runoff in a manner which
otherwise adequately protects health, property and water quality.
(Ord. 1508, passed 12-20-2010)
§ 152.008 MUNICIPAL LIABILITY DISCLAIMER.
   (A)   Neither the granting of any approval under this chapter, nor the
compliance with the provisions of this chapter, or with any condition imposed
by a municipal official hereunder, shall relieve any person from any
responsibility for damage to persons or property resulting therefrom, or as
otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon the municipality for
damages to persons or property.
   (B)   The granting of a permit which includes any stormwater management
facilities shall not constitute a representation, guarantee or warranty of any
kind by the municipality, or by an official or employee thereof, of the
practicability or safety of any structure, use or other plan proposed, and
shall create no liability upon or cause of action against such public body,
official or employee for any damage that may result pursuant thereto.
(Ord. 1508, passed 12-20-2010)
§ 152.009 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms and words used herein
shall be interpreted as follows.
      (1)   Words used in the present tense include the future tense; the
singular number includes the plural; and the plural number includes the
singular; words of masculine gender include feminine gender; and words of
feminine gender include masculine gender.
      (2)   The word INCLUDES or INCLUDING shall not limit the term to the
specific example but is intended to extend its meaning to all other instances
of like kind and character.
      (3)   The word PERSON includes an individual, firm, association,
organization, partnership, trust, company, corporation or any other similar
entity.
      (4)   The words SHALL and MUST are mandatory; the words MAY and SHOULD
are permissive.
      (5)   The words USED OR OCCUPIED include the words “intended, designed,
maintained or arranged to be used, occupied or maintained”.
   (B)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      ACCELERATED EROSION. The removal of the surface of the land through the
combined action of human activity and natural processes at a rate greater than
would occur because of the natural process alone.
      AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITIES. Activities associated with agriculture, such as
agricultural cultivation, agricultural operation and animal heavy use areas.
This includes the work of producing crops, tillage, land clearing, plowing,
disking, harrowing, planting, harvesting crops or pasturing and raising of
livestock and installation of conservation measures. Construction of new
buildings or impervious area is not considered an AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITY.
      ALTERATION. As applied to land, a change in topography as a result of the
moving of soil and rock from one location or position to another; changing of
surface conditions by causing the surface to be more or less impervious; land
disturbance.
      APPLICANT. A landowner, developer or other person who has filed an
application for approval to engage in any regulated activities at a project
site within the municipality.
      BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPS). Activities, facilities, designs,
measures or procedures used to manage stormwater impacts from regulated
activities, to meet state water quality requirements, to promote groundwater
recharge and to otherwise meet the purposes of this chapter. STORMWATER BMPs
are commonly grouped into one of two broad categories or measures: “non-
structural” or “structural”. NON-STRUCTURAL BMPs are measures referred to as
operational and/or behavior-related practices that attempt to minimize the
contact of pollutants with stormwater runoff, whereas STRUCTURAL BMPs are
measures that consist of a physical device or practice that is installed to
capture and treat stormwater runoff. STRUCTURAL BMPs include, but are not
limited to, a wide variety of practices and devices, from large-scale retention
ponds and constructed wetlands, to small-scale underground treatment systems,
infiltration facilities, filter strips, low impact design, bioretention, wet
ponds, permeable paving, grassed swales, riparian or forested buffers, sand
filters, detention basins, and manufactured devices. STRUCTURAL STORMWATER BMPs
are permanent appurtenances to the project site.
      CHANNEL EROSION. The widening, deepening and headword cutting of small
channels and waterways, due to erosion caused by moderate to large floods.
      CISTERN. An underground reservoir or tank used for storing rainwater.
      CONSERVATION DISTRICT. The Erie County Conservation District. The Erie
County Conservation District has the authority under a delegation agreement
executed with the Department of Environmental Protection to administer and
enforce all or a portion of the regulations promulgated under 25 Pa. Code
Chapter 102.
      CULVERT. A structure with appurtenant works that carries a stream and/or
stormwater runoff under or through an embankment or fill.
      DAM. An artificial barrier, together with its appurtenant works,
constructed for the purpose of impounding or storing water or another fluid or
semifluid, or a refuse bank, fill or structure for highway, railroad or other
purposes which does or may impound water or another fluid or semifluid.
      DESIGN STORM. The magnitude and temporal distribution of precipitation
from a storm event measured in probability of occurrence (e.g., a 25-year
storm) and duration (e.g., 24-hours), used in the design and evaluation of
stormwater management systems. Also see RETURN PERIOD.
      DESIGNEE. The agent of this municipality and/or agent of the governing
body involved with the administration, review or enforcement of any provisions
of this chapter by contract or memorandum of understanding.
      DETENTION BASIN. An impoundment structure designed to manage stormwater
runoff by temporarily storing the runoff and releasing it at a predetermined
rate.
      DETENTION VOLUME. The volume of runoff that is captured and released into
waters of the state at a controlled rate.
      DEVELOPER. A person, partnership, association, corporation or other
entity, or any responsible person therein or agent thereof, that undertakes any
regulated activity of this chapter.
      DEVELOPMENT SITE (SITE). The specific tract of land for which a regulated
activity is proposed. Also see PROJECT SITE.
      DISTURBED AREA. An unstabilized land area where an earth disturbance
activity is occurring or has occurred.
      DOWNSLOPE PROPERTY LINE. The portion of the property line of the lot,
tract or parcels of land being developed located such that all overland or pipe
flow from the site would be directed toward it.
      DRAINAGE CONVEYANCE FACILITY. A stormwater management facility designed
to convey stormwater runoff and shall include streams, channels, swales, pipes,
conduits, culverts, storm sewers and the like.
      DRAINAGE EASEMENT. A right granted by a landowner to a grantee, allowing
the use of private land for stormwater management, drainage or conveyance
purposes.
      DRAINAGEWAY. Any natural or artificial watercourse, trench, ditch, pipe,
swale, channel or similar depression into which surface water flows.
      EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY. A construction or other human activity which
disturbs the surface of the land, including, but not limited to, clearing and
grubbing, grading, excavations, embankments, land development, agricultural
plowing or filling, timber harvesting activities, road maintenance activities,
mineral extraction and the moving, depositing, stockpiling or storing of soil,
rock or earth materials.
      EROSION. The movement of soil particles by the action of water, wind, ice
or other natural forces.
      EROSION AND SEDIMENT POLLUTION CONTROL PLAN. A plan which is designed to
minimize accelerated erosion and sedimentation.
      EXCEPTIONAL VALUE WATERS. Surface waters of high quality, which satisfies
Pa. Code Title 25 Environmental Protection, Chapter 93 Water Quality Standards
93.4b(b) (relating to anti- degradation).
      EXISTING CONDITIONS. The initial condition of a project site prior to the
proposed construction. If the initial condition of the site is undeveloped land
and not forested, the land use shall be considered as “meadow” unless the
natural land cover is documented to generate lower curve numbers or rational
“C” coefficient.
      FEMA. The Federal Emergency Management Agency.
      FLOOD. A general but temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of streams, rivers and
other waters of the state.
      FLOOD FRINGE. The remaining portions of the 100-year floodplain outside
of the floodway boundary.
      FLOODPLAIN. Any land area susceptible to inundation by water from any
natural source or delineated by applicable Department of Housing and Urban
Development, Federal Insurance Administration Flood Hazard Boundary mapped as
being a special flood hazard area. Included are lands adjoining a river or
stream that have been or may be inundated by a 100-year flood. Also included
are areas that comprise Group 13 Soils, as listed in Appendix A of the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection (PADEP) Technical Manual
for Sewage Enforcement Officers (as amended or replaced from time to time by
PADEP).
      FLOODWAY. The channel of the watercourse and those portions of the
adjoining floodplains that are reasonably required to carry and discharge the
100-year frequency flood. Unless otherwise specified, the boundary of the
FLOODWAY is as indicated on maps and flood insurance studies provided by FEMA.
In an area where no FEMA maps or studies have defined, the boundary of the 100-
year frequency floodway, it is assumed, absent evidence to the contrary, that
the FLOODWAY extends from the stream to 50 feet landward from the top of the
bank of the stream.
      FOREST MANAGEMENT/TIMBER OPERATIONS. Planning and activities necessary
for the management of forest land. These include timber inventory and
preparation of forest management plans, silvicultural treatment cutting
budgets, logging road design and construction, timber harvesting, site
preparation and reforestation.
      FREEBOARD. A vertical distance between the elevation of the design high
water and the top of a dam, levee, tank, basin or diversion ridge. The space is
required as a safety margin in a tank, pond or basin.
      GRADE. A slope, usually of a road, channel or natural ground specified in
percent and shown on plans as specified herein.
      (TO) GRADE. To finish the surface of a roadbed, top of embankment or
bottom of excavation.
      GROUNDWATER RECHARGE. Replenishment of existing natural underground water
supplies.
      HEC-HMS MODEL CALIBRATED (HYDROLOGIC ENGINEERING CENTER HYDROLOGIC
MODELING SYSTEM). A computer-based hydrologic modeling technique adapted to the
watershed(s) in the county for the Stormwater Management Act, being 32 P.S. §§
680.1 et seq. The MODEL has been calibrated by adjusting key model input
parameters.
      HIGH QUALITY WATERS. Surface water having quality, which exceeds levels
necessary to support propagation of fish, shellfish and wildlife and recreation
in and on the wafer by satisfying Pa. Code Title 25 Environmental Protection,
Chapter 93 Water Qualify Standards 93.4b(a).
      HYDROLOGIC SOIL GROUP (HSG). Infiltration rates of soils vary widely and
are affected by subsurface permeability as well as surface intake rates. Soils
are classified into one of four HSG (A, B, C and D) according to their minimum
infiltration rate, which is obtained for bare soil after prolonged wetting. The
Natural Resource Conservation Service (NRCS) of the U.S. Department of
Agriculture defines the four groups and provides a list of most of the soils in
the United States and their group classification. The soils in the area of
interest may be identified from a soil survey report from the local NRCS office
or the County Conservation District.
      IMPERVIOUS SURFACE (IMPERVIOUS AREA). A surface that prevents the
infiltration of water into the ground, impervious surface (or areas) include,
but is not limited to: roofs; additional indoor living spaces; patios; garages;
storage sheds and similar structures; parking or driveway areas; and any new
streets and sidewalks. Any surface areas proposed to initially be gravel or
crushed stone shall be assumed to be IMPERVIOUS SURFACES.
      IMPOUNDMENT. A retention or detention basin designed to retain stormwater
runoff and release it at a controlled rate.
      INFILTRATION STRUCTURES. A structure designed to direct runoff into the
ground (e.g., french drains, seepage pits, seepage trench and the like).
      INLET. A surface connection to a closed drain. A structure at the
diversion end of a conduit. The upstream end of any structure through which
water may flow.
      LAND DEVELOPMENT (DEVELOPMENT). 
         (a)   The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots,
tracts or parcels of land for any purpose involving:
            1.   A group of two or more buildings; or
            2.   The division or allocation of land or space between or among
two or more existing or prospective occupants by means of, or for the purpose
of, streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building groups or other
features.
         (b)   Any subdivision of land; or
         (c)   Development in accordance with 53 P.S. § 503(1.1) of the Pa.
Municipalities Planning Code.
      LOW IMPACT DEVELOPMENT (LID). An approach to land development that uses
various land planning and design practices and technologies to simultaneously
conserve and protect natural resource systems and reduce infrastructure costs.
LID still allows land to be developed, but in a cost-effective manner that
helps mitigate potential environmental impacts.
      MAIN STEM (MAIN CHANNEL). Any stream segment or other runoff conveyance
facility used as a reach in the Stormwater Management Act, being 32 P.S. §§
680.1 et seq., watershed hydrologic model(s).
      MANNING EQUATION (MANNING FORMULA). A method for calculation of velocity
of flow (e.g., feet per second) and flow rate (e.g., cubic feet per second) in
open channels based upon channel shape, roughness, depth of flow and slope.
“Open channels” may include closed conduits so long as the flow is not under
pressure.
      MUNICIPALITY. The City of Corry, Erie County, Pennsylvania.
      NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES). The federal
government’s system for issuance of permits under the Clean Water Act, which is
delegated to PADEP in the state.
      NOAA ATLAS 14. Precipitation-Frequency Atlas of the United States, Atlas
14, Volume 2, U.S. Department of Commerce, National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration, National Weather Service, Hydrometeorological Design Studies
Center, Silver Spring, Maryland (2004). NOAA’S ATLAS 14 can be accessed at
Internet address http://hdsc.nws.noaa.gov/hdsc/pfds/.
      NON-POINT SOURCE POLLUTION. Pollution that enters a water body from
diffuse origins in the watershed and does not result from discernible, confined
or discrete conveyances.
      NRCS. Natural Resource Conservation Service (previously Soil Conservation
Service (SCS)).
      OPEN CHANNEL. A drainage element in which stormwater flows with an open
surface. OPEN CHANNELS include, but shall not be limited to, natural and human-
made drainageways, swales, streams, ditches, canals and pipes not under
pressure.
      OUTFALL. 
         (a)   Point where water flows from a conduit, stream or drain;
         (b)   “Point source” as described in 40 C.F.R. § 122.2 at the point
where the municipality’s storm sewer system discharges to surface waters of the
state.
      OUTLET. Points of water disposal from a stream, river, lake, tidewater or
artificial drain.
      PADEP. The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
      PARKING LOT STORAGE. Involves the use of impervious parking areas as
temporary impoundments with controlled release rates during rainstorms.
      PEAK DISCHARGE. The maximum rate of stormwater runoff from a specific
storm event.
      PERSON. An individual, partnership, public or private association or
corporation, firm, trust, estate, municipality, governmental unit, public
utility or any other legal entity whatsoever which is recognized by law as the
subject of rights and duties. Whenever used in any section prescribing or
imposing a penalty, the term PERSON shall include the members of a partnership,
the officers, members, servants and agents of an association, officers, agents
and servants of a corporation, and the officers of a municipality or country,
but shall exclude any department, board, bureau or agency of the state.
      PERVIOUS AREA. Any area not defined as impervious.
      PIPE. A culvert, closed conduit or similar structure (including
appurtenances) that conveys stormwater.
      PLANNING COMMISSION. The Planning Commission of the City of Corry.
      POINT SOURCE. Any discernible, confined or discrete conveyance,
including, but not limited to: any pipe; ditch; channel; tunnel; or conduit
from which stormwater is or may be discharged, as defined in state regulations
at 25 Pa. Code § 92a.1.
      PROBABLE MAXIMUM FLOOD (PMF). The flood that may be expected from the
most severe combination of critical meteorological and hydrologic conditions
that are reasonably possible in any area. The PMF is derived from the probable
maximum precipitation (PMP) as determined on the basis of data obtained from
the National Oceanographic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA).
      PROJECT SITE. The specific area of land where any regulated activities in
the municipality are planned, conducted or maintained.
      QUALIFIED PROFESSIONAL. Any person licensed by the Pennsylvania
Department of State or otherwise qualified by law to perform the work required
by the chapter.
      RATIONAL FORMULA. A rainfall-runoff relation used to estimate peak flow.
      REDEVELOPMENT. Earth disturbance activities on land, which has previously
been developed.
      REGULATED ACTIVITIES. Any earth disturbance activities or any activities
that involve the alteration or development of land in a manner that may affect
stormwater runoff.
      REGULATED EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY. Activity involving earth
disturbance subject to regulation under 25 Pa. Code Chapter 92a, Chapter 102 or
the Clean Streams Law, being 35 P.S. §§ 691.1 et seq.
      RELEASE RATE. The percentage of pre-development peak rate of runoff from
a site or subwatershed area to which the post-development peak rate of runoff
must be reduced to protect downstream areas.
      RELEASE RATE DISTRICT. Those subwatershed areas in which post-development
flows must be reduced to a certain percentage of pre-development flows as
required to meet the plan requirements and the goals of the Stormwater
Management Act, being 32 P.S. §§ 680.1 et seq.
      RETENTION BASIN. An impoundment in which stormwater is stored and not
released during the storm event. Stored water may be released from the basin at
some time after the end of the storm.
      RETENTION VOLUME/REMOVED RUNOFF. The volume of runoff that is captured
and not released directly into the surface waters of this state during or after
a storm event.
      RETURN PERIOD. The average interval, in years, within which a storm event
of a given magnitude can be expected to recur. For example, the 25-year return
period rainfall would be expected to recur on the average once every 25 years;
or stated in another way, the probability of a 25-year storm occurring in any
one given year is 0.04 (i.e., a 4% chance).
      RIPARIAN BUFFER. A vegetated area bordering perennial and intermittent
streams and wetlands that serves as a protective filter to help protect streams
and wetlands from the impacts of adjacent land uses.
      RISER. A vertical pipe extending from the bottom of a pond that is used
to control the discharge rate from the pond for a specified design storm.
      ROAD MAINTENANCE. Earth disturbance activities within the existing road
right-of-way, such as grading and repairing existing unpaved road surfaces,
cutting road banks, cleaning or clearing drainage ditches and other similar
activities. ROAD MAINTENANCE activities that do not disturb the subbase of a
paved road, such as milling and overlays, are not considered earth disturbance
activities.
      ROOFTOP DETENTION. Temporary ponding and gradual release of stormwater
falling directly onto flat roof surfaces by incorporating controlled-flow roof
drains into building designs.
      RUNOFF. Any part of precipitation that flows over the land surface.
      RUNOFF CAPTURE VOLUME. The volume of runoff that is captured (retained)
and not released info surface waters of the state during or after a storm
event.
      SEDIMENT. Soils or other materials transported by surface wafer as a
product of erosion.
      SEDIMENT BASIN. A barrier, dam, retention or detention basin located and
designed to retain rock, sand, gravel, silt or other material transported by
stormwater runoff.
      SEDIMENT POLLUTION. The placement, discharge or any other introduction of
sediment into waters of the state occurring from the failure to properly
design, construct, implement or maintain control measures and control
facilities in accordance with the requirements of this chapter.
      SEDIMENTATION. The process by which mineral or organic matter is
accumulated or deposited by the movement of water.
      SEEPAGE PIT/SEEPAGE TRENCH. An area of excavated earth filled with loose
stone or similar coarse material, into which surface water is directed for
infiltration into the ground.
      SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM. A conveyance or system of conveyances
(including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs,
gutters, ditches, human-made channels or storm drains) primarily used for
collecting and conveying stormwater runoff.
      SHEET FLOW. Runoff that flows over the ground surface as a thin, even
layer, not concentrated in a channel.
      SOIL COVER COMPLEX METHOD. A method of runoff computation developed by
the NRCS that is based on relating soil type and land use/cover to a runoff
parameter called curve number (CN).
      SPILLWAY (EMERGENCY). A depression in the embankment of a pond or basin,
or other overflow structure, that is used to pass peak discharges greater than
the maximum design storm controlled by the pond or basin.
      STATE WATER QUALITY REQUIREMENTS. The regulatory requirements to protect,
maintain, reclaim and restore water quality under Title 25 of the Pennsylvania
Code and the Clean Streams Law, being 35 P.S. §§ 691.1 et seq.
      STORAGE INDICATION METHOD. A reservoir routing procedure based on
solution of the continuity equation (inflow minus outflow equals the change in
storage) with outflow defined as a function of storage volume and depth.
      STORM FREQUENCY. The number of times that a given storm event occurs or
is exceeded on the average in a stated period of years. See also RETURN PERIOD.
      STORM SEWER. A system of pipes and/or open channels that convey
intercepted runoff and stormwater from other sources, but excludes domestic
sewage and industrial wastes.
      STORMWATER. Runoff from the surface of the land resulting from
precipitation, snow or ice melt.
      STORMWATER HOTSPOT. A land use or activity that generates higher
concentrations of hydrocarbons, trace metals or toxicants than are found in
typical stormwater runoff.
      STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITIES. Any structure, natural or human-made,
that, due to its condition, design or construction, conveys, stores or
otherwise affects stormwater runoff. Typical STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITIES
include, but are not limited to: detention and retention basins; open channels;
storm sewers; pipes; and infiltration facilities.
      STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN. The Erie County Stormwater Management Plan
for managing stormwater runoff in Erie County as required by the Act of October
4, 1978, P.L. 864, (Stormwater Management Act, being 32 P.S. §§ 680.1 et seq.).
      STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SITE PLAN (SWM SITE PLAN). The Plan prepared by the
applicant or his or her representative indicating how stormwater runoff will be
managed at the project site in accordance with this chapter.
      STREAM ENCLOSURE. A bridge, culvert or other structure in excess of 100
feet in length upstream to downstream which encloses a regulated waters of the
state.
      SUBWATERSHED AREA. The smallest drainage unit of a watershed for which
stormwater management criteria has been established in the Stormwater
Management Plan.
      SUBDIVISION. The division or re-division of a lot, tract or parcel of
land by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of
land, including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of lease, transfer of ownership, or building or lot
development, provided; however, that the SUBDIVISION by lease of land for
agricultural purposes into parcels of more than ten acres, not involving any
new street or easement of access or any residential dwellings, shall be exempt
(the state’s Municipalities Planning Code, Act of July 31, 1968, P.L. 805, No.
247, 53 P.S. §§ 10101 et seq.)
      SWALE. A low-lying stretch of land that gathers or carries surface water
runoff.
      TIMBER OPERATIONS. See FOREST MANAGEMENT.
      TIME OF CONCENTRATION (Tc). The time for surface runoff to travel from
the hydraulicaliy most distant point of the watershed to a point of interest
within the watershed. This TIME is the combined total of overland flow time and
flow time in pipes or channels, if any.
      USDA. The United States Department of Agriculture.
      WATERCOURSE. A channel or conveyance of surface water, such as a stream
or creek, having defined bed and banks, whether natural or artificial, with
perennial or intermittent flow.
      WATERS OF THE STATE. Rivers, streams, creeks, rivulets, impoundments,
ditches, watercourses, storm sewers, lakes, dammed water, wetlands, ponds,
springs and other bodies or channels of conveyance of surface and underground
water, or parts thereof, whether natural or artificial, within or on the
boundaries of the state.
      WATERSHED. Area drained by a river, watercourse or other surface water,
whether natural or artificial.
      WETLAND. Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or
groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under
normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted
for life in saturated soil conditions, including swamps, marshes, bogs and
similar areas. The term includes, but is not limited to, WETLAND areas listed
in the State Water Plan, the United States Forest Service Wetlands Inventory of
Pennsylvania, the State Coastal Zone Management Plan and a wetland area
designated by a river basin commission. This definition is used by the United
States Environmental Protection Agency and the United States Army Corps of
Engineers.
(Ord. 1508, passed 12-20-2010)
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT STANDARDS
§ 152.020 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   For all regulated activities, unless specifically exempted in §
152.021:
      (1)   Preparation and implementation of an approved SWM Site Plan is
required;
      (2)   No regulated activities shall commence until the municipality
issues written approval of a SWM Site Plan, which demonstrates compliance with
the requirements of this chapter;
      (3)   The SWM Site Plan shall demonstrate that adequate capacity will be
provided to meet the volume and rate control requirements, as described under
§§
152.022 and
152.023; and
      (4)   The SWM Site Plan approved by the municipality, shall be on-site
throughout the duration of the regulated activities.
   (B)   For all regulated earth disturbance activities, erosion and sediment
control BMPs shall be designed, implemented, operated and maintained during the
regulated earth disturbance activities (e.g., during construction) to meet the
purposes and requirements of this chapter and to meet all requirements under
Title 25 of the Pennsylvania Code (including, but not limited to, Chapter 102
Erosion and Sediment Control) and the Clean Streams Law, being 35 P.S. §§ 691.1
et seq. Various BMPs and their design standards are listed in the Erosion and
Sediment Pollution Control Program Manual (E&S Manual), No. 363-2134-008 (April
15, 2000), as amended and updated.
   (C)   For all regulated activities, stormwater BMPs shall be designed,
installed, implemented, operated and maintained to meet the purposes and
requirements of this chapter and to meet all requirements under Title 25 of the
Pennsylvania Code and the Clean Streams Law, being 35 P.S. §§ 691.1 et seq.,
conform to the state’s water quality requirements, meet all requirements under
the Stormwater Management Act and any more stringent requirements as determined
by the municipality.
   (D)   The municipality may, after consultation with PADEP and the
Conservation District, approve measures for meeting the state water quality
requirements other than those in this chapter, provided that they meet the
minimum requirements of, and do not conflict with state law, including, but not
limited to, the Clean Streams Law, being 35 P.S. §§ 691.1 et seq.
   (E)   All regulated activities shall include, to the maximum extent
practicable, measures to:
      (1)   Protect health, safety and property; and
      (2)   Meet the water quality goals of this chapter by implementing
measures to:
         (a)   Minimize disturbance to floodplains, wetlands, natural slopes,
existing native vegetation and woodlands;
         (b)   Create, maintain or extend riparian buffers and protect existing
forested buffers;
         (c)   Provide trees and woodlands adjacent to impervious areas
whenever feasible;
         (d)   Minimize the creation of impervious surfaces and the degradation
of waters of the state and promote groundwater recharge;
         (e)   Protect natural systems and processes (drainageways, vegetation,
soils, and sensitive areas) and maintain, as much as possible, the natural
hydrologic regime;
         (f)   Incorporate natural site elements (wetlands, stream corridors
and mature forests) as design elements;
         (g)   Avoid erosive flow conditions in natural flow pathways;
         (h)   Minimize soil disturbance and soil compaction;
         (I)   Minimize thermal impacts to waters of the state; and
         (j)   Disconnect impervious surfaces by directing runoff to pervious
areas, wherever possible and decentralize and manage stormwater at its source.
   (F)   Impervious areas:
      (1)   The measurement of impervious areas shall include all of the
impervious areas in the total proposed development, even if development is to
take place in stages.
      (2)   For developments taking place in stages, the entire development
plan must be used in determining conformance with this chapter.
   (G)   If diffused flow is proposed to be concentrated and discharged onto
adjacent property, the applicant must document that adequate downstream
conveyance facilities exist to safely transport the concentrated discharge, or
otherwise prove that no erosion, sedimentation, flooding or other harm will
result from the concentrated discharge.
      (1)   Applicant must provide an easement for proposed concentrated flow
across adjacent properties to a drainage way or public right-of-way.
      (2)   Such stormwater flows shall be subject to the requirements of this
chapter.
   (H)   Stormwater drainage systems shall be provided in order to permit
unimpeded flow along natural watercourses, except as modified by stormwater
management facilities or open channels consistent with this chapter.
   (I)   Where watercourses traverse a development site, drainage easements
(with a minimum width of 20 feet and include the 100-year water surface) shall
be provided conforming to the line of such watercourses. The terms of the
easement shall prohibit excavation, the placing of fill or structures, and any
alterations that may adversely affect the flow of stormwater within any portion
of the easement. Also, maintenance, including mowing of vegetation within the
easement may be required, except as approved by the appropriate governing
authority.
   (J)   When it can be shown that, due to topographic conditions, natural
drainageways on the site cannot adequately provide for drainage, open channels
may be constructed conforming substantially to the line and grade of such
natural drainageways. Work within the natural drainage ways shall be subject to
approval by PADEP under regulations at 25 Pa. Code Chapter 105 through the
joint permit application process, or, where deemed appropriate by PADEP,
through the general permit process.
   (K)   Any stormwater management facilities or any facilities that constitute
water obstructions (e.g., culverts, bridges, outfalls, stream enclosures and
the like) that are regulated by this chapter, that will be located in or
adjacent to waters of the state, including wetlands, shall be subject to
approval by PADEP under regulations at 25 Pa. Code Chapter 105 through the
joint permit application process, or, where deemed appropriate by PADEP, the
general permit process. When there is a question whether wetlands may be
involved, it is the responsibility of the applicant or his or her agent to show
that the land in question cannot be classified as wetlands; otherwise, approval
to work in the area must be obtained from PADEP.
   (L)   Should any stormwater management facility require a dam safety permit
under PADEP Chapter 105, the facility shall be designed in accordance with
Chapter 105 and meet the regulations of Chapter 105 concerning dam safety.
   (M)   Any stormwater management facilities regulated by this chapter that
will be located on or discharged onto state highway rights-of-way shall be
subject to approval by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation (PennDOT).
   (N)   Minimization of impervious surfaces and infiltration of runoff through
seepage beds, infiltration trenches and the like are encouraged, where soil
conditions and geology permit, to reduce the size or eliminate the need for
detention facilities.
   (O)   Infiltration BMPs should be dispersed throughout the site, made as
shallow as practicable and located to maximize use of natural on-site
infiltration features while still meeting the other requirements of this
chapter.
   (P)   The design of facilities over karst shall include an evaluation and
implementation of measures to minimize adverse effects.
   (Q)   Roof drains should not be connected to streets, sanitary or storm
sewers or roadside ditches in order to promote overland flow and infiltration/
percolation of stormwater where it is advantageous to do so. When it is more
advantageous to connect directly to streets or storm sewers, then the city may
permit it on a case by case basis.
   (R)   Applicants are encouraged to use low impact development practices to
reduce the costs of complying with the requirements of this chapter and the
state’s water quality requirements.
   (S)   When stormwater management facilities are proposed within 1,000 feet
of a downstream municipality, the developer shall notify the downstream
municipality and provide a copy of the SWM Plan, if requested, for review and
comment.
(Ord. 1508, passed 12-20-2010)
§ 152.021 EXEMPTIONS/MODIFICATIONS.
   (A)   Under no circumstance shall the applicant be exempt from implementing
such measures as necessary to:
      (1)   Meet state water quality standards and requirements;
      (2)   Protect health, safety and property; or
      (3)   Meet special requirements for high quality (HQ) and exceptional
value (EV) watersheds.
   (B)   The applicant must utilize the following BMPs to the maximum extent
practicable to receive consideration for the exemptions:
      (1)   Design around and limit disturbance of floodplains, wetlands,
natural slopes over 15%, existing native vegetation and other sensitive and
special value features;
      (2)   Maintain riparian and forested buffers;
      (3)   Limit grading and maintain non-erosive flow conditions in natural
flow paths;
      (4)   Maintain existing tree canopies near impervious areas;
      (5)   Minimize soil disturbance and reclaim disturbed areas with topsoil
and vegetation; and
      (6)   Direct runoff to pervious areas.
   (C)   The applicant’s proposed development/additional impervious area may
not adversely impact the following:
      (1)   Capacities of existing drainageways and storm sewer systems;
      (2)   Velocities and erosion;
      (3)   Quality of runoff if direct discharge is proposed;
      (4)   Existing known problem areas;
      (5)   Safe conveyance of the additional runoff; and/or
      (6)   Downstream property owners.
   (D)   An applicant proposing regulated activities, after demonstrating
compliance with divisions (A) through (C) above may be exempted from various
requirements of this chapter according to the following table.
New Impervious Area (Square Footage) 1,2 Applicant Must Provide
New Impervious Area (Square Footage) 1,2 Applicant Must Provide
0-1,000                                  -
1,000-2,500                              Documentation of impervious area 3
2,500-5,000                              Volume controls and small project SWM
                                         application
> 5,000                                  Rate controls, volume controls and SWM
                                         Site Plan
Notes:
(1)New impervious area since the date of adoption of this chapter.
(2)Gravel in existing condition shall be considered pervious and gravel in
proposed condition shall be considered impervious.
(3)The small project stormwater management application included in
Appendix E may be used for projects under 5,000 square feet of new impervious
surface and single-family home construction. The small project SWM application
allows documentation of new impervious surface, credits through disconnection
of impervious surfaces and free planting, and sizing of volume control BMPs
that may be required.
 
   (E)   Single-family residential activities are exempt from these
requirements provided the construction:
      (1)   Comply with §
152.020(G) and divisions (A) through (C) above;
      (2)   Have building setback 75 feet from downstream property lines;
      (3)   Driveways:
         (a)   Runoff must discharge onto pervious surface with a gravel strip
or other spreading device;
         (b)   No more than 1,000 square feet of paved surface may discharge to
any one point; and
         (c)   The length of flow on the pervious must exceed the length of the
paved surface flow.
      (4)   The municipality can require more information or require mitigation
of certain impacts through installation of stormwater management BMPs if there
is a threat to property, health or safety.
   (F)   An applicant proposing regulated activities, after demonstrating
compliance with divisions (A) through (C) above, may be exempted from various
requirements of this chapter if documentation can be provided that a downstream
human-made water body (i.e., reservoir, lake, human-made wetlands or other BMP)
has been designed or modified to address the potential stormwater flooding and
volume impacts of the proposed development.
   (G)   The purpose of this section is to ensure consistency of stormwater
management planning between local ordinances and NPDES permitting (when
required) and to ensure that the applicant has a single and clear set of
stormwater management standards to which the applicant is subject. The city may
accept alternative stormwater management controls under this section provided
that:
      (1)   The city, in consultation with the PADEP (or delegated authority),
determines that meeting the volume control requirements (see §
152.023) is not possible or places an undue hardship on the applicant.
      (2)   The alternative controls are documented to be acceptable to PADEP,
or delegated authority, for NPDES requirements pertaining to post construction
stormwater management requirements.
      (3)   The alternative controls are in compliance with all other sections
of this chapter, including but not limited to, §
152.020(D) and divisions (A) through (C) above.
   (H)   Agricultural activity is exempt from the rate control and SWM Site
Plan preparation requirements of this chapter, provided the activities are
performed according to the requirements of 25 Pa. Code Chapter 102.
   (I)   Forest management and timber operations are exempt from the rate and
volume control requirement and SWM Site Plan preparation requirement of this
chapter, provided the activities are performed according to the requirements of
25 Pa. Code Chapter 102. It should be noted that temporary roadways are not
exempt.
   (J)   The city may deny or revoke any exemption pursuant to this section at
any time for any project that the municipality believes may pose a threat to
public health, safety, property or the environment.
(Ord. 1508, passed 12-20-2010)
§ 152.022 WAIVERS.
   (A)   (1)   All waiver requests must meet the provisions of divisions (G)
below. Waivers shall not be issued from implementing such measures as necessary
to:
         (a)   Meet state water quality standards and requirements; and
         (b)   Protect health, safety and property.
      (2)   Municipalities will then consider waivers in accordance with §
152.020(D), except that waiver requests for relief from the design requirements
of §
152.050(B) and (C) will be processed by the city at its sole discretion.
   (B)   If an applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the governing body
of the city that any mandatory provision of this chapter is unreasonable or
causes unique or undue hardship as it applies to a proposed project, and that
an alternate design produces equal or better results within the context of
meeting the purpose and requirements of this chapter, the governing body of the
city, upon obtaining the comments and recommendations of the City Engineer, may
grant a waiver or relief so that substantial justice may be done and the public
interest is secured; provided, that such waiver will not have the effect of
nullifying the intent and purpose of this chapter.
   (C)   Applicants shall submit requests for waivers in writing and these
requests shall be included as part of a permit application submission. In the
request for waiver, the applicant shall state in full the facts of undue
hardship on which the request is based, identify the provision or provisions of
the chapter that are causing such undue hardship and state the minimum waiver
or relief that is necessary. The applicant shall state how the proposal in the
applicant’s waiver request provides equal or better results in meeting the
purpose and requirements of this chapter.
   (D)   The city shall keep a written record of all actions on waiver requests
in the project file.
   (E)   The city may charge applicants fees for waiver requests sufficient to
cover all costs incurred by the city to process the requests, including, but
not limited to, administrative costs and costs for the City Engineer to review
the waiver request.
   (F)   In granting waiver requests, the city may impose reasonable conditions
that will, in its sole judgment, resolve the undue hardship while meeting the
purpose and requirements of this chapter.
   (G)   The municipality may grant requests for waivers when the following
findings are made by the city, when each is determined solely by the city to be
applicable and relevant:
      (1)   The waiver shall result in an equal or better means of complying
with the purpose and requirements of this chapter;
      (2)   The waiver is the minimum necessary to provide relief from undue
hardship;
      (3)   The applicant is not requesting a waiver based solely on cost
considerations;
      (4)   Existing down gradient stormwater problems will not be exacerbated
by the proposed waiver request;
      (5)   Runoff is not being diverted to a different drainage area in a
manner that may cause hardship to others;
      (6)   Increased flooding or ponding on off-site properties or roadways
will not be caused by the waiver request;
      (7)   Potential icing conditions will not be caused by the waiver
request;
      (8)   Increased or unusual municipal maintenance expenses will not result
from the waiver request; and
      (9)   Operation and maintenance requirements are not reduced by the
waiver request.
(Ord. 1508, passed 12-20-2010)
§ 152.023 VOLUME CONTROLS.
   (A)   The low impact development practices provided in the BMP Manual and in
Appendix B of this chapter shall be utilized for all regulated activities to
the maximum extent practicable.
   (B)   Stormwater runoff volume controls shall be implemented using the
design storm method or the simplified method as defined below. For regulated
activity areas equal or less than one acre that do not require hydrologic
routing to design the stormwater facilities, this chapter establishes no
preference for either method; therefore, the applicant may select either method
on the basis of economic considerations, the intrinsic limitations on
applicability of the analytical procedures associated with each methodology,
and other factors.
      (1)   The design storm method (CG-I in the BMP Manual) is applicable to
any sized regulated activity. This method requires detailed modeling based on
site conditions.
         (a)   Do not increase the post-development total runoff volume for all
storms equal to or less than the two-year 24-hour storm;
         (b)   For hydrologic modeling purposes:
            1.   Existing non-forested pervious areas must be considered meadow
(good condition) for pre-development hydrologic calculations; and
            2.   Twenty percent of existing impervious area, when present
within the proposed project site, shall be considered meadow (good condition)
for pre-development hydrologic calculations for re-development.
      (2)   The simplified method (CG-2 in the BMP Manual) is independent of
site conditions and should be used if the design storm method is not followed.
This method is not applicable to regulated activities greater than one acre or
for projects that require detailed design of stormwater storage facilities. For
new impervious surfaces:
         (a)   Stormwater facilities shall capture at least the first two
inches of runoff from all new impervious surfaces;
         (b)   At least the first one inch of runoff from new impervious
surfaces shall be permanently removed from the runoff flow, (i.e., it shall not
be released into surface waters of the state). Removal options include reuse,
evaporation, transpiration and infiltration;
         (c)   Wherever possible, infiltration facilities should be designed to
accommodate infiltration of the entire permanently removed runoff; however, in
all cases at least the first half-inch of the permanently removed runoff should
be infiltrated; and
         (d)   Actual field infiltration tests at the location of the proposed
elevation of the stormwater BMPs are required. Infiltration test shall be
conducted in accordance with the BMP Manual. A minimum 48-hour notification of
the municipality shall be provided to allow witnessing of the testing.
      (3)   In cases where it is not possible or desirable to use infiltration-
based best management practices to partially fulfill the requirements in either
divisions (B)(1) or (B)(2) above, the following procedure shall be provided to
allow witnessing of the testing.
         (a)   At a minimum, the following documentation shall be provided to
justify the decision to reduce the use of infiltration BMPs:
            1.   Description of and justification for field infiltration/
permeability testing with respect to the type of test and test locations);
            2.   An interpretive narrative describing existing site soils and
their structure as these relate to the interaction between soils and water. In
addition to providing soil and soil profile descriptions, this narrative shall
identify depth to seasonal high water tables and depth to bedrock, and provide
a description of all subsurface elements (fragipans and other restrictive
layers, geology and the like) that influence the direction and rate of
subsurface water movement;
            3.   A qualitative assessment of the site’s contribution to annual
aquifer recharge shall be made, along with identification of any restrictions
or limitations associated with the use of engineered infiltration facilities;
and
            4.   The provided documentation must be signed and sealed by a
professional engineer or geologist.
         (b)   The following water quality pollutant load reductions will be
required for all disturbed areas within the proposed development.
 
Pollutant Load               Units  Required reduction (%)
Total nitrate (NO3)          Pounds 50
Total phosphorous (TP)       Pounds 85
Total suspended solids (TSS) Pounds 85
 
         (c)   The performance criteria for water quality best management
practices shall be determined from the state’s Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual most current version.
   (C)   The applicable worksheets from the BMP Manual must be used in
calculations to establish volume control.
(Ord. 1508, passed 12-20-2010)
§ 152.024 RATE CONTROLS.
   (A)   Lands contained within the county that have not had release rates
established under an approved Stormwater Management Act, 32 P.S. §§ 680.1 et
seq. Post-development discharge rates shall not exceed the pre-development
discharge rates for the one-year, two-year, ten-year, 25-year, 50-year and 100-
year storms.
   (B)   Lands contained within the county that have had release rates
established under an approved Stormwater Management Act, 32 P.S. §§ 680.1 et
seq. The post-development peak discharge rates shall be in accordance with the
approved release rate map for the following watersheds (see appendices for
release rate map): Lake Erie watersheds.
(Ord. 1508, passed 12-20-2010)
E&S STANDARDS
§ 152.035 EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION REQUIREMENTS DURING EARTH DISTURBANCE
ACTIVITIES.
   (A)   The applicant shall meet requirements as contained in 25 Pa. Code,
Chapters 92a and 102 as required and applicable as follows:
      (1)   The implementation and maintenance of erosion and sediment control
BMPs;
      (2)   Development of written plans;
      (3)   Submission of plans for approval;
      (4)   Obtaining erosion and sediment control and NPDES permits; and
      (5)   Maintaining plans and permits on site.
   (B)   Evidence of any necessary plan or permit approval for earth
disturbance activities from PADEP or the County Conservation District must be
provided to Wayne Township.
   (C)   A copy of the approved Erosion and Sediment Control Plan and any other
permit, as required by PADEP or the County Conservation District, shall be
available at the project site at all times if required under Chapter 102.
   (D)   Construction of temporary roadways (e.g., for utility construction,
timber harvesting and the like) shall comply with all applicable standards for
erosion and sedimentation control and stream crossing regulations under 25 Pa.
Code, Chapters 102 and 105. The Erosion and Sedimentation Control Plan shall be
submitted to the County Conservation District for approval and shall address
the following, as applicable:
      (1)   Design of the roadway system, including haul roads, skid roads,
landing areas, trails and storage and staging areas;
      (2)   Runoff control structures (e.g., diversions, culverts, detention
ponds and the like);
      (3)   Stream crossings for both perennial and intermittent streams;
      (4)   Access to public roadways, including design of rock construction
entrance for mud and debris control; and
      (5)   A remediation plan for restoring the disturbed area through re-
grading, topsoil placement, reseeding and other stabilization techniques, as
required.
   (E)   Additional erosion and sedimentation control design standards and
criteria that must be applied where infiltration BMPs are proposed include the
following.
      (1)   Areas proposed for infiltration BMPs shall be protected from
sedimentation and compaction during the construction phase, as to maintain
their maximum infiltration capacity.
      (2)   Infiltration BMPs shall be protected from receiving sediment-laden
runoff.
      (3)   The source of protection for infiltration BMPs shall be identified
(i.e., orange construction fence surrounding the perimeter of the BMP).
(Ord. 1508, passed 12-20-2010)
DESIGN CRITERIA
§ 152.050 DESIGN CRITERIA FOR STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND DRAINAGE FACILITIES.
   (A)   General design guidelines.
      (1)   Stormwater shall not be transferred from one watershed to another,
unless:
         (a)   The watersheds are sub-watersheds of a common watershed which
join together within the perimeter of the property;
         (b)   The effect of the transfer does not alter the peak rate
discharge onto adjacent lands; or
         (c)   Easements from the affected landowner(s) are provided.
      (2)   Consideration shall be given to the relationship of the subject
property to the drainage pattern of the watershed. A concentrated discharge of
stormwater to an adjacent property shall be within an existing watercourse or
confined in an easement or returned to a pre-development flow type condition.
      (3)   Innovative stormwater BMPs and recharge facilities are encouraged
(e.g., rooftop storage, drywells, cisterns, recreation area ponding, diversion
structures, porous pavements, holding tanks, infiltration systems, in-line
storage in storm sewers and grading patterns). They shall be located, designed
and constructed in accordance with the latest technical guidance published by
PADEP, provided they are accompanied by detailed engineering plans and
performance capabilities and supporting site specific soils, geology, runoff
and groundwater and infiltration rate data to verify proposed designs.
Additional guidance from other sources may be accepted at the discretion of the
city, a pre-application meeting is suggested.
      (4)   All existing and natural watercourses, channels, drainage systems
and areas of surface water concentration shall be maintained in their existing
condition unless an alteration is approved by the appropriate regulatory
agency.
      (5)   The design of all stormwater management facilities shall
incorporate sound engineering principles and practices. The municipality shall
reserve the right to disapprove any design that would result in the
continuation or exacerbation of a documented adverse hydrologic or hydraulic
condition within the watershed, as identified in the Plan.
      (6)   The design and construction of multiple use stormwater detention
facilities are strongly encouraged. In addition to stormwater management,
facilities should, where appropriate, allow for recreational uses including
ball fields, play areas, picnic grounds and the like. Consultation with the
city and prior approval are required before design. Provision for permanent wet
ponds with stormwater management capabilities may also be appropriate.
         (a)   Multiple use basins should be constructed so that potentially
dangerous conditions are not created.   
         (b)   Water quality basins or recharge basins that are designed for a
slow release of water or other extended detention ponds are not permitted for
recreational uses, unless the ponded areas are clearly separated and secure.
      (7)   Should any stormwater management facility require a dam safety
permit under PADEP Chapter 105, the facility shall be designed in accordance
with Chapter 105 and meet the regulations of Chapter 105 concerning dam safety.
   (B)   Stormwater management facility design considerations. All stormwater
management facilities shall meet the following design requirements.
      (1)   No outlet structure from a stormwater management facility, or
swale, shall discharge directly onto a municipal or state roadway without
approval from the city or PennDOT.
      (2)   The top, or toe, of any slope of stormwater management facilities
shall be located a minimum of ten feet from any property line.
      (3)   The minimum horizontal distance between any stormwater holding
facility and a building/structure shall be 25 feet. The lowest floor elevation
of any structure constructed immediately adjacent to a detention basin or other
stormwater facility shall be a minimum of two feet above the 100-year water
surface elevation.
      (4)   Stormwater management facility bottom, or surface of permanent
pool, elevations must be greater than adjacent floodplain elevations (FEMA or
HEC-RAS analysis). If no floodplain is defined, bottom elevations must be
greater than existing ground elevations 50 feet from top of stream bank in the
facility’s vicinity.
      (5)   Basin outflow culverts discharging into floodplains must account
for tailwater. Tailwater corresponding to the 100-year floodplain elevation
must be used for all design storms, or the applicant may elect to determine
flood elevations of the adjacent watercourse for each design storm. The
floodplain is assumed to be 50 feet from top of stream bank in areas where a
floodway is not designated or no other evidence is provided.
      (6)   The invert of all stormwater management facilities and underground
infiltration/storage facilities shall be located a minimum of two feet above
the seasonal high groundwater table. The invert of stormwater facilities may be
lowered if adequate sub-surface drainage is provided. Flows from underdrains
need not be accounted for in volume or rate control calculations.
      (7)   Whenever possible, the side slopes and basin shape shall be
amenable to the natural topography. Vertical side slopes and rectangular basins
shall be avoided whenever possible.
      (8)   Exterior slopes of compacted soil shall not exceed a three to one
ratio, and may be further reduced if the soil has unstable characteristics.
      (9)   Interior slopes of the basin shall not exceed three to one ratio.
      (10)   Unless specifically designed as a volume control facility, all
stormwater management facilities shall have a minimum slope of 2% extending
radially out from the principal outlet structure. Facilities designed as water
quality/infiltration BMPs may have a bottom slope of zero.
      (11)   Impervious low-flow channels are not permitted within stormwater
management facilities.
      (12)   Unless specifically designed as a volume control or water quality
facility, all stormwater management facilities must empty over a period of time
not less than 24 hours and not more than 72 hours from the end of the
facility’s inflow hydrograph. Infiltration tests performed at the facility
locations and proposed basin bottom depths, in accordance with the BMP Manual,
must support time-to-empty calculations if infiltration is a factor.
      (13)   Energy dissipators and/or level spreaders shall be installed at
points where pipes or drainageways discharge to or from basins. Discharges to
drainage swales shall be dissipated or piped to an acceptable point.
      (14)   (a)   Landscaping and planting specifications must be provided for
all stormwater management basins and be specific for each type of basin.
         (b)   Minimal maintenance, saturation tolerant vegetation must be
provided in basins designed as water quality/infiltration BMPs.
      (15)   A safety fence may be required, at the discretion of the
municipality, for any stormwater management facility. The fence shall be a
minimum of four feet high, and of a material acceptable to the municipality. A
gate with a minimum opening of ten feet shall be provided for maintenance
access.
      (16)   The primary outlet structure shall be designed to pass all design
storms, up to and including the 100-year event, without discharging through the
emergency spillway. All principal outlet structures shall:
         (a)   Be constructed of reinforced concrete or an alternative material
approved by the city. When approved for use, all metal risers shall:
            1.   Be suitably coated to prevent corrosion;
            2.   Have a concrete base attached with a water-tight connection.
The base shall be sufficient weight to prevent flotation of the riser;
            3.   Provide a trash rack or similar appurtenance to prevent debris
from entering the riser; and
            4.   Provide an anti-vortex device, consisting of a thin vertical
plate normal to the basin berm.
         (b)   Provide trash racks to prevent clogging of primary outflow
structure stages for all orifices; and
         (c)   Provide outlet aprons and shall extend to the toe of the basin
slope at a minimum.
      (17)   Any stormwater management facility designed to store runoff shall
provide an emergency spillway designed to convey the 100-year post-development
peak rate flow with a blocked primary outlet structure. The emergency spillway
shall be designed per the following requirements:
         (a)   The top of embankment elevation shall provide a minimum one foot
of freeboard above the maximum water surface elevation. This is to be
calculated when the spillway functions for the 100-year post-development
inflow, with a blocked outlet structure;
         (b)   Avoid locating on fill areas, whenever possible;
         (c)   The spillway shall be armored to prevent erosion during the 100-
year post-development flow, with a blocked primary outlet structure. Synthetic
liners or riprap may be used, and calculations sufficient to support proposed
armor must be provided. An earthen plug must be used to accurately control the
spillway invert if riprap is the proposed armoring material. Emergency spillway
armor must extend up the sides of the spillway, and continue at full width to a
minimum of ten feet past the toe of slope;
         (d)   The city may require the use of additional protection when
slopes exceed a four to one ratio and spillway velocities might exceed NRCS
standards for the particular soils involved; and
         (e)   Any underground stormwater management facility, pipe storage
systems, must have a method to bypass flows higher than the required design, up
to a 100-year post-development inflow, without structural failure or causing
downstream harm or safety risks.
      (18)   Design of stormwater management facilities having three feet or
more of water depth, measured vertically from the lowest elevation in the
facility to the crest of the emergency spillway, shall meet the following
additional requirements.
         (a)   The maximum water depth within any stormwater management
facility shall be no greater than eight feet when functioning through the
primary outlet structure.
         (b)   The top of embankment width shall be:
            1.   For embankments up to four feet, width shall be at least six
feet;
            2.   For embankments between four and six feet, width shall be at
least eight feet; and
            3.   For embankments over six feet, width shall be at least ten
feet.
         (c)   A ten-foot wide access to the basin bottom must be provided with
a maximum longitudinal slope of 10%.
         (d)   Berms shall be constructed using soils that conform to the
unified soil classification of CH, MH, CL or ML. Soils used shall be tested to
determine its density analysis per ASTM 698. The embankments will be
constructed in a maximum of six-inch lifts. The lifts will each be compacted to
a density at least 98% of it’s the maximum dry density. Each layer of compacted
fill shall be tested to determine its density per ASTM 2922 or ASTM 3017. One
test per 50 cubic yards of material placed, at least one per layer, shall be
performed by an independent testing agency.
         (e)   A cutoff and key trench of impervious material shall be provided
under all embankments four feet or greater in height. The cutoff trench shall
run the entire length of the embankment and tie into undisturbed natural
ground.
         (f)   Anti-seep collars, or a PADEP approved alternative, must be
provided on all outflow culverts in accordance with the methodology contained
in the latest edition of the PADEP E&S Manual. An increase in seepage length of
15% must be used in accordance with the requirements for permanent anti-seep
collars.
      (19)   Construction of stormwater management facilities:
         (a)   Basins used for rate control only shall be installed prior to or
concurrent with any earthmoving or land disturbances which they will serve. The
phasing of their construction shall be noted in the narrative and on the plan.
         (b)   Basins that include water quality or recharge components shall
have those components installed in such a manner as to not disturb or diminish
their effectiveness.
         (c)   Compaction test reports shall be kept on file at the site and be
subject to review at all times with copies being forwarded to the city upon
request.
         (d)   Temporary and permanent grasses or stabilization measures shall
be established on the sides and base of all earthen basins within 15 days of
construction.
      (20)   Exceptions to these requirements may be made at the discretion of
the municipality for BMPs that retain or detain water, but are of a much
smaller scale than traditional stormwater management facilities.
   (C)   Stormwater carrying facilities.
      (1)   All storm sewer pipes, grass waterways, open channels, swales and
other stormwater carrying facilities that service drainage areas within the
site must be able to convey post-development runoff from the ten-year design
storm.
      (2)   Stormwater management facilities that convey off-site water through
the site shall be designed to convey the 25-year storm event, or larger events,
as determined by the City Engineer.
      (3)   All developments shall include provisions that allow for the
overland conveyance and flow of the post-development 100-year storm event
without damage to public or private property.
      (4)   Storm sewers:
         (a)   Storm sewers must be able to convey post-development runoff
without surcharging inlets for the ten-year storm event.
         (b)   When connecting to an existing storm sewer system, the applicant
must demonstrate that the proposed system will not exacerbate any existing
stormwater problems and that adequate downstream capacity exists.
         (c)   Inlets, manholes, pipes and culverts shall be constructed in
accordance with the specifications set forth in PennDOT’s Publication 408, and
as detailed in the PennDOT’s Publication 72M - Standards for Roadway
Construction (RC) or other detail approved by the municipality. All material
and construction details, inlets, manholes, pipe trenches and the like, must be
shown on the SWM Site Plan, and a note added that all construction must be in
accordance with PennDOT’s Publication 408 and PennDOT’s Publication 72M, latest
edition. A note shall be added to the plan stating that all frames, concrete
top units and grade adjustment rings shall be set in a bed of full mortar
according to Publication 408.
         (d)   A minimum pipe size of 18 inches in diameter shall be used in
all roadway systems, public or private, proposed for construction in the
municipality. Pipes shall be designed to provide a minimum velocity of two and
one-half feet per second when flowing full, but in all cases, the slope shall
be no less then 0.5%. Arch pipe of equivalent cross-sectional area may be
substituted in lieu of circular pipe where cover or utility conflict conditions
exist.
         (e)   All storm sewer pipes shall be laid to a minimum depth of one
foot from subgrade to the crown of pipe.
         (f)   In curbed roadway sections, the maximum encroachment of water on
the roadway pavement shall not exceed half of a through travel lane or one inch
less than the depth of curb during the ten year design storm of five-minute
duration. Gutter depth shall be verified by inlet capture/capacity calculations
that account for road slope and opening area.
            1.   Inlets shall be placed at a maximum of 400 feet apart.
            2.   Inlets shall be placed so drainage cannot cross intersections
or street centerlines.
         (g)   Standard type “C” inlets with eight-inch hoods shall be used
along curbed roadway networks. Type “C” inlets with ten-inch hoods that provide
a two-inch sump condition may be used with approval of the city when roadway
longitudinal slopes are 1.0% or less.
         (h)   For inlets containing a change in pipe size, the elevation for
the crown of the pipes shall be the same or the smaller pipe’s crown shall be
at a higher elevation.
         (i)   All inlets shall provide a minimum two-inch drop between the
lowest inlet pipe invert elevation and the outlet pipe invert elevation.
         (j)   On curbed sections, a double inlet shall be placed at the low
point of sag vertical curves, or an inlet shall be placed on each side of the
low point at a distance not to exceed 100 feet, or at an elevation not to
exceed 0.2 feet above the low point.
         (k)   At all roadway low points, swales and easements shall be
provided behind the curb or swale and through adjacent properties to channelize
and direct any overflow of stormwater runoff away from dwellings and
structures.
         (l)   All inlets in paved areas shall have heavy duty bicycle safe
grating. A note to this effect shall be added to the SWM Site Plan or inlet
details therein.
         (m)   Inlets must be sized to accept the specified pipe sizes without
knocking out any of the inlet corners. All pipes entering or exiting inlets
shall be cut flush with the inside wall of the inlet. A note to this effect
shall be added to the SWM Site Plan or inlet details therein.
         (n)   Inlets shall have weep holes covered with geotextile fabric
placed at appropriate elevations to completely drain the sub grade prior to
placing the base and surface course on roadways.
         (o)   Inlets, junction boxes or manholes greater then five feet in
depth shall be equipped with ladder rungs and shall be detailed on the SWM Site
Plan.
         (p)   Inlets shall not have a sump condition in the bottom unless
designed as a water quality BMP or specifically approved by the municipality.
Pipe shall be flush with the bottom of the box or concrete channels shall be
poured.
         (q)   Accessible drainage structures shall be located on continuous
storm sewer system at all vertical dislocations, at all locations where a
transition in storm sewer pipe sizing is required, at all vertical and
horizontal angle points exceeding five degrees, and at all points of
convergence of two or more storm sewer pipes.
         (r)   All storm drainage piping shall be provided with either
reinforced concrete headwalls or end sections of compatible material as the
pipe involved at its entrance and discharge.
         (s)   1.   Outlet protection and energy dissipaters shall be provided
at all surface discharge points in order to minimize erosion consistent with
the E&S Manual.
            2.   Flow velocities and volumes from any storm sewer shall not
result in a degradation of the receiving channel.
         (t)   Stormwater roof drains and pipes shall not be connected to storm
sewers or discharge onto impervious areas without approval by the city.
      (5)   Swale conveyance facilities:
         (a)   Swales must be able to convey post-development runoff from a
ten-year design storm with six inches of freeboard to top of the swale.
         (b)   Swales shall have side slopes no steeper than three to one
ratio.
         (c)   All swales shall be designed, labeled on the SWM Site Plan and
details provided to adequately construct and maintain the design dimension of
the swales.
         (d)   Swales shall be designed for stability using velocity or shear
criteria. Velocity criteria may be used for channels with less than 10% slope.
Shear criteria may be used for all swales. Documentation must be provided to
support velocity and/or shear limitations used in calculations.
         (e)   Where swale bends occur, the computed velocities or shear
stresses shall be multiplied by the following factor for the purpose of
designing swale erosion protection:
            1.   One and three-fourths: when swale bend is 30 to 60 degrees;
            2.   Two: when swale bend is 60 to 90 degrees; and
            3.   Two and one-half: when swale bend is 90 degrees or greater.
         (f)   Manning’s “n” values used for swale capacity design must reflect
the permanent condition.
(Ord. 1508, passed 12-20-2010)
§ 152.051 CALCULATION METHODOLOGY.
   (A)   Calculations. All calculations shall be consistent with the guidelines
set forth in the BMP Manual, as amended herein.
   (B)   Methodology. Stormwater runoff from all development sites shall be
calculated using either the rational method or the NRCS rainfall-runoff
methodology. Other methods shall be selected by the design professional based
on the individual limitations and suitability of each method for a particular
site and approved by the city.
   (C)   Rainfall values. NRCS rainfall-runoff method. The soil conservation
service type II, 24-hour rainfall distribution shall be used in conjunction
with rainfall depths from NOAA Atlas 14 or be consistent with the following
table.
 
Return Interval (Year) 24-Hour Rainfall Total (Inches)
1                      2.13
2                      2.56
10                     3.71
25                     4.46
50                     5.09
100                    5.76
 
   (D)   Runoff volume.
      (1)   Rational method. Not to be used to calculate runoff volume.
      (2)   NRCS rainfall-runoff method. This method shall be used to estimate
the change in volume due to regulated activities. Combining curve numbers for
land areas proposed for development with Curve Numbers for areas unaffected by
the proposed development into a single weighted curve number is not acceptable.
   (E)   Peak flow rates.
      (1)   Rational method. This method may be used for design of conveyance
facilities only. Extreme caution should be used by the design professional if
the watershed has more then one main drainage channel, if the watershed is
divided so that hydrologic properties are significantly different in one versus
the other, if the time of concentration exceeds 60 minutes or if stormwater
runoff volume is an important factor. The combination of rational method
hydrographs based on timing shall be prohibited.
      (2)   NRCS rainfall-runoff method.
         (a)   This method is recommended for design of stormwater management
facilities and where stormwater runoff volume must be taken into consideration.
The following provides guidance on the model applicability:
            1.   NRCS’s TR-20 or HEC-HMS: no size limitations; and
            2.   Other models as pre-approved by the municipality.
         (b)   The NRCS antecedent runoff condition II (ARC II, previously AMC
II) must be used for all simulations. The use of continuous simulation models
that vary the ARC are not permitted for stormwater management purposes.
      (3)   Rate comparison. For comparison of peak flow rates, flows shall be
rounded to a tenth of a cubic foot per second (cfs).
   (F)   Runoff coefficients.
      (1)   Rational method. Use Table C-1 (
Appendix C).
      (2)   NRCS rainfall-runoff method. Use table C-2 (
Appendix C). Curve numbers (CN) should be rounded to tenths for use in
hydrologic models as they are a design tool with statistical variability. For
large sites, CNs should realistically be rounded to the nearest whole number.
      (3)   Pre-development peak flow rate.
         (a)   For the purposes of pre-development peak flow rate and volume
determination, existing non-forested pervious areas conditions shall be
considered as meadow (good condition).
         (b)   For the purposes of pre-development peak flow rate and volume
determination, 20% of existing impervious area, when present, shall be
considered meadow (good condition).
   (G)   Design storm.
      (1)   All stormwater management facilities shall be verified by routing
the proposed one-year, two-year, ten-year, 25-year, 50-year and 100-year
hydrographs through the facility using the storage indication method or
modified puls method. The design storm hydrograph shall be computed using a
calculation method that produces a full hydrograph.
      (2)   The stormwater management and drainage system shall be designed to
safely convey the post development 100-year storm event to stormwater detention
facilities, for the purpose of meeting peak rate control.
   (H)   Time of concentration.
      (1)   The time of concentration is to represent the average condition
that best reflects the hydrologic response of the area. The following time of
concentration (Tc) computational methodologies shall be used unless another
method is pre-approved by the city:
         (a)   Pre-development - NRCS’s lag equation:
            Time of concentration = Tc = [(Tlag/.6) * 60] (minutes)
                     Tlag = L0.8 (S+1)0.7
                      1900Y
            Where:
            Ttag   =   Lag time (hours)
            L   =   Hydraulic length of watershed (feet)
            Y   =   Average overland slope of watershed (percent)
            S   =   Maximum retention in watershed as defined by: S = [(1000/
CN) - 10]
            CN   =   NRCS curve number for watershed
         (b)   Post-development; commercial, industrial or other areas with
large impervious areas (>20% impervious area) - NRCS segmental method. The
length of sheet flow shall be limited to 100 feet. Tc for channel and pipe flow
shall be computed using Manning’s equation.
         (c)   Post-development; residential, cluster or other low impact
designs less than or equal to 20% impervious area - NRCS lag equation or NRCS
segmental method.
      (2)   Additionally, the following provisions shall apply to calculations
for time of concentration:
         (a)   The post-development Tc shall never be greater than the pre-
development Tc for any watershed or sub-watershed. This includes when the
designer has specifically used swales to reduce flow velocities. In the event
that the designer believes that the post-development Tc is greater, it will
still be set by default equal to the pre-development Tc for modeling purposes.
         (b)   The minimum Tc for any watershed shall be five minutes.
         (c)   The designer must provide computations for all pre-development
Tc paths. A five minute Tc can not be assumed for pre-development.
         (d)   Undetained fringe areas (areas that are not tributary to a
stormwater facility but where a reasonable effort has been made to convey
runoff from all new impervious coverage to best management practices) may be
assumed to represent the pre-development conditions for purpose of Tc
calculation.
   (I)   Drainage. Drainage areas tributary to sinkholes or closed depressions
in areas underlain by limestone or carbonate geologic features shall be
excluded from the modeled point of analysis defining pre-development flows. If
left undisturbed during construction activities, areas draining to closed
depressions may also be used to reduce peak runoff rates in the post-
development analysis. New, additional contributing runoff should not be
directed to existing sinkholes or closed depressions.
   (J)   Uniform flow. Where uniform flow is anticipated, the Manning’s
equation shall be used for hydraulic computations and to determine the capacity
of open channels, pipes and storm sewers. Manning’s “n” values shall be
obtained from PennDOT’s Drainage Manual, Publication 584. Inlet control shall
be checked at all inlet boxes to ensure the headwater depth during the ten-year
design event is contained below the top of grate for each inlet box.
   (K)   Existing runoff rates. The municipality may require that computed
existing runoff rates be reconciled with field observations, conditions and
site history, if the designer can substantiate, through actual physical
calibration, that more appropriate runoff and time of concentration values
should be utilized at a particular site, then appropriate variations may be
made upon review and recommendation of the municipality.
(Ord. 1508, passed 12-20-2010)
SWM SITE PLAN AND REPORT REQUIREMENTS
§ 152.065 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   For any of the activities regulated by this chapter and not eligible for the
exemptions provided in §
152.021, the final approval of subdivision and/or land development plans, the
issuance of any building or occupancy permit or the commencement of any land
disturbance activity, may not proceed until the applicant has received written
approval of a SWM Site Plan from the municipality.
(Ord. 1508, passed 12-20-2010)
§ 152.066 SWM SITE PLAN AND REPORT CONTENTS.
   (A)   (1)   The SWM Site Plan and SWM Site Report shall consist of all
applicable calculations, maps and plans. All SWM Site Plan materials shall be
submitted to the municipality in a format that is clear, concise, legible, neat
and well organized; otherwise, the SWM Site Plan shall be rejected.
      (2)   Appropriate sections from the municipal subdivision and land
development ordinance, and other applicable local ordinances, shall be followed
in preparing the SWM Site Plan.
   (B)   SWM Site Plan shall include, but not be limited to:
      (1)   Plans shall be of one size and in a form that meets the
requirements for recording in the office of the County Recorder of Deeds:
         (a)   Plans for tracts of less than 20 acres shall be drawn at a scale
of one inch equals no more than 50 feet;
         (b)   Plans for tracts of 20 acres or more, plans shall be drawn at a
scale of one inch equals no more than 100 feet; and
         (c)   All lettering shall be drawn to a size to be legible if the
plans are reduced to half size.
      (2)   The name of the development; name and location address of the
property site; name, address and telephone number of the applicant/owner of the
property; and name, address, telephone number, email address and engineering
seal of the individual preparing the SWM Site Plan:
      (3)   The date of submission and dates of all revisions;
      (4)   A graphical and written scale on all drawings and maps;
      (5)   A north arrow on all drawings and maps;
      (6)   A location map at a minimum scale of one inch equals 1,000 feet and
illustrates the project relative to highways, municipalities or other
identifiable landmarks;
      (7)   Metes and bounds description of the entire tract perimeter;
      (8)   Existing and final contours at intervals:
         (a)   Slopes less than 5%: no greater than one foot;
         (b)   Slopes between 5% and 15%: no greater than two feet; and
         (c)   Steep slopes, greater than 15%: five-foot contour intervals may
be used.
      (9)   Perimeters of existing water bodies within the project area
including stream banks, lakes, ponds, springs, field delineated wetlands or
other bodies of water, sinkholes, flood hazard boundaries (FEMA delineated
floodplains and floodways), areas of natural vegetation to be preserved, the
total extent of the upstream area draining through the site and overland
drainage paths. In addition, any areas necessary to determine downstream
impacts, where required for proposed stormwater management facilities must be
shown;
      (10)   The location of all existing and proposed utilities, on-lot
wastewater facilities, water supply wells, sanitary sewers and water lines on
and within 50 feet of property lines, including inlets, manholes, valves,
meters, poles, chambers, junction boxes and other utility system components;
      (11)   A key map showing all existing human-made features beyond the
property boundary that may be affected by the project;
      (12)   Soil names and boundaries with identification of the hydraulic
soil group classification including rock outcroppings;
      (13)   Proposed impervious surfaces, structures, roads, paved areas and
buildings, including plans and profiles of roads and paved areas and floor
elevations of buildings;
      (14)   Existing and proposed land use(s);
      (15)   Horizontal alignment, vertical profiles and cross-sections of all
open channels, pipes, swales and other BMPs;
      (16)   The location and clear identification of the nature of permanent
stormwater BMPs;
      (17)   The location of all erosion and sedimentation control facilities,
shown separately from the SWM Site Plan (typically an E&S Plan);
      (18)   A minimum 20-foot wide access easement around all stormwater
management facilities that would provide ingress to and egress from a public
right-of-way. In lieu of providing an easement to the public right-of-way, a
note may be added to the plan granting the municipality or their designees
access to all easements via the nearest public right-of-way;
      (19)   Construction details for all drainage and stormwater BMPs;
      (20)   Construction sequence;
      (21)   Identification of short-term and long-term ownership, operations
and maintenance responsibilities; and
      (22)   Notes and statements:
         (a)   A statement, signed by the landowner, acknowledging that the
stormwater BMPs are fixtures that cannot be altered or removed without prior
approval by the municipality;
         (b)   A statement referencing the operation and maintenance (O&M)
agreement and stating that the O&M agreement is part of the SWM Site Plan;
         (c)   A note indicating that record drawings will be provided for all
stormwater facilities prior to occupancy, or the release of the surety bond;
         (d)   The following signature block for the registered professional
preparing the Stormwater Management Plan:
   “I,                                , hereby certify that the Stormwater
Management Plan meets all design standards and criteria of the City of Corry’s
Stormwater Management Ordinance.”
         (e)   The following signature block for the municipality reviewing the
Stormwater Management Plan:
   “I,                             , have reviewed this Stormwater Management
Plan in accordance with the Design Standards and Criteria of the City of
Corry’s Stormwater Management Ordinance.”
   (C)   SWM Site Report shall include (but not limited to):
      (1)   General data including:
         (a)   Project name;
         (b)   Project location, address of the property site;
         (c)   Name, address and telephone number of the applicant/owner of the
property;
         (d)   Name, address, telephone number, email address and engineering
seal of the individual preparing the SWM Site Report; and
         (e)   Date of submission and revisions.
      (2)   Project description narrative that clearly discusses the project
and provides the following information, where applicable:
         (a)   Narrative.
            1.   Statement of the regulated activity describing what is being
proposed. Overall stormwater management concept with description of permanent
stormwater management techniques, including construction specifications and
materials to be used for stormwater management facilities;
            2.   Expected project schedule;
            3.   Location map showing the project site and its location
relative to release rate districts;
            4.   Detailed description of the existing site conditions,
including a site evaluation completed for projects proposed in areas of
carbonate geology or karst topography, and other environmentally sensitive
areas such as brownfields;
            5.   Total site area, pre and post, which must be equal or have an
explanation as to why it is not;
            6.   Total site impervious area;
            7.   Total off-site areas;
            8.   Number and description of stormwater management facilities;
            9.   Type of development;
            10.   Pre-development land use;
            11.   Whether site is a water quality sensitive (WQS) development;
            12.   Whether site is in a defined sensitive area;
            13.   Types of water quality and recharge systems used, if
applicable;
            14.   Complete hydrologic, hydraulic and structural computations
for all stormwater management facilities;
            15.   A written maintenance plan for all stormwater features
including detention facilities and other stormwater management elements;
            16.   Identification of ownership and maintenance responsibility
for all permanent stormwater management facilities; and
            17.   Other pertinent information, as required
         (b)   Summary tables.
            1.   Pre-development hydrologic soil group (HSG) assumptions, curve
numbers (CN), computation of average slope, hydraulic length, computed time of
concentration;
            2.   Existing conditions runoff volume and peak rate of runoff;
            3.   Post-development runoff volume and peak rate of runoff;
            4.   Undetained areas, areas to ponds;
            5.   Land use for each sub-area;
            6.   Hydrologic soil group (HSG) assumptions, curve numbers (CN);
            7.   Time of concentration computed for each sub-area;
            8.   Post-development peak rate of runoff routed to ponds and out;
            9.   Pond maximum return period design data, including maximum
water surface elevation, berm elevation and emergency spillway elevation; and
            10.   Water quality depth and volume requirements.
         (c)   Calculations.
            1.   Complete hydrologic, hydraulic and structural computations,
calculations, assumptions and criteria for the design of all stormwater BMPs;
            2.   Details of the berm embankment and outlet structure indicating
the embankment top elevation, embankment side slopes, top width of embankment,
emergency spillway elevation, perforated riser dimensions, pipe barrel
dimensions and dimensions and spacing of antiseep collars;
            3.   Design computations for the control structures, (pipe barrel
and riser, and the like);
            4.   A plot or table of the stage-storage (volume vs. elevation)
and all supporting computations; and
            5.   Routing computations.
         (d)   Drawings.
            1.   Drainage area maps for all watersheds and inlets depicting the
time of concentration path for both existing conditions and post-developed
condition;
            2.   All stormwater management facilities must be located on a plan
and described in detail including easements and buffers boundaries;
            3.   Reports that do not clearly indicate the above information may
be rejected for review by the municipality and will be returned to the
applicant;
            4.   Description of, justification, and actual field results for
infiltration testing with respect to the type of test and test location for the
design of infiltration BMPs;
            5.   The effect of the project, in terms of runoff volumes, water
quality and peak flows, on surrounding properties and aquatic features and on
any existing municipal stormwater collection system that may receive runoff
from the project site;
            6.   Description of the proposed changes to the land surface and
vegetative cover including the type and amount of impervious area to be added;
and
            7.   Identification of short-term and long-term ownership,
operation and maintenance responsibilities as well as schedules and costs for
inspection and maintenance activities for each permanent stormwater or drainage
BMP, including provisions for permanent access or maintenance easements.
   (D)   Supplemental information to be provided prior to recording of the SWM
Site Plan, as applicable:
      (1)   Signed and executed operations and maintenance agreement (
Appendix A);
      (2)   Signed and executed easements, as required for all on-site and off-
site work;
      (3)   An Erosion and Sedimentation Control Plan and approval letter from
the County Conservation District;
      (4)   A NPDES permit;
      (5)   Permits from PADEP and ACOE;
      (6)   Geologic assessment;
      (7)   Soils investigation report, including boring logs, compaction
requirements and recommendations for construction of detention basins; and
      (8)   A highway occupancy permit from PennDOT when utilization of a
PennDOT storm drainage system is proposed or when proposed facilities would
encroach onto a PennDOT right-of-way.
(Ord. 1508, passed 12-20-2010)
§ 152.067 SWM SITE PLAN AND REPORT SUBMISSION.
   (A)   The applicant shall submit the SWM Site Plan and Report for the
regulated activity.
   (B)   Five copies of the SWM Site Plan and Report shall be submitted and be
distributed as follows:
      (1)   Two copies to the city accompanied by the requisite executed review
fee reimbursement agreement, as specified in this chapter; and
      (2)   One copy to the City Engineer.
   (C)   Additional copies shall be submitted as requested by the municipality
or PADEP.
(Ord. 1508, passed 12-20-2010)
§ 152.068 SWM SITE PLAN AND REPORT REVIEW.
   (A)   The city shall require receipt of a complete SWM Site Plan and Report
as specified in this chapter. The city shall review the SWM Site Plan and
Report for consistency with the purposes, requirements and intent of this
chapter.
   (B)   The city shall not approve any SWM Site Plan and Report that is
deficient in meeting the requirements of this chapter. At its sole discretion,
and in accordance with this subchapter, when a SWM Site Plan and Report is
found to be deficient, the city may disapprove the submission and require a
resubmission, or in the case of minor deficiencies, the city may accept
submission of modifications.
   (C)   The city shall notify the applicant in writing within 45 calendar days
whether the SWM Site Plan and Report is approved or disapproved if the SWM Site
Plan and Report is not part of a Subdivision or Land Development Plan. If the
SWM Site Plan and Report involves a Subdivision or Land Development Plan, the
timing shall follow the Subdivision and Land Development process according to
the Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S. §§ 10101 et seq.
   (D)   The city and its agents shall not issue a zoning or building permit
for any regulated activity if the SWM Site Plan and Report has been found to be
inconsistent with this chapter, as determined by the city. All required permits
from PADEP must be obtained prior to issuance of a zoning or building permit.
(Ord. 1508, passed 12-20-2010)
§ 152.069 MODIFICATION OF PLANS.
   A modification to a submitted SWM Site Plan and Report for a development
site that involves a change in stormwater management facilities or techniques,
or that involves the relocation or re-design of stormwater management
facilities, or that is necessary because soil or other conditions are not as
stated on the SWM Site Plan as determined by the city, shall require a
resubmission of the modified SWM Site Plan in accordance with this chapter.
(Ord. 1508, passed 12-20-2010)
§ 152.070 RESUBMISSION OF DISAPPROVED SWM SITE PLAN AND REPORT.
   A disapproved SWM Site Plan and Report may be resubmitted with the revisions
addressing the municipality’s concerns, documented in writing, to the
municipality in accordance with this chapter. The applicable municipal review
fee must accompany a resubmission of a disapproved SWM Site Plan and Report.
(Ord. 1508, passed 12-20-2010)
§ 152.071 AUTHORIZATION TO CONSTRUCT AND TERM OF VALIDITY.
   The city’s approval of a SWM Site Plan and Report authorizes the regulated
activities contained in the SWM Site Plan for a maximum term of validity of
five years following the date of approval. The city may specify a term of
validity shorter than five years in the approval for any specific SWM Site
Plan. Terms of validity shall commence on the date the city signs the approval
for a SWM Site Plan. If stormwater management facilities included in the
approved SWM Site Plan have not been constructed, or if an record drawing of
these facilities has not been approved within this time, then the city may
consider the SWM Site Plan disapproved and may revoke any and all permits or
approvals.
(Ord. 1508, passed 12-20-2010)
§ 152.072 RECORD DRAWINGS, COMPLETION CERTIFICATE AND FINAL INSPECTION.
   (A)   The applicant shall be responsible for providing record drawings of
all stormwater BMPs included in the approved SWM Site Plan. The record drawing
and an explanation of any discrepancies with the approved SWM Site Plan shall
be submitted to the city as a prerequisite for the release of the guarantee or
issuance of an occupancy permit.
   (B)   The record drawing shall include a certification of completion signed
by a Qualified Professional verifying that all permanent stormwater BMPs have
been constructed according to the approved SWM Site Plan and Report.
      (1)   Drawings shall show all approved revisions and elevations and
inverts to all manholes, inlets, pipes and stormwater control facilities.
      (2)   Submission shall include a comparison of the constructed stage-
storage (volume vs. elevation) of all above-ground and below-ground stormwater
storage facilities to the approved design.
   (C)   After receipt of the Record Drawing and certification of completion by
the city, the city may conduct a final inspection.
(Ord. 1508, passed 12-20-2010)
EASEMENTS
§ 152.085 EASEMENTS.
   (A)   Easements shall be established to accommodate the existence of
drainageways.
   (B)   Where a tract is traversed by a watercourse, drainage-way, channel or
stream, there shall be provided an easement paralleling the line of such
watercourse, drainage-way, channel or stream with a width adequate to preserve
the unimpeded flow of natural drainage in the 100-year floodplain.
   (C)   Easements shall be established for all on-site stormwater management
or drainage facilities, including, but not limited to, detention facilitates
(above or below ground), infiltration facilities, all stormwater BMPs, drainage
swales and drainage facilities (inlets, manholes, pipes and the like).
   (D)   Easements are required for all areas used for off-site stormwater
control.
   (E)   All easements shall be a minimum of 20 feet wide and shall encompass
the 100-year surface elevation of the proposed stormwater facility.
   (F)   Easements shall provide ingress to, and egress from, a public right-
of-way. In lieu of providing an easement to the public right-of-way, a note may
be added to the plan granting the city or their designees access to all
easements via the nearest public right-of-way able for vehicle ingress and
egress on grades of less than 10% for carrying out inspection or maintenance
activities.
   (G)   Where possible, easements shall be centered on side and/or rear lot
lines.
   (H)   Nothing shall be planted or placed within the easement which would
adversely affect the function of the easement, or conflict with any conditions
associated with such easement.
   (I)   All easement agreements shall be recorded with a reference to the
recorded easement indicated on the Site Plan. The format and content of the
easement agreement shall be reviewed and approved by the City Engineer and the
City Solicitor.
(Ord. 1508, passed 12-20-2010)
MAINTENANCE RESPONSIBILITIES
§ 152.100 FINANCIAL GUARANTEE.
   (A)   The applicant shall provide a financial guarantee to the municipality
for the timely installation and proper construction of all stormwater
management controls as required by the approved SWM Site Plan and this chapter,
equal to 110% of the full construction cost of the required controls in
accordance with the Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S. §§ 10101 et seq.
   (B)   At the completion of the project and as a prerequisite for the release
of the financial guarantee, the applicant shall:
      (1)   Provide a certification of completion from an engineer, architect,
surveyor or other qualified person, verifying that all permanent facilities
have been constructed according to the SWM Site Plan and Report and approved
revisions thereto;
      (2)   Provide a set of record drawings; and
      (3)   Request a final inspection from the city to certify compliance with
this chapter, after receipt of the certification of completion and record
drawings by the city.
(Ord. 1508, passed 12-20-2010)
§ 152.101 MAINTENANCE RESPONSIBILITIES.
   (A)   The SWM Site Plan and Report for the project site shall describe the
future operation and maintenance responsibilities. The operation and
maintenance description shall outline required routine maintenance actions and
schedules necessary to ensure proper operation of the stormwater control
facilities.
   (B)   The SWM Site Plan and Report for the project site shall establish
responsibilities for the continuing operating and maintenance of all proposed
stormwater control facilities, consistent with the following principles.
      (1)   If a development consists of structures or lots that are to be
separately owned and in which streets, sewers and other public improvements are
to be dedicated to the city, stormwater control facilities/BMPs may also be
dedicated to and maintained by the city.
      (2)   If a development site is to be maintained in a single ownership or
if sewers and other public improvements are to be privately owned and
maintained, then the ownership and maintenance of stormwater control
facilities/BMPs shall be the responsibility of the owner or private management
entity.
      (3)   Facilities, areas or structures used as stormwater BMPs shall be
enumerated as permanent real estate appurtenances and recorded as deed
restrictions or easements that run with the land.
      (4)   The SWM Site Plan and Report shall be recorded as a restrictive
deed covenant that runs with the land.
      (5)   The city may take enforcement actions against an applicant for
failure to satisfy any provision of this chapter.
   (C)   The city, upon recommendation of the City Engineer, shall make the
final determination on the continuing maintenance responsibilities prior to
final approval of the SWM Site Plan and Report. The city may require a
dedication of such facilities as part of the requirements for approval of the
SWM Site Plan. Such a requirement is not an indication that the municipality
will accept the facilities. The municipality reserves the right to accept or
reject the ownership and operating responsibility for any portion of the
stormwater management controls.
   (D)   If the city accepts ownership of stormwater BMPs, the city may, at its
discretion, require a fee from the applicant to the municipality to offset the
future cost of inspections, operations, and maintenance.
   (E)   It shall be unlawful to alter or remove any permanent stormwater BMP
required by an approved SWM Site Plan, or to allow the property to remain in a
condition, which does not conform to an approved SWM Site Plan, unless the city
grants an exception in writing.
(Ord. 1508, passed 12-20-2010) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.102 MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT FOR PRIVATELY OWNED STORMWATER FACILITIES.
   (A)   (1)   Prior to final approval of the SWM Site Plan and Report, the
applicant shall sign the operation and maintenance (O&M) agreement (
Appendix A) covering all stormwater control facilities that are to be privately
owned.
      (2)   The operation and maintenance (O&M) agreement shall be recorded
with the SWM Site Plan and made a part hereto.
   (B)   (1)   Other items may be included in the operation and maintenance
(O&M) agreement where determined necessary to guarantee the satisfactory
operation and maintenance of all BMP facilities.
      (2)   The operation and maintenance (O&M) agreement shall be subject to
the review and approval of the city and the City Solicitor.
   (C)   The owner is responsible for operation and maintenance of the
stormwater BMPs. If the owner fails to adhere to the operation and maintenance
(O&M) agreement, the city may perform the services required and charge the
owner appropriate fees. Non-payment of fees may result in a lien against the
property.
(Ord. 1508, passed 12-20-2010)
INSPECTIONS
§ 152.115 SCHEDULE OF INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   PADEP or its designees normally ensure compliance with any permits
issued, including those for stormwater management. In addition to PADEP
compliance programs, the city may inspect all phases of the installation of
temporary or permanent stormwater management facilities.
   (B)   During any stage of earth disturbance activities, if the city
determines that the stormwater management facilities are not being installed in
accordance with the approved SWM Site Plan, the city may suspend or revoke any
existing permits or approvals until a revised SWM Site Plan is submitted and
approved as specified in this chapter.
   (C)   Stormwater BMPs shall be inspected by the landowner, or the
landowner’s designee according to the inspection schedule described on the SWM
Site Plan for each BMP.
      (1)   The city may require submission of copies of the inspection
reports, in a form as stipulated by the city.
      (2)   If such inspections are not conducted or inspection reports not
submitted as scheduled, the city, or its designee, may conduct such inspections
and charge the owner appropriate fees. Non-payment of fees may result in a lien
against the property.
      (3)   Prior to conducting a scheduled inspection, the city shall inform
the owner of its intent to conduct an inspection.
(Ord. 1508, passed 12-20-2010)
§ 152.116 RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   (A)   Upon presentation of proper credentials, duly authorized
representatives of the city may enter at reasonable times, upon any property
within the city, to inspect the implementation, condition or operations and
maintenance of the stormwater BMPs in regard to any aspect governed by this
chapter.
   (B)   Stormwater BMP owners and operators shall allow persons working on
behalf of the city ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes
of determining compliance with this chapter.
   (C)   Persons working on behalf of the city shall have the right to
temporarily locate on any stormwater BMP in the city such devices, as are
necessary, to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the discharges from such
stormwater BMP.
   (D)   Unreasonable delay in allowing the city access to a stormwater BMP is
a violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 1508, passed 12-20-2010) Penalty, see §
152.999
ENFORCEMENT
§ 152.130 NOTIFICATION.
   (A)   (1)   In the event that a person fails to comply with the requirements
of this chapter, an approved SWM Site Plan or fails to conform to the
requirements of any permit or approval issued hereunder, the city shall provide
written notification of the violation.
      (2)   Such notification shall set forth the nature of the violation(s)
and establish a time limit for correction of these violation(s).
   (B)   Failure to comply within the time specified shall subject such person
to the penalties provisions of this chapter. All such penalties shall be deemed
cumulative and shall not prevent the municipality from pursuing any and all
other remedies, it shall be the responsibility of the owner of the real
property on which any regulated activity is proposed to occur, is occurring or
has occurred, to comply with the terms and conditions of this chapter.
(Ord. 1508, passed 12-20-2010)
§ 152.131 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Generally. The governing body of the city is hereby authorized and
directed to enforce all of the provisions of this chapter. The approved SWM
Site Plan shall be on file at the project site throughout the duration of the
construction activity. The city or their designee may make periodic inspections
during construction.
   (B)   Adherence to approved SWM Site Plan.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to
undertake any regulated activity on any property except as provided for by an
approved SWM Site Plan and pursuant to the requirements of this chapter.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful to alter or remove any control structure
required by the SWM Site Plan pursuant to this chapter.
      (3)   It shall be unlawful to allow a property to remain in a condition
that does not conform to an approved SWM Site Plan.
(Ord. 1508, passed 12-20-2010) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.132 PUBLIC NUISANCE.
   (A)   A violation of any provision of this chapter is hereby deemed a public
nuisance.
   (B)   Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate
violation.
(Ord. 1508, passed 12-20-2010) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.133 SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.
   (A)   Any approval or permit issued by the city may be suspended or revoked
for:
      (1)   Non-compliance with or failure to implement any provision of the
approved SWM Site Plan or operation and maintenance (O&M) agreement;
      (2)   A violation of any provision of this chapter or any other
applicable law, ordinance, rule or regulation relating to the regulated
activity; or
      (3)   The creation of any condition or the commission of any act, during
the regulated activity which constitutes or creates a hazard or nuisance,
pollution or which endangers the life or property of others.
   (B)   A suspended approval or permit may be reinstated by the city when:
      (1)   The city or its designee has inspected and approved the corrections
to the violation(s) that caused the suspension; or
      (2)   The city is satisfied that the violation(s) has been corrected.
   (C)   An approval that has been revoked by the city cannot be reinstated.
The applicant may apply for a new approval under the provisions of this
chapter.
(Ord. 1508, passed 12-20-2010)
§ 152.134 APPEALS.
   (A)   Any person aggrieved by any action of the city or its designee,
relevant to the provisions of this chapter, may appeal to the city within 30
days of that action.
   (B)   Any person aggrieved by any decision of the city, relevant to the
provisions of this chapter, may appeal to the County Court of Common Pleas
within 30 days of the city’s decision.
(Ord. 1508, passed 12-20-2010)
PROHIBITIONS
§ 152.145 PROHIBITED DISCHARGES AND CONNECTIONS.
   (A)   Any drain, including indoor drains and sinks, or conveyance, whether
on the surface or underground, that allows any non-stormwater discharge,
including sewage, process wastewater and wash water, to enter the city’s
separate storm sewer system or waters of the state is prohibited.
   (B)   Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial land
use to the city’s separate storm sewer system, which has not been documented in
plans, maps or equivalent records, and approved by the city is prohibited.
   (C)   No person shall allow, or cause to allow, discharges into the city’s
separate storm sewer system or into surface waters of the state, which are not
composed entirely of stormwater, except:
      (1)   As provided in division (D) below; and
      (2)   Discharges allowed under a state or federal permit.
   (D)   The following discharges are authorized unless they are determined to
be significant contributors to pollution to the waters of the state:
      (1)   Discharges from firefighting activities;
      (2)   Potable water sources including dechlorinated water line and fire
hydrant flushings;
      (3)   Irrigation drainage;
      (4)   Air conditioning condensate;
      (5)   Springs;
      (6)   Water from crawl space pumps;
      (7)   Pavement wash waters where spills or leaks of toxic or hazardous
materials have not occurred (unless all spill material has been removed) and
where detergents are not used;
      (8)   Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands;
      (9)   Uncontaminated water from foundations or from footing drains;
      (10)   Lawn watering;
      (11)   Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges;
      (12)   Uncontaminated groundwater;
      (13)   Water from individual residential car washing;
      (14)   Routine external building washdown, which does not use detergents
or other compounds; and
      (15)   Diverted stream flows.
   (E)   In the event that the city or DEP determines that any of the
discharges identified in division (D) above significantly contribute to
pollution of waters of this state, the city or PADEP will notify the
responsible person(s) to cease the discharge.
   (F)   Upon notice provided by the city or PADEP under division (E) above,
the discharger will have a reasonable time, as determined by the city or PADEP,
to cease the discharge.
   (G)   Nothing in this section shall affect a discharger’s responsibilities
under state law.
(Ord. 1508, passed 12-20-2010) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.146 ROOF DRAINS.
   Roof drains and sump pumps shall discharge to infiltration areas, vegetative
BMPs, or pervious areas to the maximum extent practicable.
(Ord. 1508, passed 12-20-2010)
§ 152.147 ALTERATION OF BMPS.
   (A)   No person shall modify, remove, fill, landscape, or alter any existing
stormwater BMP, facilities, areas or structures, unless it is part of an
approved maintenance program, without the written approval of the city.
   (B)   No person shall place any structure, fill, landscaping or vegetation
into a stormwater BMP, facilities, areas, structures or within a drainage
easement, which would limit or alter the functioning of the BMP, without the
written approval of the city.
(Ord. 1508, passed 12-20-2010) Penalty, see §
152.999
FEES AND EXPENSES
§ 152.160 GENERAL.
   The fee required by this chapter is the municipal review fee. The municipal
review fee shall be established by the city to defray review costs incurred by
the city and the City Engineer. Requests for waiver shall be accompanied by the
established fee in accordance with §
152.022. The applicant shall pay all fees.
(Ord. 1508, passed 12-20-2010)
§ 152.161 EXPENSES COVERED BY FEES.
   The fees required by this chapter shall, at a minimum, cover:
   (A)   Administrative and clerical costs;
   (B)   Review of the SWM Site Plan and Report by the city;
   (C)   Pre-construction meetings;
   (D)   Inspection of stormwater management facilities/BMPs and drainage
improvements during construction;
   (E)   Final inspection upon completion of the stormwater management
facilities/BMPs and drainage improvements presented in the SWM Site Plan; and
   (F)   Any additional work required to enforce any permit provisions
regulated by this chapter, correct violations, and assure proper completion of
stipulated remedial actions.
(Ord. 1508, passed 12-20-2010)
§ 152.162 RECORDING OF APPROVED SWM SITE PLAN AND RELATED AGREEMENTS.
   (A)   The owner of any land upon which permanent stormwater BMPs will be
placed, constructed or implemented, as described in the SWM Site Plan, shall
record the following documents in the office of the County Recorder of Deeds,
within ten days of approval of the SWM Site Plan by the city:
      (1)   The SWM Site Plan including key details;
      (2)   Operations and maintenance agreement (
Appendix A); and
      (3)   Easements under §
152.085.
   (B)   The city may suspend or revoke any approvals granted for the project
site upon discovery of the failure of the owner to comply with this section.
(Ord. 1508, passed 12-20-2010)
§ 152.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Anyone violating the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a
summary offense and, upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine of not more
than $300 for each violation, recoverable with costs. Each day that the
violation continues shall be a separate offense and penalties shall be
cumulative.
   (B)   In addition, the city, through the City Solicitor, may institute
injunctive, mandamus or any other appropriate action or proceeding at law or in
equity for the enforcement of this chapter. Any court of competent jurisdiction
shall have the right to issue restraining orders, temporary or permanent
injunctions, mandamus or other appropriate forms of remedy or relief.
(Ord. 1508, passed 12-20-2010)
APPENDIX A: OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT
   THIS AGREEMENT, made and entered into this        day of                  
20        , by and between
                                                                   
(hereinafter the “Landowner”), and                         , Erie County,
Pennsylvania, (hereinafter “City of Corry”);
WITNESSETH
   WHEREAS, the Landowner is the owner of certain real property as recorded by
deed in the land records of Erie County, Pennsylvania, Deed Book           at
Page            , (hereinafter “Property”).
   WHEREAS, the Landowner is proceeding to build and develop the Property; and
   WHEREAS, the SWM Site Plan approved by the City of Corry (hereinafter
referred to as the “Plan”) for the property identified herein, which is
attached hereto as Appendix A and made part hereof, as approved by the City of
Corry, provides for management of stormwater within the confines of the
Property through the use of BMPs; and
   WHEREAS, the City of Corry, and the Landowner, his successors and assigns,
agree that the health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the City of
Corry and the protection and maintenance of water quality require that on-site
SWM BMPs be constructed and maintained on the Property; and
   WHEREAS, the City of Corry requires, through the implementation of the SWM
Site Plan, that stormwater BMPs as required by said Plan and the City of Corry
Stormwater Management Ordinance be constructed and adequately operated and
maintained by the Landowner, successors and assigns.
   NOW, THEREFORE, in consideration of the foregoing promises, the mutual
covenants contained herein, and the following terms and conditions, the parties
hereto agree as follows:
   1.   The Landowner shall construct the BMPs in accordance with the plans and
specifications identified in the SWM Site Plan.
   2.   The Landowner shall operate and maintain the BMPs as shown on the Plan
in good working order in accordance with the specific maintenance requirements
noted on the approved SWM Site Plan.
   3.   The Landowner hereby grants permission to the City of Corry, its
authorized agents, and employees, to enter upon the property, at reasonable
times and upon presentation of proper credentials, to inspect the BMPs whenever
necessary. Whenever possible, the City of Corry shall notify the Landowner
prior to entering the property.
   4.   In the event the Landowner fails to operate and maintain the BMPs per
paragraph 2, the City of Corry or its representatives may enter upon the
Property and take whatever action is deemed necessary to maintain said BMPs. It
is expressly understood and agreed that the City of Corry is under no
obligation to maintain or repair said facilities, and in no event shall this
Agreement be construed to impose any such obligation on the City of Corry.
   5.   In the event the City of Corry, pursuant to this Agreement, performs
work of any nature, or expends any funds in performance of said work for labor,
use of equipment, supplies, materials, and the like, the Landowner shall
reimburse the City of Corry for all expenses (direct and indirect) incurred
within ten (10) days of receipt of invoice from the City of Corry.
   6.   The intent and purpose of this Agreement is to ensure the proper
maintenance of the onsite BMPs by the Landowner; provided, however, that this
Agreement shall not be deemed to create or effect any additional liability of
any party for damage alleged to result from or be caused by stormwater runoff.
   7.   The Landowner, its executors, administrators, assigns, and other
successors in interests, shall release the City of Corry from all damages,
accidents, casualties, occurrences or claims which might arise or be asserted
against said employees and representatives from the construction, presence,
existence, or maintenance of the BMPs by the Landowner or City of Corry.
   8.   The City of Corry may inspect the BMPs at a minimum of once every three
years to ensure their continued functioning.
   This Agreement shall be recorded at the Office of the Recorder of Deeds of
Erie County, Pennsylvania, and shall constitute a covenant running with the
Property and/or equitable servitude, and shall be binding on the Landowner, his
administrators, executors, assigns, heirs and any other successors in
interests, in perpetuity.
ATTEST:
WITNESS the following signatures and seals:
(SEAL)                                 For the City of Corry:
                                                                                             
                                    For the Landowner:
                                                                                            
ATTEST:
                                     (City, Borough, Township)
County of Erie, Pennsylvania
I,                                          , a Notary Public in and for the
County and State aforesaid, whose commission expires on the           day of
                    , 20              do hereby certify that
                                          whose name(s) is/are signed to the
foregoing Agreement bearing date of the          day of                       
, 20           , has acknowledged the same before me in my said County and
State.
GIVEN UNDER MY HAND THIS             day of                              , 20
        .
                                                                                                      
NOTARY PUBLIC (SEAL)
(Ord. 1508, passed 12-20-2010)
APPENDIX B: LOW IMPACT DEVELOPMENT PRACTICES
   Natural hydrologic conditions may be altered radically by poorly planned
development practices, such as introducing unneeded impervious surfaces,
destroying existing drainage swales, constructing unnecessary storm sewers, and
changing local topography. A traditional drainage approach of development has
been to remove runoff from a site as quickly as possible and capture it in a
detention basin. This approach leads ultimately to the degradation of water
quality, as well as expenditure of additional resources for detaining and
managing concentrated runoff at some downstream location.
   The recommended alternative approach is to promote practices that will
minimize post-development runoff rates and volumes, which will minimize needs
for artificial conveyance and storage facilities. To simulate pre-development
hydrologic conditions, forced infiltration is often necessary to offset the
loss of infiltration by creation of impervious surfaces. The ability of the
ground to infiltrate runoff depends upon the soil types and its conditions.
   Preserving natural hydrologic conditions requires careful alternative site
design considerations. Site design practices include preserving natural
drainage features, minimizing impervious surface area, reducing the hydraulic
connectivity of impervious surfaces, and protecting natural depression storage.
A well-designed site will contain a mix of all those features. The following
describes various techniques to achieve the alternative approaches:
      (1)   Preserving Natural Drainage Features. Protecting natural drainage
features, particularly vegetated drainage swales and channels, is desirable
because of their ability to infiltrate and attenuate flows and to filter
pollutants. However, this objective is often not accomplished in land
development. In fact, commonly held drainage philosophy encourages just the
opposite pattern - streets and adjacent storm sewers typically are located in
the natural headwater valleys and swales, thereby replacing natural drainage
functions with a completely impervious system. As a result, runoff and
pollutants generated from impervious surfaces flow directly into storm sewers
with no opportunity for attenuation, infiltration, or filtration. Developments
designed to fit site topography also minimize the amount of grading on site.
      (2)   Protecting Natural Depression Storage Areas. Depressional storage
areas have no surface outlet, or drain very slowly following a storm event.
They can be commonly seen as ponded areas in farm fields during the wet season
or after large runoff events. Traditional development practices eliminate these
depressions by filling or draining, thereby obliterating their ability to
reduce surface runoff volumes and trap pollutants. The volume and release-rate
characteristics, of depressions should be protected in the design of the
development site. The depressions can be protected by simply avoiding the
depression or by incorporating its storage as additional capacity in required
detention facilities.
      (3)   Avoiding Introduction of Impervious Areas. Careful site planning
should consider reducing impervious coverage to the maximum extent possible.
Building footprints, sidewalks, driveways, and other features producing
impervious surfaces should be evaluated to minimize impacts on runoff.
      (4)   Reducing the Hydraulic Connectivity of Impervious Surfaces.
Impervious surfaces are significantly less of a problem if they are not
directly connected to an impervious conveyance system (such as storm sewer).
Two basic ways to reduce hydraulic connectivity are: routing of roof runoff
over lawns; and reducing the use of storm sewers. Site grading should promote
increasing travel time of stormwater runoff and should help reduce
concentration of runoff to a single point in the development.
      (5)   Routing Roof Runoff Over Lawns. Roof runoff can be easily routed
over lawns in most site designs. The practice discourages direct connections of
downspouts to storm sewers or parking lots. The practice also discourages
sloping driveways and parking lots to the street. The routing of roof drains
and crowning the driveway to allow runoff to discharge to pervious areas is
desirable as the pervious area essentially acts as a filter strip.
      (6)   Reducing the Use of Storm Sewers. By reducing the use of storm
sewers for draining streets, parking lots, and back yards, the potential for
accelerating runoff from the development can be greatly reduced. The practice
requires greater use of swales and may not be practical for some development
sites, especially if there are concerns for areas that do not drain in a
“reasonable” time. The practice requires educating local citizens and public
works officials, who expect runoff to disappear shortly after a rainfall event.
      (7)   Reducing Street Widths. Street widths can be reduced by either
eliminating on-street parking or by reducing cartway widths. Municipal planners
and traffic designers should encourage narrower neighborhood streets, which
ultimately could lower maintenance and maintenance related costs.
      (8)   Limiting Sidewalks to One Side of the Street. A sidewalk on one
side of the street may suffice in low-traffic neighborhoods. The lost sidewalk
could be replaced with bicycle/recreational trails that follow back-of-lot
lines. Where appropriate, backyard trails should be constructed using pervious
materials.
      (9)   Using Permeable Paving Materials. These materials include permeable
interlocking concrete paving blocks or porous bituminous concrete. Such
materials should be considered as alternatives to conventional pavement
surfaces, especially for low use surfaces such as driveways, overflow parking
lots, and emergency access roads.
      (10)   Reducing Building Setbacks. Reducing building setbacks reduces
driveway and entry walks and is most readily accomplished along low-traffic
streets where traffic noise is not a problem.
      (11)   Constructing Cluster Developments. Cluster developments can also
reduce the amount of impervious area for a given number of lots. The biggest
savings is in street length, which also will reduce costs of the development.
Cluster development “clusters” the construction activity onto less-sensitive
areas without substantially affecting the gross density of development.
   In summary, careful consideration of the existing topography and
implementation of a combination of the above mentioned techniques may avoid
construction of costly stormwater control measures. Other benefits include:
reduced potential of downstream flooding, reduced water quality degradation of
receiving streams and water bodies, enhancement of aesthetics, and reduction of
development costs. Beneficial results include: more stable baseflows in
receiving streams, improved groundwater recharge, reduced flood flows, reduced
pollutant loads, and reduced costs for conveyance and storage.
(Ord. 1508, passed 12-20-2010)
APPENDIX C: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT DESIGN CRITERIA
TABLE C-1 - RATIONAL METHOD RUNOFF COEFFICIENTS
Hydraulic Soil Group Storm A  B  C  D
Hydraulic   Storm A              B              C               D
Soil Group
Slope Range ≥   0-2% 2-6% +6%  0-2% 2-6% +6%  0-2% 2-6%  +6%  0-2% 2-6% +6%
Cultivated  <25yr 0.08 0.13 0.16 0.11 0.15 0.21 0.14 0.19  0.26 0.18 0.23 0.31
Land        ≥25y0.14 0.08 0.22 0.16 0.21 0.28 0.2  0.25  0.34 0.24 0.29 0.41
Pasture     <25yr 0.12 0.2  0.3  0.18 0.28 0.37 0.24 0.34  0.44 0.3  0.4  0.5
            ≥25y0.15 0.25 0.37 0.23 0.34 0.45 0.3  0.42  0.52 0.37 0.5  0.62
Meadow      <25yr 0.10 0.16 0.25 0.14 0.22 0.3  0.2  0.28  0.36 0.24 0.3  0.4
            ≥25y0.14 0.22 0.3  0.2  0.28 0.37 0.26 0.35  0.44 0.3  0.4  0.5
Forest      <25yr 0.05 0.08 0,11 0.08 0,11 0.14 0.1  0,13  0.16 0.12 0.16 0.2
            ≥25y0.08 0.11 0.14 0.1  0.14 0.18 0.12 0.16  0.2  0.15 0.2  0.25
Residential <25yr 0.25 0.28 0.31 0.27 0.3  0.35 0.3  0.33  0.38 0:33 0.36 0.42
1/8 Acre    ≥25y0.33 0.37 0.4  0.35 0.39 0.44 0.38 0.42  0.49 0.41 0.45 0.54
1/4 Acre    <25yr 0.22 0.26 0.29 0.24 0.29 0.33 0.27 0.31  0.36 0.3  0.34 0.4
            ≥25y0.3  0.34 0.37 0.33 0.37 0.42 0.36 0.4   0.47 0.38 0.42 0.52
1/3 Acre    <25yr 0.19 0.23 0.26 0.22 0.26 0.3  0.25 0.29  0.34 0.28 0.32 0.39
            ≥25y0.28 0.32 0.35 0.3  0.35 0.39 0.33 0.38  0.45 0.36 0.4  0.5
1/2 Acre    <25yr 0.16 0.2  0.24 0.19 0.23 0.28 0.22 0.27  0.32 0,26 0.3  0.37
            ≥25y0.25 0.29 0.32 0.28 0.32 0.36 0.31 0.35  0.42 0.34 0.38 0.48
1 Acre      <25yr 0.14 0.19 0.22 0.17 0.21 0.26 0.2  0.25  0.31 0.24 0.29 0.35
            ≥25y0.22 0.26 0.29 0.24 0.28 0.34 0.28 0.32  0.4  0.31 0.35 0.46
Industrial  <25yr 0.67 0.68 0.68 0.68 0.68 0.69 0.68 0.69  0.69 0.69 0.69 0.7
            ≥25y0.85 0.85 0.86 0.85 0.86 0.86 0.86 0.86  0.87 0.86 0.86 0.88
Commercial  <25yr 0.71 0.71 0.72 0.71 0.72 0.72 0.72 0.72  0.72 0.72 0.72 0.72
            ≥25y0.88 0.88 0.89 0.89 0.89 0.89 0.89 0.89  0.9  0.89 0.89 0.9
Streets     <25yr 0.7  0.71 0.72 0.71 0.72 0.74 0.72 0.73  0.76 0.73 0.75 0.78
            ≥25y0.76 0.77 0.79 0.8  0.82 0.84 0.84 0.85  0.89 0.89 0.91 0.95
            <25yr 0.05 0.1  0.14 0.08 0.13 0.19 0.12 0.17  0.24 0.16 0.21 0.28
Open Space  ≥25y0.11 :    0.2  0.14 0.19 0.26 0.18 0.23�0.32 0.22 0.27 0.39
                       0.16
Parking or  <25yr 0.85 0,86 0.87 0.85 0.86 0.87 0.85 0.86, 0.87 0.85 0.86 0.87
Impervious  ≥25y0.95 0.96 0.97 0.95 0.96 0.97 0.95 0.96  0.97 0.95 0.96 0.97
 
Source: Rawls, W.J., S.L. Long, and R.H. McCuen, 1981. Comparison of Urban
Flood Frequency Procedures. Preliminary Draft Report prepared for the Soil
Conservation Service, Beitsville, Maryland.
For simplification, a designer may use 0.3 for all pervious areas and 0.95 for
all impervious areas.
TABLE C-2 - RUNOFF CURVE NUMBERS (FROM NRCS (SCS) TR-55)
Runoff Curve Numbers for Urban Areas
Cover Description                         Curve Numbers for Hydrologic
                                          Soil Groups
Cover Type and Hydrologic Average Percent A B C D
Condition                 Impervious Area
Runoff Curve Numbers for Urban Areas
Cover Description                                     Curve Numbers for
                                                      Hydrologic Soil Groups
Cover Type and Hydrologic Condition   Average Percent A  B  C  D
                                      Impervious Area
Fully Developed Urban Areas
(Vegetation Established)
Open Space (lawns, parks, golf courses, etc):
Poor Condition (grass cover < 50%)                    68 79 86 89
Fair Condition (grass cover 50% to                    49 69 79 84
75%)
Good Condition (grass cover > 75%)                    39 61 74 80
Impervious Areas:
Paved Parking Lots, Roofs, Driveways,                 98 98 98 98
and the like
Streets and Roads:
Paved: Curbed and Storm Sewers                        98 98 98 98
Paved: Open Ditches                                   83 89 92 93
Gravel                                                76 85 89 91
Dirt                                                  72 82 87 89
Urban Districts:
Commercial and Business               85%             89 92 94 95
Industrial                            72%             81 88 91 93
Residential Districts by Average Lot Size:
1/8 Acres or less                     65%             77 85 90 92
1/4 Acre                              38%             61 75 83 87
1/3 Acre                              30%             57 72 81 86
1/2 Acre                              25%             54 70 80 85
1 Acre                                20%             51 68 79 84
2 Acres                               12%             46 65 77 82
                   Bare Soil          —             77 86 91 94
Fallow             Crop Residue Cover Poor            76 85 90 93
                   (CR)               Good            74 83 88 90
                   Straight Row (SR)  Poor            72 81 88 91
                                      Good            67 78 85 89
                   SR + CR            Poor            71 80 87 90
                                      Good            64 75 82 85
                   Contoured (C)      Poor            70 79 84 88
Row Crops                             Good            65 75 82 86
                   C + CR             Poor            69 78 83 87
                                      Good            64 74 81 85
                   Contoured and      Poor            66 74 80 82
                   Terraced (C&T)     Good            62 71 78 81
                   C&T + CR           Poor            65 73 79 81
                                      Good            61 70 77 80
                   SR                 Poor            65 76 84 88
                                      Good            63 75 83 87
                   SR + CR            Poor            64 75 83 86
                                      Good            60 72 80 84
                   C                  Poor            63 74 82 85
Small Grain                           Good            61 73 81 84
                   C + CR             Poor            62 73 81 84
                                      Good            60 72 80 83
                   C&T                Poor            61 72 79 82
                                      Good            59 70 78 81
                   C&T + CR           Poor            60 71 78 81
                                      Good            58 69 77 80
                   SR                 Poor            66 77 85 89
Close Seeded or                       Good            58 72 81 85
Broadcast Legumes  C                  Poor            64 75 83 85
Or Rotation Meadow                    Good            55 69 78 83
                   C&T                Poor            63 73 80 83
                                      Good            51 67 76 80
Runoff Curve Numbers for Other Agricultural Lands
Pasture, Grassland, or Range -        Poor            68 79 86 89
Continuous Forage for Grazing         Fair            49 69 79 84
                                      Good            39 61 74 80
Meadow - Continuous Grass, Protected
from Grazing and Generally Mowed for  -               30 58 71 78
Hay
Woods - Grass Combination (orchard or Poor            57 73 82 86
tree farm)                            Fair            43 65 76 82
                                      Good            32 58 72 79
                                      Poor            45 66 77 83
Woods                                 Fair            36 60 73 79
                                      Good            30 55 70 77
Farmsteads - Buildings, Lanes,        -               59 74 82 86
Driveways and Surrounding Lots.
 
(Ord. 1508, passed 12-20-2010)
APPENDIX D: REVIEW FEE REIMBURSEMENT AGREEMENT
   THIS AGREEMENT MUST BE COMPLETED AND SIGNED BY THE DEVELOPER/APPLICANT PRIOR
TO SUBMISSION OF THE SUBDIVISION/LAND DEVELOPMENT APPLICATION AND PLANS, SKETCH
PLANS, CONDITIONAL USE APPLICATIONS OR ANY OTHER SUBMISSION WHICH REQUIRES
MUNICIPAL CONSULTANT REVIEW.
REVIEW FEE REIMBURSEMENT AGREEMENT
THIS AGREEMENT, made and entered into this         day of
                         , 20        , by and between
                                       , (hereinafter the “Landowner”), and
                                      , Erie County, Pennsylvania, (hereinafter
“City of Corry”);
WITNESSETH
   WHEREAS, the Landowner is the owner of certain real property as recorded by
deed in the land records of Erie County, Pennsylvania, Deed Book            at
Page           , (hereinafter “Property”).
   WHEREAS, the Landowner is proceeding to build and develop the Property; and
   WHEREAS, the Landowner has submitted a SWM Site Plan for review and approval
by the City of Corry (hereinafter referred to as the “Plan”) for the property
identified herein; and
   WHEREAS, the Developer has requested and/or required the City of Corry
approval and/or review of its proposed plans, and the City of Corry is willing
to authorize its professional consultants to review said Plan and/or proposal
upon execution of this agreement, and upon deposit of an escrow account
according to the current Fee Schedule.
   NOW, THEREFORE, in consideration of the foregoing promises, the mutual
covenants contained herein, and the following terms and conditions, the parties
hereto agree as follows:
   1.   The Landowner and City of Corry hereby authorize and direct the City of
Corry’s engineer or professional consultants, as defined at Section 107 of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code (53 P.S. §§ 10101 et seq.) to review
Landowner’s plans or proposals to use its property, and to make such
recommendations and specifications as may be necessary with respect to such
plans in accordance with all applicable City of Corry ordinances, and State and
Federal rules and regulations.
   2.   The Landowner and City of Corry acknowledge that the City of Corry will
incur costs and fees relating to the review of Landowner’s plans by its City
Engineer or professional consultants, and Landowner agrees to pay and/or
reimburse the City of Corry for such costs in accordance with this agreement.
   3.   The Landowner shall pay the City of Corry or professional consultant’s
charges and fees for the following: (a) review of any and all Stormwater
Management Plans, studies, or other correspondence relating to the Landowners
submission; (b) attendance at any and all meetings relating to Landowner’s
plan; (c) preparation of any reports, legal documents, or other correspondence
relating to Landowner’s plan or proposal; (d) administrative cost and incurred
expenses relating to the administration of this agreement and (e) Professional
Consultant’s fees associated with construction activities. It is understood by
the execution of this agreement that the Landowner specifically accepts the Fee
Schedule currently in effect in the City of Corry.
   4.   The Landowner hereby agrees to deposit with the City of Corry the sum
of                   Dollars ($                     ), payable as cash in U.S.
Dollars or check drawn on a Pennsylvania bank, as security for the payment of
all costs and expenses, charges and fees as set forth in Paragraph 3 above,
upon execution of this agreement, which shall be held in a noninterest-bearing
account by the City of Corry. In the event that the above deposited escrow fund
shall fall below fifty percent (50%) of the original deposit, the Landowner
shall immediately, upon receipt of written notice from the City of Corry or its
agent(s), deposit sums with the City of Corry necessary to replenish the
account to its original balance. In the event that this is insufficient to pay
current City of Corry incurred expenses. Landowner agrees to pay the total
amount currently due for City of Corry incurred expenses without delay in
addition to re-establishing the base escrow account balance. The City of Corry
will use its best efforts to advise the Landowner of the impending likelihood
that its costs have exceeded the required escrow account sums as described
above.
   5.   Landowner and City of Corry agree that upon completion of the City of
Corry’s review of Landowner’s plan or proposal, all unused portions of the
escrow account as described above shall be returned to the applicant upon
written request to the City of Corry.
   6.   Landowner and City of Corry acknowledge that the Ordinance and
appropriate fee schedules require Landowner to pay the City’s Engineer or
professional consultant fees relating to this plan or project, and in the even
that Landowner fails to provide sufficient funds in the above-described
revolving escrow account upon fifteen (15) days written notice to the Landowner
or make the initial deposit payment described above within five (5) days of the
date of this agreement. Landowner shall be in default of this agreement and in
violation of the above Sections of Ordinance. In the event of Landowner’s
default as described above, the City of Corry may refuse to issue any permit or
grant any approval necessary to further improve or develop the subject site
until such time as the terms of this Agreement are strictly met by Landowner.
Moreover, final approval or further review may be denied or delayed until such
time as the terms of this agreement are strictly met by Landowner.
   7.   Landowner and the City of Corry further agree that all fees or costs
arising out of this Agreement shall be paid prior to the issuance of any
permit, occupancy or otherwise, for the use, improvement or construction of the
buildings as proposed on the Landowner’s plan. The Landowner agrees and
acknowledges that no permit, occupancy or otherwise, or recordable plans, shall
be released by the City of Corry until all outstanding professional consultant
fees and costs are paid to the City of Corry, and provided that the Landowner
is not in default under this agreement.
   8.   The Landowner may at any time terminate all further obligations under
this Agreement by giving fifteen (15) days written notice to the City of Corry
that it does not desire to proceed with the development as set forth on the
plan and upon receipt of such written notice by the Landowner to the City of
Corry, the Landowner shall be liable to the City of Corry for its costs and
expenses incurred to the date and time of its receipt of the notice, plus the
applicable administrative costs and expenses as outlined in Paragraph 3 above.
   9.   The Landowner and the City of Corry further agree that the City of
Corry shall have the right and privilege to sue the Landowner or then property
owner in assumpsit for reimbursement or to lien the property or both, in its
sole discretion, for any expense in excess of the then current balance of funds
on deposit with the City of Corry in accordance with this agreement incurred by
the City of Corry by reason of any review, supervision and inspection of
Landowner’s project by its professionals including, but not limited to, the
City Engineer and City Solicitor. The City of Corry’s election of its remedies
under this paragraph shall not constitute a waiver of any other remedies the
City of Corry may have.
   10.   The Landowner and the City of Corry acknowledge that this agreement
represents their full understanding as to the City of Corry’s reimbursement for
professional or consultant services.
   11.   This agreement shall be binding on and insure to the benefit of the
successors and assigns of Landowner. The City of Corry shall receive thirty
(30) days’ advance written notice from Landowner of any proposed assignment of
Landowner’s rights and responsibilities under this Agreement.
ATTEST:
WITNESS the following signatures and seals:
(SEAL)                                    For the City of Corry:
                                                                                        
                                       For the Landowner:
                                                                                       
ATTEST:
                                             (City, Borough, Township)
County of Erie, Pennsylvania
I                           , a Notary Public in and for the County and State
aforesaid, whose commission expires on the                       day of
                        , 20            , do hereby certify that
                                    whose name(s) is/are signed to the
foregoing Agreement bearing date of the                              day of
                    , 20               , has acknowledged the same before me in
my said County and State.
GIVEN UNDER MY HAND THIS                           day of
                         , 20                       .
                                                                                                           
NOTARY PUBLIC                     (SEAL)
(Ord. 1508, passed 12-20-2010)
APPENDIX E: SMALL PROJECT SWM PLAN APPLICATION
   Per the City of Corry’s Stormwater Management Act, 32 P.S. §§ 680.1 et seq.,
a stormwater management plan is required whenever more than 2,500 square feet
of impervious surface are proposed. Impervious surfaces are areas that prevent
the infiltration of water into the ground and shall include, but not be limited
to, roofs, patios, garages, storage sheds and similar structures, and any new
streets or sidewalks.
To Calculate Impervious Surfaces Please Complete This Table
Surface Type Length (feet) X Width (feet) = Proposed Impervious Area
To Calculate Impervious Surfaces Please Complete This Table
Surface Type       Length (feet) X Width (feet) =   Proposed Impervious Area
                                 X              =
Building (area per               X              =
downspout)                       X              =
                                 X              =
                                 X              =
Driveway                         X              =
                                 X              =
                                 X              =
Parking Areas                    X              =
                                 X              =
                                 X              =
Patios/Walks                     X              =
                                 X              =
                                 X              =
                                 X              =
Other                            X              =
                                 X              =
Total Impervious Surface Area to be managed (sum of
all areas)
 
   If the Total Impervious Surface Area is LESS THAN 2,500 Square Feet, please
read, acknowledge and sign below.
   If the Total Impervious Surface Area EXCEEDS 2,500 Square Feet, complete the
remainder of the Application.
   Based Upon the information you hove provided a Stormwater Management Plan IS
NOT required for this regulated activity. The City of Corry may request
additional information and/or SWM for any reason.
   Property Owner Acknowledges that submission of inaccurate information may
result in a stop work order or permit revocation. Acknowledgement of such is by
signature below. I declare that I am the owner or owner’s legal representative.
I further acknowledge that the information provided is accurate and employees
of [municipality] are granted access to the above described property for review
and inspection as may be required.
                                                                      
Owner         Date:                                    
CREDITS
Credit 1: DISCONNECTION OF IMPERVIOUS AREA
   When runoff from impervious areas is directed to a pervious area that allows
for infiltration, filtration, and increased time of concentration, all or parts
of the impervious areas may qualify as Disconnected Impervious Area (DIA).
Using the criteria below, determine the portion of the impervious area that can
be excluded from the calculation of total impervious area.
Criteria: An impervious area is considered to be completely or partially
disconnected if it meets the requirements listed below
   (A)   Rooftop area draining to a downspout is 500 sf
   (B)   Paved area draining to a discharge is 1,000 sf
   (C)   Flow path of paved impervious area is not more than 75’
   (D)   Soil at discharge is not designated as hydrologic soil group “D”
   (E)   Flow path at discharge area has a positive slope of 5%
   (F)   Gravel strip or other spreading device is required at paved
discharges.
 
Length of Pervious Flow Path from discharge point * DIA Credit Factor
0-14                                                1.0
15-29                                               0.8
30-44                                               0.6
45-59                                               0.4
60-74                                               0.2
75 or more                                          0
 
Flow path cannot include impervious surfaces and must be at least 15 feet from
any impervious surfaces.
Calculate DIA Credit and Required Capture Volume
             Proposed
             Impervious   DIA Credit   Impervious Area      Required
Surface Type Area (from X Factor     = to be managed   /  = Capture Volume
             previous                                       (ft3)
             sheet)
Calculate DIA Credit and Required Capture Volume
              Proposed
              Impervious   DIA Credit   Impervious Area       Required
Surface Type  Area (from X Factor     = to be managed   /   = Capture Volume
              previous                                        (ft3)
              sheet)
Building                 X            =                 / 6 =
(area per                X            =                 / 6 =
downspout)               X            =                 / 6 =
                         X            =                 / 6 =
                         X            =                 / 6 =
Driveway                 X            =                 / 6 =
                         X            =                 / 6 =
                         X            =                 / 6 =
Parking Areas            X            =                 / 6 =
                         X            =                 / 6 =
                         X            =                 / 6 =
Patios/Walks             X            =                 / 6 =
                         X            =                 / 6 =
                         X            =                 / 6 =
                         X            =                 / 6 =
Other                    X            =                 / 6 =
                         X            =                 / 6 =
Total Req’d Capture Volume
 
Credit 2: TREE PLANTING
   Perhaps the best BMP is a tree as they intercept rainfall, increase
evapotranspiration and increase time of concentration. A portion of the
required capture volume can be reduced provided the criteria are met.
CREDITS
 
Deciduous Trees        Evergreen Trees
6 ft3 per tree planted 10 ft3 per tree planted
 
Criteria
To receive credit for planting trees, the following must be met:
   (A)   Trees must be native species (see below), minimum 1” caliper tree and
3 feet tall shrub (min).
   (B)   Trees shall be adequately protected during construction.
   (C)   Trees shall be maintained until redevelopment occurs.
   (D)   No more than 25% of the required capture volume can be mitigated
through the use of trees.
   (E)   Dead trees shall be replaced within 12 months.
   (F)   Non-native species are not applicable.
      Req’d Capture Volume (ft3)
   -   Tree Planting Credit (ft3)
      Capture Volume to be managed (ft3)
Sizing of BMP
      How much of the Volume will you manage with a Rain Garden?
   +   How much of the Volume will you manage with a Sump or Trench?
      Capture Volume to be managed (ft3)
Enter the volumes into the Small Project SWM Plan Worksheet on the next sheet.
Native Species Trees (Common Name)
   (A)   Aspen, big-tooth or quaking
   (B)   Basswood, American
   (C)   Blackgum
   (D)   Cherry, black
   (E)   Chokeberry (red or black)
   (F)   Cotton-wood, eastern
   (G)   Cucumber magnolia
   (H)   Dogwood (silky or red osier)
   (I)   Elderberry
   (J)   Hickory, sweet pignut or shag-bark
   (K)   Hophornbeam
   (L)   Ironwood
   (M)   Maple (sugar, red or silver)
   (N)   Mountain laurel
   (O)   Oak (white, swamp white, scarlet, pin, red, black)
   (P)   Pine (pitch or eastern white)
   (Q)   Serviceberry (downy orshadbush)
   (R)   Sycamore, American
   (S)   Tuliptree
   (T)   Willow, black
   (U)   Witch hazel
Credit 2: TREE PLANTING
Perhaps the best BMP is a tree as they intercept rainfall, increase,
evapotranspiration and increase time of concentration. A portion of the
required capture volume can be reduced provided the criteria are met.
CREDITS
 
Deciduous Trees    Evergreen Trees
(MISSING MATERIAL) 10 ft3 per tree planted
 
SMALL PROJECT SWM PLAN WORKSHEET
   Based upon the information you have provided a Stormwater Plan is required
for this development activity. The Stormwater Management Ordinance developed
through the Erie County Stormwater Management Act, 32 P.S. §§ 680.1 et seq.,
regulates compliance requirements for Stormwater Management in this
jurisdiction. A complete copy of the Plan can be found on the Erie County
Planning Department website (http://www.eriecountyplanning.org) which contains
the Model Ordinance.
   Regulated activities shall be conducted only after (municipality) approves a
stormwater management plan. The Erie County Stormwater Management Act, 32 P.S.
§§ 680.1 et seq., will assist you in preparing the necessary information and
plans for (municipality) to review and approve. This document will constitute
an approved plan if all of the relevant details are to be installed in their
entirety AND no part of the stormwater system adversely affects any other
property, nor adversely affect any septic systems or drinking water wells on
this, or any other, parcel. Alternative system proposed require a plan will
need to be submitted to [municipality] for approval. A design by a qualified
professional may be required for more complex sites.
PLEASE INITIAL BELOW TO INDICATE THE STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN FOR THIS SITE
           Minimum Control #1: Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control
           Minimum Control #2: Source Control of Pollution
           Minimum Control #3: Preservation of Natural Drainage Systems and
Outfalls
   The relevant details from County Stormwater Management Act, 32 P.S. §§ 680.1
et seq., will be installed in their entirety AND the system will be located as
not to adversely affect other property, nor any septic systems or drinking
water wells on this, or any other, parcel.
           To meet this requirement, the following will be installed and
maintained:
 
Capture Volume to be managed (ft3)        Conversion Surface Area of BMPs (ft2)
 By Rain Garden 6” ponding; 2’ soil X 1.20
 depth
 Dry Well or Infiltration Trench 2 1/   X 1.25
 2 aggregate depth
 Total                                    Total
 
           In lieu of meeting the above, an alternative and/or professional
design is attached for approval AND the system will be located as not to
adversely affect other property, any septic systems or drinking water wells on
this, or any other, parcel.
        Site Sketch Plan showing:
•   Property lines with dimensions
•   Proposed septic system, if applicable
•   Proposed buildings with dimensions
•   Proposed well site, if applicable
•   Proposed impervious surfaces with dimensions
•   Proposed stormwater management system(s)
           Operation and Maintenance Agreement
   Condition on approval. The stormwater management plan must, be fully
implemented prior to a request for final inspection of the building or zoning
permit.
   Acknowledgement. By executing below, the Owner acknowledges the following:
I declare that I am the owner of the property.
•   The information provided is accurate.
•    I further acknowledge that municipal representatives are granted access to
the above described property for review and inspection as may be required.
                                                                      
Owner            Date:                              
(Ord. 1508, passed 12-20-2010)
APPENDIX F: RELEASE RATE MAP
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/eb9aa15e107f9f46ee6921b75956e7ec9407ddcb/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1556.png]
(Ord. 1508, passed 12-20-2010)
CHAPTER 153: FLOODPLAINS
Section
General Provisions
   
153.001   Intent
   
153.002   Applicability
   
153.003   Abrogation and greater restrictions
   
153.004   Warning and disclaimer of liability
   
153.005   Definitions
Administration
   
153.020   Designation of Floodplain Administrator
   
153.021   Permits required
   
153.022   Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator
   
153.023   Application procedures and requirements
   
153.024   Review of application by others
   
153.025   Changes
   
153.026   Placards
   
153.027   Start of construction
   
153.028   Enforcement
   
153.029   Appeals
Identification of Floodplain Areas
   
153.040   Identification
   
153.041   Description and special requirements of identified floodplain areas
   
153.042   Changes in identification of area
   
153.043   Boundary disputes
   
153.044   Jurisdictional boundary changes
Technical Provisions
   
153.055   General
   
153.056   Elevation and floodproofing requirements
   
153.057   Design and construction standards
   
153.058   Development which may endanger human life
   
153.059   Special requirements for subdivisions and development
   
153.060   Special requirements for manufactured homes
   
153.061   Special requirements for recreational vehicles
Activities Requiring Special Permits
   
153.075   General
   
153.076   Application requirements for special permits
   
153.077   Application review procedures
   
153.078   Special technical requirements
Existing Structures in Identified Floodplain Areas
   
153.090   Existing structures
   
153.091   Improvements
Variances
   
153.105   General
   
153.106   Variance procedures and conditions
 
   
153.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 153.001 INTENT.
   The intent of this chapter is to:
   (A)   Promote the general health, welfare and safety of the community;
   (B)   Encourage the utilization of appropriate construction practices in
order to prevent or minimize flood damage in the future;
   (C)   Minimize danger to public health by protecting water supply and
natural drainage;
   (D)   Reduce financial burdens imposed on the community, its governmental
units and its residents by preventing excessive development in areas subject to
flooding; and
   (E)   Comply with federal and state floodplain management requirements.
(Ord. 1534, passed 3-3-2014)
§ 153.002 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, business or
corporation to undertake, or cause to be undertaken, any construction or
development anywhere within the city unless a permit has been obtained from the
Floodplain Administrator.
   (B)   A permit shall not be required for minor repairs to existing buildings
or structures.
(Ord. 1534, passed 3-3-2014) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.003 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
   This chapter supersedes any other conflicting provisions which may be in
effect in identified floodplain areas. However, any other ordinance provisions
shall remain in full force and effect to the extent that those provisions are
more restrictive. If there is any conflict between any of the provisions of
this chapter, the more restrictive shall apply.
(Ord. 1534, passed 3-3-2014)
§ 153.004 WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   (A)   The degree of flood protection sought by the provisions of this
chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on
accepted engineering methods of study. Larger floods may occur or flood heights
may be increased by human-made or natural causes, such as ice jams and bridge
openings restricted by debris. This chapter does not imply that areas outside
any identified floodplain areas, or that land uses permitted within such areas
will be free from flooding or flood damages.
   (B)   This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city or any
officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on
this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
(Ord. 1534, passed 3-3-2014)
§ 153.005 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE. A use or structure on the same lot with, and of
a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the principal use or
structure.
   BASE FLOOD. A flood which has a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in
any given year, also called the 100-YEAR FLOOD or 1% ANNUAL CHANCE FLOOD.
   BASE FLOOD DISCHARGE. The volume of water resulting from a base flood as it
passes a given location within a given time, usually expressed in cubic feet
per second (cfs).
   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE). The elevation shown on the flood insurance rate
map (FIRM) for Zones AE, AH and A1-30 that indicates the water surface
elevation resulting from a flood that has a 1% or greater chance of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year.
   BASEMENT. Any area of the building having its floor below ground level on
all sides.
   BUILDING. A combination of materials to form a permanent structure having
walls and a roof. Included shall be all manufactured homes and trailers to be
used for human habitation.
   DEVELOPMENT. Any human-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, the construction, reconstruction, renovation,
repair, expansion or alteration of buildings or other structures; the placement
of manufactured homes; streets, and other paving; utilities; filling, grading
and excavation; mining; dredging; drilling operations; storage of equipment or
materials; and the subdivision of land.
   EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads, is completed before the effective date
of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
   EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. The
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads.
   FLOOD. A temporary inundation of normally dry land areas.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). The official map on which the Federal
Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas of special flood
hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS). The official report provided by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency that includes flood profiles, the Flood Insurance
Rate Map, the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map, and the water surface elevation
of the base flood.
   FLOODPLAIN AREA. A relatively flat or low land area which is subject to
partial or complete inundation from an adjoining or nearby stream, river or
watercourse; and/or any area subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation of
surface waters from any source.
   FLOODPROOFING. Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions,
changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities,
structures and their contents.
   FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land
areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot.
   HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface
prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
   HISTORIC STRUCTURES. Any structure that is:
      (1)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places, a
listing maintained by the Department of Interior, or preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual
listing on the National Register;
      (2)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to
qualify as a registered historic district;
      (3)   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in
states which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
      (4)   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation that have been certified either:
         (a)   By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
         (b)   Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without
approved programs.
   IDENTIFIED FLOODPLAIN AREA. An umbrella term that includes all of the areas
within which the community has selected to enforce floodplain regulations. It
will always include the area identified as the special flood hazard area on the
flood insurance rate maps and flood insurance study, but may include additional
areas identified by the community. See §§
153.040 and
153.041 for the specifics on what areas the community has included in the
IDENTIFIED FLOODPLAIN AREA.
   LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest floor of the lowest fully enclosed area, including
basement. An unfinished, flood-resistant partially-enclosed area, used solely
for parking of vehicles, building access and incidental storage, in an area
other than a basement area is not considered the LOWEST FLOOR of a building,
provided that such space is not designed and built so that the structure is in
violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of this chapter.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which
is built on a permanent chassis, and is designed for use with or without a
permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term includes
park trailers, travel trailers, recreational and other similar vehicles which
are placed on a site for more than 180 consecutive days.
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A parcel, or contiguous parcels, of
land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
   MINOR REPAIR. The replacement of existing work with equivalent materials for
the purpose of its routine maintenance and upkeep, but not including the
cutting away of any wall, partition or portion thereof, the removal or cutting
of any structural beam or bearing support, or the removal or change of any
required means of egress, or rearrangement of parts of a structure affecting
the exitway requirements; nor shall MINOR REPAIRS include addition to,
alteration of, replacement or relocation of any standpipe, water supply, sewer,
drainage, drain leader, gas, oil, waste, vent or similar piping, electric
wiring, mechanical or other work affecting public health or general safety.
   NEW CONSTRUCTION. Structures for which the start of construction commenced
on or after the effective start date of this chapter and includes any
subsequent improvements to such structures. Any construction started February
15, 1978 and before the effective start date of this chapter is subject to the
ordinance in effect at the time the permit was issued, provided the start of
construction was within 180 days of permit issuance.
   NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads, is completed on or after the effective
date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
   PERSON. An individual, partnership, public or private association or
corporation, firm, trust, estate, municipality, governmental unit, public
utility or any other legal entity whatsoever, which is recognized by law as the
subject of rights and duties.
   POST-FIRM STRUCTURE. A structure for which construction or substantial
improvement occurred after December 31, 1974 or on or after the community’s
initial flood insurance rate map (FIRM) dated February 15, 1978, whichever is
later, and, as such, would be required to be compliant with the regulations of
the National Flood Insurance Program.
   PRE-FIRM STRUCTURE. A structure for which construction or substantial
improvement occurred on or before December 31, 1974 or before the community’s
initial flood insurance rate map (FIRM) dated February 15, 1978, whichever is
later, and, as such, would not be required to be compliant with the regulations
of the National Flood Insurance Program.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle which is:
      (1)   Built on a single chassis;
      (2)   Not more than 400 square feet, measured at the largest horizontal
projections;
      (3)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-
duty truck; and
      (4)   Not designed for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary
living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.
   REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION. The base flood elevation (BFE) or estimated
flood height, as determined using simplified methods plus a freeboard safety
factor of one and one-half feet.
   SPECIAL PERMIT. A special approval which is required for hospitals, nursing
homes, jails and new manufactured home parks/subdivisions and substantial
improvements to such existing parks, when such development is located in all or
a designated portion of a floodplain.
   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA). An area in the floodplain subject to a 1%
or greater chance of flooding in any given year. It is shown on the FIRM as
Zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99 or AH.
   START OF CONSTRUCTION. Includes substantial improvement and other proposed
new development and means the date the permit was issued, provided the actual
start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition,
placement or other improvement was within 180 days after the date of the permit
and shall be completed within 12 months after the date of issuance of the
permit unless a time extension is granted, in writing, by the Floodplain
Administrator. The actual START means either the first placement of permanent
construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings,
the installation of piles, the construction of columns or any work beyond the
stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufacture home on a foundation.
Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing,
grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and
walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers,
foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the
installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds
not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a
substantial improvement, the actual START OF CONSTRUCTION means the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building,
whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
   STRUCTURE. A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage
tank that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home.
   SUBDIVISION. The division or re-division of a lot, tract or parcel of land
by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land
including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether immediate or
future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs, or
devisees, transfer of ownership or building or lot development; provided,
however, that the SUBDIVISION by lease of land for agricultural purposes into
parcels of more than ten acres, not involving any new street or easement of
access or any residential dwelling, shall be exempted.
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage from any cause sustained by a structure whereby
the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal
or exceed 50% or more of the market value of the structure before the damage
occurred.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or
other improvement of a structure, of which the cost equals or exceeds 50% of
the market value of the structure before the start of construction of the
improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred substantial
damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not,
however, include any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications
which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are
the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions.
   UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE (UCC). The statewide building code adopted by the
state’s General Assembly, applicable to new construction in all municipalities
whether administered by the municipality, a third party or the Department of
Labor and Industry, applicable to residential and commercial buildings, the
code adopted The International Residential Code (IRC) and the International
Building Code (IBC), by reference, as the construction standard applicable with
the state floodplain construction. For coordination purposes, references to the
above are made specifically to various sections of the IRC and the IBC.
   VARIANCE. A grant of relief by a community from the terms of a floodplain
management regulation.
   VIOLATION. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community’s floodplain management regulations. A structure
or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications or
other evidence of compliance required in 44 C.F.R. § 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)
(10), (d)(3). (e)(2), (e)(4) or (e)(5) is presumed to be in violation until
such time as that documentation is provided.
(Ord. 1534, passed 3-3-2014)
ADMINISTRATION
§ 153.020 DESIGNATION OF FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.
   (A)   The City Administrator within the City Engineer’s office is hereby
appointed to administer and enforce this chapter and is referred to herein as
the Floodplain Administrator. The Floodplain Administrator may:
      (1)   Fulfill the duties and responsibilities set forth in these
regulations;
      (2)   Delegate duties and responsibilities set forth in these regulations
to qualified technical personnel, plan examiners, inspectors and other
employees; or
      (3)   Enter into a written agreement or written contract with another
agency or private sector entity to administer specific provisions of these
regulations. Administration of any part of these regulations by another entity
shall not relieve the community of its responsibilities pursuant to the
participation requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program as set forth
in the Code of Federal Regulations at 44 C.F.R. § 59.22.
   (B)   In the absence of a designated Floodplain Administrator, the
Floodplain Administrator duties are to be fulfilled by the Chief Executive
Officer.
(Ord. 1534, passed 3-3-2014)
§ 153.021 PERMITS REQUIRED.
   A permit shall be required before any construction or development is
undertaken within any area of the city.
(Ord. 1534, passed 3-3-2014)
§ 153.022 DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.
   (A)   The Floodplain Administrator shall issue a permit only after it has
been determined that the proposed work to be undertaken will be in conformance
with the requirements of this and all other applicable codes and ordinances.
   (B)   Prior to the issuance of any permit, the Floodplain Administrator
shall review the application for the permit to determine if all other necessary
government permits required by state and federal laws have been obtained, such
as those required by the state’s Sewage Facilities Act (35 P.S. §§ 750.1 et
seq., as amended); the state’s Dam Safety and Encroachments Act (32 P.S. §§
693.1 et seq., as amended); the state’s Clean Streams Act (35 P.S. §§ 691.1 et
seq., as amended); and the U.S. Clean Water Act, § 404, 33 U.S.C. § 1344. No
permit shall be issued until this determination has been made.
   (C)   During the construction period, the Floodplain Administrator or other
authorized official shall inspect the premises to determine that the work is
progressing in compliance with the information provided on the permit
application and with all applicable municipal laws and ordinances. He or she
shall make as many inspections during and upon completion of the work as are
necessary.
   (D)   In the discharge of his or her or her duties, the Floodplain
Administrator shall have the authority to enter any building, structure,
premises or development in the identified floodplain area, upon presentation of
proper credentials, at any reasonable hour to enforce the provisions of this
chapter.
   (E)   In the event the Floodplain Administrator discovers that the work does
not comply with the permit application or any applicable laws and ordinances,
or that there has been a false statement or misrepresentation by any applicant,
the Floodplain Administrator shall revoke the permit and report such fact to
the Council for whatever action it considers necessary.
   (F)   The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain in perpetuity all records
associated with the requirements of this chapter, including, but not limited
to, finished construction elevation data, permitting, inspection and
enforcement.
   (G)   The Floodplain Administrator is the official responsible for
submitting a biennial report to FEMA concerning community participation in the
National Flood Insurance Program.
   (H)   The responsibility, authority and means to implement the commitments
of the Floodplain Administrator can be delegated from the person identified.
However, the ultimate responsibility lies with the person identified in this
chapter as the Floodplain Administrator/Manager.
   (I)   The Floodplain Administrator shall consider the requirements of the 34
Pa. Code and the 2009 IBC and the 2009 IRC, or latest revisions thereof.
(Ord. 1534, passed 3-3-2014)
§ 153.023 APPLICATION PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Application for such a permit shall be made, in writing, to the
Floodplain Administrator on forms supplied by the city. Such application shall
contain the following:
      (1)   Name and address of applicant;
      (2)   Name and address of owner of land on which proposed construction is
to occur;
      (3)   Name and address of contractor;
      (4)   Site location including address;
      (5)   Listing of other permits required;
      (6)   Brief description of proposed work and estimated cost, including a
breakout of flood-related cost and the market value of the building before the
flood damage occurred where appropriate; and
      (7)   A plan of the site showing the exact size and location of the
proposed construction as well as any existing buildings or structures.
   (B)   If any proposed construction or development is located entirely or
partially within any identified floodplain area, applicants for permits shall
provide all the necessary information in sufficient detail and clarity to
enable the Floodplain Administrator to determine that:
      (1)   All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage and conform with the requirements of this and all other applicable codes
and ordinances;
      (2)   All utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and
water systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood
damage;
      (3)   Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood
hazards;
      (4)   Structures will be anchored to prevent floatation, collapse or
lateral movement;
      (5)   Building materials are flood-resistant;
      (6)   Appropriate practices that minimize flood damage have been used;
and
      (7)   Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning
equipment and other service facilities have been designed and located to
prevent water entry or accumulation.
   (C)   Applicants shall file the following minimum information plus any other
pertinent information as may be required by the Floodplain Administrator to
make the above determination:
      (1)   A completed permit application form;
      (2)   A plan of the entire site, clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of
one inch being equal to 100 feet or less, showing the following:
         (a)   North arrow, scale and date;
         (b)   Topographic contour lines, if available;
         (c)   The location of all existing and proposed buildings, structures
and other improvements, including the location of any existing or proposed
subdivision and development;
         (d)   The location of all existing streets, drives and other access
ways; and
         (e)   The location of any existing bodies of water or watercourses,
identified floodplain areas and, if available, information pertaining to the
floodway, and the flow of water including direction and velocities.
      (3)   Plans of all proposed buildings, structures and other improvements,
drawn at suitable scale showing the following:
         (a)   The proposed lowest floor elevation of any proposed building
based upon North American Vertical Datum of 1988;
         (b)   The elevation of the base flood; and
         (c)   Supplemental information as may be necessary under 34 Pa. Code,
the 2009 IBC or the 2009 IRC.
      (4)   The following data and documentation:
         (a)   If available, information concerning flood depths, pressures,
velocities, impact and uplift forces and other factors associated with a base
flood; and floodway area (see §
153.041(A)) when combined with all other existing and anticipated development,
will not increase the base flood elevation at any point;
         (b)   Documentation, certified by a registered professional engineer
or architect, to show that the cumulative effect of any proposed development
within an AE Area/District without floodway (see §
153.041(B)) when combined with all other existing and anticipated development,
will not increase the base flood elevation more than one foot at any point
within the community;
         (c)   1.   A document, certified by a registered professional engineer
or architect, which states that the proposed construction or development has
been adequately designed to withstand the pressures, velocities, impact and
uplift forces associated with the base flood.
            2.   Such statement shall include a description of the type and
extent of floodproofing measures which have been incorporated into the design
of the structure and/or the development.
         (d)   Detailed information needed to determine compliance with §§
153.057(F) and
153.058, including:
            1.   The amount, location and purpose of any materials or
substances referred to in §§
153.057(F) and
153.058 which are intended to be used, produced, stored or otherwise maintained
on site; and
            2.   A description of the safeguards incorporated into the design
of the proposed structure to prevent leaks or spills of the dangerous materials
or substances listed in §
153.058 during a base flood.
         (e)   The appropriate component of the Department of Environmental
Protection’s planning module for land development; and
         (f)   Where any excavation or grading is proposed, a plan meeting the
requirements of the Department of Environmental Protection to implement and
maintain erosion and sedimentation control.
   (D)   Applications for permits shall be accompanied by a fee, payable to the
municipality based upon the estimated cost of the proposed construction as
determined by the Floodplain Administrator.
(Ord. 1534, passed 3-3-2014)
§ 153.024 REVIEW OF APPLICATION BY OTHERS.
   A copy of all plans and applications for any proposed construction or
development in any identified floodplain area to be considered for approval may
be submitted by the Floodplain Administrator to any other appropriate agencies
and/or individuals (e.g., Planning Commission, Municipal Engineer and the like)
for review and comment.
(Ord. 1534, passed 3-3-2014)
§ 153.025 CHANGES.
   After the issuance of a permit by the Floodplain Administrator, no changes
of any kind shall be made to the application, permit or any of the plans,
specifications or other documents submitted with the application without the
written consent or approval of the Floodplain Administrator. Requests for any
such change shall be in writing, and shall be submitted by the applicant to
Floodplain Administrator for consideration.
(Ord. 1534, passed 3-3-2014)
§ 153.026 PLACARDS.
   In addition to the permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall issue a
placard which shall be displayed on the premises during the time construction
is in progress. This placard shall show the number of the permit, the date of
its issuance and be signed by the Floodplain Administrator.
(Ord. 1534, passed 3-3-2014)
§ 153.027 START OF CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   Work on the proposed construction or development shall begin within
180 days after the date of issuance of the development permit. Work shall also
be completed within 12 months after the date of issuance of the permit or the
permit shall expire unless a time extension is granted, in writing, by the
Floodplain Administrator. The issuance of a development permit does not refer
to the zoning approval.
   (B)   The actual start of construction means either the first placement of
permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or
footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns or any work
beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufacture home on a
foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as
clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets
and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers
or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the
installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds
not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a
substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building,
whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
   (C)   Time extensions shall be granted only if a written request is
submitted by the applicant, who sets forth sufficient and reasonable cause for
the Floodplain Administrator to approve such a request and the original permit
is compliant with the ordinance and FIRM/FIS in effect at the time the
extension is granted.
(Ord. 1534, passed 3-3-2014)
§ 153.028 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Whenever the Floodplain Administrator or other authorized municipal
representative determines that there are reasonable grounds to believe that
there has been a violation of any provisions of this chapter, or of any
regulations adopted pursuant thereto, the Floodplain Administrator shall give
notice of such alleged violation as hereinafter provided.
   (B)   Such notice shall:
      (1)   Be in writing;
      (2)   Include a statement of the reasons for its issuance;
      (3)   Allow a reasonable time not to exceed a period of 30 days for the
performance of any act it requires;
      (4)   Be served upon the property owner or his or her agent as the case
may require; provided, however, that such notice or order shall be deemed to
have been properly served upon such owner or agent when a copy thereof has been
served with such notice by any other method authorized or required by the laws
of this state; and
      (5)   Contain an outline of remedial actions which, if taken, will effect
compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 1534, passed 3-3-2014)
§ 153.029 APPEALS.
   (A)   Any person aggrieved by any action or decision of the Floodplain
Administrator concerning the administration of the provisions of this chapter,
may appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board. Such appeal must be filed, in writing,
within 30 days after the decision, determination or action of the Floodplain
Administrator.
   (B)   Upon receipt of such appeal, the Zoning Hearing Board shall consider
the appeal in accordance with the Municipal Planning Code and any other local
ordinance.
   (C)   Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Zoning Hearing Board may
seek relief therefrom by appeal to court, as provided by the laws of this state
including the state’s Floodplain Management Act.
(Ord. 1534, passed 3-3-2014)
IDENTIFICATION OF FLOODPLAIN AREAS
§ 153.040 IDENTIFICATION.
   (A)   The identified floodplain area shall be: any areas of city, classified
as special flood hazard areas (SFHAs) in the flood insurance study (FIS) and
the accompanying flood insurance rate maps (FIRMs) dated February 19, 2014 and
issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), or the most recent
revision thereof, including all digital data developed as part of the flood
insurance study.
   (B)   The above referenced FIS and FIRMs, and any subsequent revisions and
amendments are hereby adopted by the city and declared to be a part of this
chapter.
(Ord. 1534, passed 3-3-2014)
§ 153.041 DESCRIPTION AND SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS OF IDENTIFIED FLOODPLAIN AREAS.
   The identified floodplain area shall consist of the following specific
areas.
   (A)   The floodway area shall be those areas identified in the FIS and the
FIRM as floodway and which represent the channel of a watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without increasing the water surface elevation by more than one foot at any
point. This term shall also include floodway areas which have been identified
in other available studies or sources of information for those special flood
hazard areas where no floodway has been identified in the FIS and FIRM.
      (1)   Within any floodway area, no encroachments, including fill, new
construction, substantial improvements or other development shall be permitted
unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the proposed
encroachment would not result in any increase in flood levels within the
community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
      (2)   Within any floodway area, no new construction or development shall
be allowed, unless the appropriate permit is obtained from the Department of
Environmental Protection Regional Office.
   (B)   The AE Area/District shall be those areas identified as an AE Zone on
the FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA for which base flood elevations
have been provided.
      (1)   The AE Area adjacent to the floodway shall be those areas
identified as an AE Zone on the FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA for
which base flood elevations have been provided and a floodway has been
delineated.
      (2)   AE Area without floodway shall be those areas identified as an AE
zone on the FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA for which base flood
elevations have been provided but no floodway has been determined.
         (a)   No permit shall be granted for any construction, development,
use or activity within any AE Area/District without floodway unless it is
demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development would not,
together with all other existing and anticipated development, increase the BFE
more than one foot at any point.
         (b)   No new construction or development shall be located within the
area measured 50 feet landward from the top-of-bank of any watercourse, unless
the appropriate permit is obtained from the Department of Environmental
Protection Regional Office.
   (C)   (1)   The A Area/District shall be those areas identified as an A Zone
on the FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA and for which no base flood
elevations have been provided. For these areas, elevation and floodway
information from other federal, state or other acceptable sources shall be used
when available. Where other acceptable information is not available, the base
flood elevation shall be determined by using the elevation of a point on the
boundary of the identified floodplain area which is nearest the construction
site.
      (2)   In lieu of the above, the municipality may require the applicant to
determine the elevation with hydrologic and hydraulic engineering techniques.
Hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be undertaken only by professional
engineers or others of demonstrated qualifications, who shall certify that the
technical methods used correctly reflect currently accepted technical concepts.
Studies, analyses, computations and the like shall be submitted in sufficient
detail to allow a thorough technical review by the municipality.
   (D)   The AO and AH Area/District shall be those areas identified as Zones
AO and AH on the FIRM and in the FIS. These areas are subject to inundation by
1% annual chance shallow flooding where average depths are between one and
three feet. In Zones AO and AH, drainage paths shall be established to guide
flood waters around and away from structures on slopes.
(Ord. 1534, passed 3-3-2014)
§ 153.042 CHANGES IN IDENTIFICATION OF AREA.
   The identified floodplain area may be revised or modified by the Council
where studies or information provided by a qualified agency or person documents
the need for such revision. However, prior to any such change to the special
flood hazard area, approval must be obtained from FEMA. Additionally, as soon
as practicable, but not later than six months after the date such information
becomes available, a community shall notify FEMA of the changes to the special
flood hazard area by submitting technical or scientific data. See §
153.055(B) for situations where FEMA notification is required.
(Ord. 1534, passed 3-3-2014)
§ 153.043 BOUNDARY DISPUTES.
   Should a dispute concerning any identified floodplain boundary arise, an
initial determination shall be made by the city and any party aggrieved by this
decision or determination may appeal to the Council. The burden of proof shall
be on the appellant.
(Ord. 1534, passed 3-3-2014)
§ 153.044 JURISDICTIONAL BOUNDARY CHANGES.
   Prior to development occurring in areas where annexation or other corporate
boundary changes are proposed or have occurred, the community shall review
flood hazard data affecting the lands subject to boundary changes. The
community shall adopt and enforce floodplain regulations in areas subject to
annexation or corporate boundary changes which meet or exceed those in 44
C.F.R. § 60.3.
(Ord. 1534, passed 3-3-2014)
TECHNICAL PROVISIONS
§ 153.055 GENERAL.
   (A)   Alteration or relocation of watercourse.
      (1)   No encroachment, alteration or improvement of any kind shall be
made to any watercourse until all adjacent municipalities which may be affected
by such action have been notified by the municipality, and until all required
permits or approvals have first been obtained from the Department of
Environmental Protection Regional Office.
      (2)   No encroachment, alteration or improvement of any kind shall be
made to any watercourse unless it can be shown that the activity will not
reduce or impede the flood carrying capacity of the watercourse in any way.
      (3)   In addition, FEMA and the state’s Department of Community and
Economic Development shall be notified prior to any alteration or relocation of
any watercourse.
   (B)   Proposed encroachments. When a community proposes to permit the
following encroachments:
      (1)   Any development that causes a rise in the base flood elevations
within the floodway;
      (2)   Any development occurring in Zones A1-30 and Zone AE without a
designated floodway, which will cause a rise of more than one foot in the base
flood elevation; or
      (3)   Alteration or relocation of a stream, including, but not limited
to, installing culverts and bridges, the applicant shall, as per 44 C.F.R. §
65.12:
         (a)   Apply to FEMA for conditional approval of such action prior to
permitting the encroachments to occur;
         (b)   Upon receipt of the Administrator’s conditional approval of map
change and prior to approving the proposed encroachments, a community shall
provide evidence to FEMA of the adoption of floodplain management ordinances
incorporating the increased base flood elevations and/or revised floodway
reflecting the post-project condition; and
         (c)   Upon completion of the proposed encroachments, a community shall
provide as-built certifications. FEMA will initiate a final map revision upon
receipt of such certifications in accordance with 44 C.F.R. part 67.
   (C)   Compliance. Any new construction, development, uses or activities
allowed within any identified floodplain area shall be undertaken in strict
compliance with the provisions contained in this chapter and any other
applicable codes, ordinances and regulations.
(Ord. 1534, passed 3-3-2014)
§ 153.056 ELEVATION AND FLOODPROOFING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Residential structures.
      (1)   In AE, A1-30 and AH Zones, any new construction or substantial
improvement shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated up to, or
above, the regulatory flood elevation.
      (2)   In A Zones, where there are no base flood elevations specified on
the FIRM, any new construction or substantial improvement shall have the lowest
floor, including basement, elevated up to. or above, the regulatory flood
elevation determined in accordance with §
153.041(C).
      (3)   In AO Zones, any new construction or substantial improvement shall
have the lowest floor, including basement, at or above the highest adjacent
grade at least as high as the depth number specified on the FIRM.
      (4)   The design and construction standards and specifications contained
in the 2009 International Building Code (IBC) and in the 2009 International
Residential Code (IRC), or the most recent revisions thereof, and ASCE 24 and
34 Pa. Code, Chapters 401 through 405 as amended, shall be utilized where they
are more restrictive.
   (B)   Non-residential structures.
      (1)   In AE, A1-30 and AH Zones, any new construction or substantial
improvement of a non-residential structure shall have the lowest floor,
including basement, elevated up to, or above, the regulatory flood elevation,
or be designed and constructed so that the space enclosed below the regulatory
flood elevation:
         (a)   Is floodproofed so that the structure is water-tight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water; and
         (b)   Has structural components with the capability of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy.
      (2)   In A Zones, where no base flood elevations are specified on the
FIRM, any new construction or substantial improvement shall have the lowest
floor, including basement, elevated or completely floodproofed up to, or above,
the regulatory flood elevation determined in accordance with §
153.041(C).
      (3)   In AO Zones, any new construction or substantial improvement shall
have their lowest floor elevated or completely floodproofed above the highest
adjacent grade to at least as high as the depth number specified on the FIRM.
      (4)   Any non-residential structure, or part thereof, made water-tight
below the regulatory flood elevation shall be floodproofed in accordance with
the WI or W2 space classification standards contained in the publication
entitled Flood-Proofing Regulations published by the U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers June 1972, as amended March 1992, or with some other equivalent
standard. All plans and specifications for such floodproofing shall be
accompanied by a statement certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect which states that the proposed design and methods of construction are
in conformance with the above referenced standards.
      (5)   The design and construction standards and specifications contained
in the 2009 International Building Code (IBC) and in the 2009 International
Residential Code (IRC), or the most recent revisions thereof, and ASCE 24 and
34 Pa. Code Chapters 401 through 405, as amended, shall be utilized, where they
are more restrictive.
   (C)   Space below the lowest floor.
      (1)   Fully enclosed space below the lowest floor, excluding basements,
which will be used solely for the parking of a vehicle, building access or
incidental storage in an area other than a basement, shall be designed and
constructed to allow for the automatic entry and exit of flood waters for the
purpose of equalizing hydrostatic forces on exterior walls. The term FULLY
ENCLOSED SPACE also includes crawl spaces.
      (2)   Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a
registered professional engineer or architect, or meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria:
         (a)   A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed space;
         (b)   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade; and
         (c)   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers or other
coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters.
   (D)   Historic structures. Historic structures undergoing repair or
rehabilitation that would constitute a substantial improvement, as defined in
this chapter, must comply with all ordinance requirements that do not preclude
the structure’s continued designation as a historic structure. Documentation
that a specific ordinance requirement will cause removal of the structure from
the National Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic
places must be obtained from the Secretary of the Interior or the State
Historic Preservation Officer. Any exemption from ordinance requirements will
be the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the
structure.
   (E)   Accessory structures. Structures accessory to a principal building
need not be elevated or floodproofed to remain dry, but shall comply, at a
minimum, with the following requirements:
      (1)   The structure shall not be designed or used for human habitation,
but shall be limited to the parking of vehicles, or to the storage of tools,
material and equipment related to the principal use or activity;
      (2)   Floor area shall not exceed 600 square feet;
      (3)   The structure will have a low damage potential;
      (4)   The structure will be located on the site so as to cause the least
obstruction to the flow of flood waters;
      (5)   Power lines, wiring and outlets will be elevated to the regulatory
flood elevation;
      (6)   Permanently affixed utility equipment and appliances such as
furnaces, heaters, washers, dryers and the like are prohibited;
      (7)   Sanitary facilities are prohibited; and
      (8)   The structure shall be adequately anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse and lateral movement and shall be designed to automatically provide
for the entry and exit of floodwater for the purpose of equalizing hydrostatic
forces on the walls. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be
certified by a registered professional engineer or architect, or meet or exceed
the following minimum criteria:
         (a)   A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed space;
         (b)   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade; and
         (c)   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers and the like or
other coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic entry and
exit of flood waters.
(Ord. 1534, passed 3-3-2014)
§ 153.057 DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.
   The following minimum standards shall apply for all construction and
development proposed within any identified floodplain area.
   (A)   Fill. If fill is used, it shall:
      (1)   Extend laterally at least 15 feet beyond the building line from all
points;
      (2)   Consist of soil or small rock materials only. Sanitary landfills
shall not be permitted;
      (3)   Be compacted to provide the necessary permeability and resistance
to erosion, scouring or settling;
      (4)   Be no steeper than one vertical to two horizontal feet unless
substantiated data justifying steeper slopes are submitted to, and approved by
the Floodplain Administrator; and
      (5)   Be used to the extent to which it does not adversely affect
adjacent properties.
   (B)   Drainage facilities. Storm drainage facilities shall be designed to
convey the flow of stormwater runoff in a safe and efficient manner. The system
shall ensure proper drainage along streets, and provide positive drainage away
from buildings. The system shall also be designed to prevent the discharge of
excess runoff onto adjacent properties.
   (C)   Water and sanitary sewer facilities and systems.
      (1)   All new or replacement water supply and sanitary sewer facilities
and systems shall be located, designed and constructed to minimize or eliminate
flood damages and the infiltration of flood waters.
      (2)   Sanitary sewer facilities and systems shall be designed to prevent
the discharge of untreated sewage into flood waters.
      (3)   No part of any on-site waste disposal system shall be located
within any identified floodplain area except in strict compliance with all
state and local regulations for such systems. If any such system is permitted,
it shall be located so as to avoid impairment to it, or contamination from it,
during a flood.
      (4)   The design and construction provisions of the UCC and FEMA #348,
“Protecting Building Utilities From Flood Damages” and “The International
Private Sewage Disposal Code” shall be utilized.
   (D)   Other utilities. All other utilities such as gas lines, electrical and
telephone systems shall be located, elevated (where possible) and constructed
to minimize the chance of impairment during a flood.
   (E)   Streets. The finished elevation of all new streets shall be no more
than one foot below the regulatory flood elevation.
   (F)   Storage. All materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive or, in
times of flooding, could be injurious to human, animal or plant life, and not
listed in §
153.058, shall be stored at or above the regulatory flood elevation or
floodproofed to the maximum extent possible.
   (G)   Placement of buildings and structures. All buildings and structures
shall be designed, located and constructed so as to offer the minimum
obstruction to the flow of water and shall be designed to have a minimum effect
upon the flow and height of flood water.
   (H)   Anchoring.
      (1)   All buildings and structures shall be firmly anchored in accordance
with accepted engineering practices to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral
movement.
      (2)   All air ducts, large pipes, storage tanks and other similar objects
or components located below the regulatory flood elevation shall be securely
anchored or affixed to prevent flotation.
   (I)   Floors, walls and ceilings.
      (1)   Wood flooring used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be installed to accommodate a lateral expansion of the flooring, perpendicular
to the flooring grain without causing structural damage to the building.
      (2)   Plywood used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be of
a marine or water-resistant variety.
      (3)   Walls and ceilings at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be designed and constructed of materials that are water-resistant and will
withstand inundation.
      (4)   Windows, doors and other components at or below the regulatory
flood elevation shall be made of metal or other water-resistant material.
   (J)    Paints and adhesives.
      (1)   Paints and other finishes used at or below the regulatory flood
elevation shall be of marine or water-resistant quality.
      (2)   Adhesives used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be
of a marine or water-resistant variety.
      (3)   All wooden components (doors, trim, cabinets and the like) used at
or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be finished with a marine or
water-resistant paint or other finishing material.
   (K)   Electrical components.
      (1)   Electrical distribution panels shall be at least three feet above
the base flood elevation.
      (2)   Separate electrical circuits shall serve lower levels and shall be
dropped from above.
   (L)   Equipment. Water heaters, furnaces, air conditioning and ventilating
units, and other electrical, mechanical or utility equipment or apparatus shall
not be located below the regulatory flood elevation.
   (M)   Fuel supply systems. All gas and oil supply systems shall be designed
to prevent the infiltration of flood waters into the system and discharges from
the system into flood waters. Additional provisions shall be made for the
drainage of these systems in the event that flood water infiltration occurs.
   (N)   Uniform construction code coordination. The standards and
specifications contained 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401 through 405), as amended,
and not limited to the following provisions shall apply to the above and other
sections and divisions of this chapter, to the extent that they are more
restrictive and supplement the requirements of this chapter.
      (1)   International Building Code (IBC) 2009, or the latest edition
thereof, §§ 801, 1202, 1403, 1603, 1605, 1612, 3402 and Appendix G.
      (2)   International Residential Building Code (IRC) 2009, or the latest
edition thereof, §§ R104, R105, R109, R322, Appendix E and Appendix J.
(Ord. 1534, passed 3-3-2014)
§ 153.058 DEVELOPMENT WHICH MAY ENDANGER HUMAN LIFE.
   (A)   In accordance with the state’s Floodplain Management Act, and the
regulations adopted by the Department of Community and Economic Development as
required by the Act, any new or substantially improved structure which:
      (1)   Will be used for the production or storage of any of the following
dangerous materials or substances;
      (2)   Will be used for any activity requiring the maintenance of a supply
of more than 550 gallons, or other comparable volume, of any of the following
dangerous materials or substances on the premises; or
      (3)   Will involve the production, storage or use of any amount of
radioactive substances; shall be subject to the provisions of this section, in
addition to all other applicable provisions. The following list of materials
and substances are considered dangerous to human life: acetone; ammonia;
benzene; calcium carbide; carbon disulfide; celluloid; chlorine; hydrochloric
acid; hydrocyanic acid; magnesium; nitric acid and oxides of nitrogen;
petroleum products (gasoline, fuel oil and the like); phosphorus; potassium;
sodium; sulphur and sulphur products; pesticides (including insecticides,
fungicides, and rodenticides); radioactive substances, insofar as such
substances are not otherwise regulated.
   (B)   Within any floodway area, any structure of the kind described in
division (A) above shall be prohibited. Where permitted within any identified
floodplain area, any new or substantially improved residential structure of the
kind described in division (A) above shall be elevated to remain completely dry
up to at least one and one-half feet above base flood elevation and built in
accordance with §§
153.055 through
153.057.
   (C)   (1)   Where permitted within any identified floodplain area, any new
or substantially improved non-residential structure of the kind described in
division (A) above shall be built in accordance with §§
153.055 through
153.057 including:
         (a)   Elevated or designed and constructed to remain completely dry up
to at least one and one-half feet above base flood elevation; and
         (b)   Designed to prevent pollution from the structure or activity
during the course of a base flood.
      (2)   Any such structure, or part thereof, that will be built below the
regulatory flood elevation shall be designed and constructed in accordance with
the standards for completely dry floodproofing contained in the publication
Flood-Proofing Regulations (U.S. Army Corps of Engineers June 1972, as amended
March 1992), or with some other equivalent water-tight standard.
(Ord. 1534, passed 3-3-2014)
§ 153.059 SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS FOR SUBDIVISIONS AND DEVELOPMENT.
   All subdivision proposals and development proposals containing at least 50
lots or at least five acres, whichever is the lesser, in identified floodplain
areas where base flood elevation data are not available, shall be supported by
hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses that determine base flood
elevations and floodway information. The analyses shall be prepared by a
licensed professional engineer in a format required by FEMA for a conditional
letter of map revision and letter of map revision. Submittal requirements and
processing fees shall be the responsibility of the applicant.
(Ord. 1534, passed 3-3-2014)
§ 153.060 SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS FOR MANUFACTURED HOMES.
   (A)   Within any Floodway Area/District, manufactured homes shall be
prohibited. If a variance is obtained in accordance with the criteria in §§
153.105 and
153.106, then the following provisions apply.
   (B)   Where permitted within any identified floodplain area, all
manufactured homes, and any improvements thereto, shall be:
      (1)   Placed on a permanent foundation;
      (2)   Elevated so that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is at
least one and one-half feet above base flood elevation; and
      (3)   Anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement.
   (C)   Installation of manufactured homes shall be done in accordance with
the manufacturers’ installation instructions as provided by the manufacturer.
Where the applicant cannot provide the above information, the requirements of
Appendix E of the 2009 International Residential Building Code or the U.S.
Department of Housing and Urban Development’s Permanent Foundations for
Manufactured Housing, 1984 Edition, draft or latest revision thereto and 34 Pa.
Code Chapter 401 through 405 shall apply.
   (D)   Consideration shall be given to the installation requirements of the
2009 IBC and the 2009 IRC, or the most recent revisions thereto, and 34 Pa.
Code, as amended, where appropriate and/or applicable to units where the
manufacturers’ standards for anchoring cannot be provided or were not
established for the proposed unit(s) installation.
(Ord. 1534, passed 3-3-2014)
§ 153.061 SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS FOR RECREATIONAL VEHICLES.
   Recreational vehicles in Zones A, A1-30, AH and AE must either:
   (A)   Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days;
   (B)   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
   (C)   Meet the permit requirements for manufactured homes in §
153.060.
(Ord. 1534, passed 3-3-2014)
ACTIVITIES REQUIRING SPECIAL PERMITS
§ 153.075 GENERAL.
   In accordance with the administrative regulations promulgated by the
Department of Community and Economic Development to implement the state’s
Floodplain Management Act, the following activities shall be prohibited within
any identified floodplain area unless a special permit has been issued by the
city.
   (A)   The commencement of any of the following activities or the
construction, enlargement or expansion of any structure used, or intended to be
used, for any of the following activities:
      (1)   Hospitals;
      (2)   Nursing homes; or
      (3)   Jails or prisons.
   (B)   The commencement of, or any construction of, a new manufactured home
park or manufactured home subdivision or substantial improvement to an existing
manufactured home park or manufactured home subdivision.
(Ord. 1534, passed 3-3-2014)
§ 153.076 APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS FOR SPECIAL PERMITS.
   Applicants for special permits shall provide five copies of the following
items:
   (A)   A written request, including a completed permit application form;
   (B)   A small scale map showing the vicinity in which the proposed site is
located;
   (C)   A plan of the entire site, clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of one
inch being equal to 100 feet or less, showing the following:
      (1)   North arrow, scale and date;
      (2)   Topography based upon the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of
1988, showing existing and proposed contours at intervals of two feet;
      (3)   All property and lot lines, including dimensions and the size of
the site expressed in acres or square feet;
      (4)   The location of all existing streets, drives, other access ways and
parking areas, with information concerning widths, pavement types and
construction, and elevations;
      (5)   The location of any existing bodies of water or watercourses,
buildings, structures and other public or private facilities, including
railroad tracks and facilities, and any other natural and human-made features
affecting, or affected by, the proposed activity or development;
      (6)   The location of the floodplain boundary line, information and spot
elevations concerning the base flood elevation, and information concerning the
flow of water including direction and velocities;
      (7)   The location of all proposed buildings, structures, utilities and
any other improvements; and
      (8)   Any other information which the municipality considers necessary
for adequate review of the application.
   (D)   Plans of all proposed buildings, structures and other improvements,
clearly and legibly drawn at suitable scale showing the following:
      (1)   Sufficiently detailed architectural or engineering drawings,
including floor plans, sections and exterior building elevations, as
appropriate;
      (2)   For any proposed building, the elevation of the lowest floor,
including basement, and, as required, the elevation of any other floor;
      (3)   Complete information concerning flood depths, pressures,
velocities, impact and uplift forces, and other factors associated with the
base flood;
      (4)   Detailed information concerning any proposed floodproofing
measures;
      (5)   Cross-section drawings for all proposed streets, drives, other
accessways and parking areas, showing all rights-of-way and pavement widths;
      (6)   Profile drawings for all proposed streets, drives and vehicular
accessways, including existing and proposed grades; and
      (7)   Plans and profiles of all proposed sanitary and storm sewer
systems, water supply systems and any other utilities and facilities.
   (E)   The following data and documentation:
      (1)   Certification from the applicant that the site upon which the
activity or development is proposed is an existing separate and single parcel,
owned by the applicant or the client he or she represents;
      (2)   Certification from a registered professional engineer, architect or
landscape architect that the proposed construction has been adequately designed
to protect against damage from the base flood;
      (3)   A statement, certified by a registered professional engineer,
architect, landscape architect or other qualified person which contains a
complete and accurate description of the nature and extent of pollution that
might possibly occur from the development during the course of a base flood,
including a statement concerning the effects such pollution may have on human
life;
      (4)   A statement certified by a registered professional engineer,
architect or landscape architect, which contains a complete and accurate
description of the effects the proposed development will have on base flood
elevation and flows;
      (5)   A statement, certified by a registered professional engineer,
architect or landscape architect, which contains a complete and accurate
description of the kinds and amounts of any loose buoyant materials or debris
that may possibly exist or be located on the site below the base flood
elevation and the effects such materials and debris may have on base flood
elevation and flows;
      (6)   The appropriate component of the Department of Environmental
Protection’s planning module for land development;
      (7)   Where any excavation or grading is proposed, a plan meeting the
requirements of the Department of Environmental Protection to implement and
maintain erosion and sedimentation control;
      (8)   Any other applicable permits such as, but not limited to, a permit
for any activity regulated by the Department of Environmental Protection under
§ 302 of Act 1978-166; and
      (9)   An evacuation plan which fully explains the manner in which the
site will be safely evacuated before or during the course of a base flood.
(Ord. 1534, passed 3-3-2014)
§ 153.077 APPLICATION REVIEW PROCEDURES.
   Upon receipt of an application for a special permit by the city, the
following procedures shall apply in addition to those of §§
153.020 through
153.029.
   (A)   Within three working days following receipt of the application, a
complete copy of the application and all accompanying documentation shall be
forwarded to the County Planning Commission by registered or certified mail for
its review and recommendations. Copies of the application shall also be
forwarded to the City Planning Commission and City Engineer for review and
comment.
   (B)   If an application is received that is incomplete, the city shall
notify the applicant in writing, stating in what respect the application is
deficient.
   (C)   If the city decides to disapprove an application, it shall notify the
applicant, in writing, of the reasons for the disapproval.
   (D)   If the city approves an application, it shall file written
notification, together with the application and all pertinent information, with
the Department of Community and Economic Development, by registered or
certified mail, within five working days after the date of approval.
   (E)   Before issuing the special permit, the city shall allow the Department
of Community and Economic Development 30 days, after receipt of the
notification by the Department, to review the application and decision made by
the city.
   (F)   If the city does not receive any communication from the Department of
Community and Economic Development during the 30-day review period, it may
issue a special permit to the applicant.
   (G)   If the Department of Community and Economic Development should decide
to disapprove an application, it shall notify the city and the applicant, in
writing, of the reasons for the disapproval, and the city shall not issue the
special permit.
(Ord. 1534, passed 3-3-2014)
§ 153.078 SPECIAL TECHNICAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   In addition to the requirements of §§
153.055 through
153.061, the following minimum requirements shall also apply to any proposed
development requiring a special permit. If there is any conflict between any of
the following requirements and those in §§
153.055 through
153.061, or in any other code, ordinance or regulation, the more restrictive
provision shall apply.
   (B)   No application for a special permit shall be approved unless it can be
determined that the structure or activity will be located, constructed and
maintained in a manner which will:
      (1)   Fully protect the health and safety of the general public and any
occupants of the structure. At a minimum, all new structures shall be designed,
located and constructed so that:
         (a)   The structure will survive inundation by waters of the base
flood without any lateral movement or damage to either the structure itself, or
to any of its equipment or contents below the BFE;
         (b)   The lowest floor, including basement, will be elevated to at
least one and one-half feet above base flood elevation; and
         (c)   The occupants of the structure can remain inside for an
indefinite period of time and be safely evacuated at any time during the base
flood.
      (2)   Prevent any significant possibility of pollution, increased flood
levels or flows, or debris endangering life and property.
   (C)   All hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be undertaken only by
professional engineers or others of demonstrated qualifications, who shall
certify that the technical methods used correctly reflect currently accepted
technical concepts. Studies, analyses, computations and the like shall be
submitted in sufficient detail to allow a thorough technical review by the city
and the Department of Community and Economic Development.
(Ord. 1534, passed 3-3-2014)
EXISTING STRUCTURES IN IDENTIFIED FLOODPLAIN AREAS
§ 153.090 EXISTING STRUCTURES.
   The provisions of this chapter do not require any changes or improvements to
be made to lawfully existing structures. However, when an improvement is made
to any existing structure, the provisions of §
153.091 shall apply.
(Ord. 1534, passed 3-3-2014)
§ 153.091 IMPROVEMENTS.
   The following provisions shall apply whenever any improvement is made to an
existing structure located within any identified floodplain area.
   (A)   No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be allowed
within any Floodway Area/District that would cause any increase in BFE.
   (B)   No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be allowed
within AE Area/District without floodway that would, together with all other
existing and anticipated development, increase the BFE more than one foot at
any point.
   (C)   Any modification, alteration, reconstruction or improvement of any
kind to an existing structure to an extent or amount of 50% or more of its
market value, shall constitute a substantial improvement and shall be
undertaken only in full compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
   (D)   The above activity shall also address the requirements of the 34 Pa.
Code, as amended, and the 2009 IBC and the 2009 IRC.
   (E)   Within any Floodway Area/District (see §
153.041(A)), no new construction or development shall be allowed, unless the
appropriate permit is obtained from the Department of Environmental Protection
Regional Office.
   (F)   Within any AE Area/District without floodway (See §
153.041(B)), no new construction or development shall be located within the
area measured 50 feet landward from the top-of-bank of any watercourse, unless
the appropriate permit is obtained from the Department of Environmental
Protection Regional Office.
   (G)   Any modification, alteration, reconstruction or improvement of any
kind to an existing structure, to an extent or amount of less than 50% of its
market value, shall be elevated and/or floodproofed to the greatest extent
possible.
(Ord. 1534, passed 3-3-2014)
VARIANCES
§ 153.105 GENERAL.
   If compliance with any of the requirements of this chapter would result in
an exceptional hardship to a prospective builder, developer or landowner, the
city may, upon request, grant relief from the strict application of the
requirements.
(Ord. 1534, passed 3-3-2014)
§ 153.106 VARIANCE PROCEDURES AND CONDITIONS.
   (A)   Requests for variances shall be considered by the city in accordance
with the procedures contained in §
153.029 and the following.
      (1)   No variance shall be granted for any construction, development, use
or activity within any Floodway Area/District that would cause any increase in
the BFE.
      (2)   No variance shall be granted for any construction, development, use
or activity within any AE Area/District without floodway that would, together
with all other existing and anticipated development, increase the BFE more than
one foot at any point.
      (3)   Except for a possible modification of the regulatory flood
elevation requirement involved, no variance shall be granted for any of the
other requirements pertaining specifically to development regulated by special
permit §§
153.075 through
153.078 or to development which may endanger human life (§
153.058).
      (4)   If granted, a variance shall involve only the least modification
necessary to provide relief.
      (5)   In granting any variance, the city shall attach whatever reasonable
conditions and safeguards it considers necessary in order to protect the public
health, safety and welfare, and to achieve the objectives of this chapter.
      (6)   Whenever a variance is granted, the city shall notify the applicant
in writing that:
         (a)   The granting of the variance may result in increased premium
rates for flood insurance; and/or
         (b)   Such variances may increase the risks to life and property.
      (7)   In reviewing any request for a variance, the city shall consider,
at a minimum, the following:
         (a)   There is good and sufficient cause;
         (b)   Failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional
hardship to the applicant; and
         (c)   The granting of the variance will:
            1.   Neither result in an unacceptable or prohibited increase in
flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or extraordinary public
expense; nor
            2.   Create nuisances, cause fraud on, or victimize the public or
conflict with any other applicable state or local ordinances and regulations.
      (8)   A complete record of all variance requests and related actions
shall be maintained by the city. In addition, a report of all variances granted
during the year shall be included in the annual report to FEMA.
   (B)   Notwithstanding any of the above, however, all structures shall be
designed and constructed so as to have the capability of resisting the 1%
annual chance flood.
(Ord. 1534, passed 3-3-2014)
§ 153.999 PENALTY.
   Any person who fails to comply with any or all of the requirements or
provisions of this chapter or who fails or refuses to comply with any notice,
order of direction of the Floodplain Administrator or any other authorized
employee of the municipality shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction, shall pay a fine to city, of not less than $25 nor more than $600,
plus costs of prosecution. In addition to the above penalties all other actions
are hereby reserved, including an action in equity for the proper enforcement
of this chapter. The imposition of a fine or penalty for any violation of, or
noncompliance with, this chapter shall not excuse the violation or
noncompliance or permit it to continue. All such persons shall be required to
correct or remedy such violations and noncompliance within a reasonable time.
Any development initiated or any structure or building constructed,
reconstructed, enlarged, altered or relocated, in noncompliance with this
chapter may be declared by the Council to be a public nuisance and abatable as
such.
(Ord. 1534, passed 3-3-2014)
CHAPTER 154: SUBDIVISIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
154.001   Purpose
   
154.002   Authority
   
154.003   Jurisdiction
   
154.004   Plan review
   
154.005   Plan approval
   
154.006   Short title
   
154.007   Effective date
   
154.008   Definitions
Procedures; Major Subdivisions
   
154.020   Pre-application investigation
   
154.021   Preliminary plan application
   
154.022   Approval of preliminary plan
   
154.023   Final plan application
   
154.024   Approval of final plan
   
154.025   Recording of plan
Procedures; Minor Subdivisions
   
154.040   Pre-application investigation
   
154.041   Preliminary plan application and approval
   
154.042   Final plan application and approval
   
154.043   Recording of plan
Assurances of Completion
   
154.055   Improvements
   
154.056   Performance assurance
Development Standards
   
154.070   General standards
Plan Requirements
   
154.080   Sketch plan
   
154.081   Preliminary plan
   
154.082   Final plan
Design Standards
   
154.095   General
   
154.096   Streets
   
154.097   Alleys
   
154.098   Blocks
   
154.099   Lots and building lines
   
154.100   Easements
   
154.101   Public areas
   
154.102   Street names
   
154.103   Flood plains
Required Improvements
   
154.115   General
   
154.116   Improvements
Construction Requirements
   
154.130   General
   
154.131   Monuments
   
154.132   Water supply
   
154.133   Sewage disposal
   
154.134   Storm sewers
   
154.135   Streets, subgrade, subdrains, pavements and curbs
   
154.136   Sidewalks
   
154.137   Utilities
   
154.138   Street signs
   
154.139   Shade trees
   
154.140   Street lighting
   
154.141   Existing natural areas
   
154.142   Erosion control
Mobile Home Parks
   
154.155   General
   
154.156   Plan submission
   
154.157   Plan requirements
   
154.158   Construction
   
154.159   Park standards
Administration and Modification
   
154.170   General
   
154.171   Changes
   
154.172   Variances
   
154.173   Records
   
154.174   Validity
 
   
154.999   Penalty
   Appendix A:Statements and acknowledgments
   Appendix B:Lot size and yard requirements
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 154.001 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of these subdivision regulations is to provide for the
harmonious development of the city by:
   (A)   Assisting in the orderly and efficient integration of the many
residential subdivisions and related community facilities;
   (B)   Ensuring conformance of subdivision plans with the public improvement
plans of the city;
   (C)   Ensuring coordination of inter-municipal public improvement plans and
programs;
   (D)   Securing the protection of soil, water and related natural resources;
   (E)   Facilitating the rational movement of traffic;
   (F)   Securing equitable handling of all subdivision plans by providing
uniform standards and procedures, thus, providing suitable and safe sites for
building purposes and human habitation;
   (G)   Ensuring conformance to acceptable standards for the construction of
streets and other public improvements;
   (H)   Providing for proper compliance with state statutes as they relate to
the subdivision and development of land; and
   (I)   Protecting the general public’s interest.
(Ord. 1286, passed 6-7-1982)
§ 154.002 AUTHORITY.
   The Planning Commission is vested by law with jurisdiction and control of
the subdivision of land located within the limits of the city (Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247, as amended (53 P.S. §§ 10101 et seq.),
and the Clean Stream Law, Act 222 (35 P.S. §§ 691.1 et seq.))
(Ord. 1286, passed 6-7-1982)
§ 154.003 JURISDICTION.
   The governing body of the city may regulate subdivisions and land
development within the municipality by enacting a subdivision and land
development ordinance.
   (A)   The ordinance may require that all plats of land lying within the
municipality shall be submitted for approval to the governing body or in lieu
thereof to a planning agency designated in the ordinance for this purpose. All
powers granted herein to the governing body or the planning agency shall be
exercised in accordance with the provisions of the subdivision and land
development ordinance. In the case of any development governed by any future
ordinance adopted pursuant to Article VII of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, Act 247, 53 P.S. §§ 10101 et seq., however, the applicable
provisions of the subdivision and land development ordinance shall be as
modified by such ordinance and the procedures which shall be followed in the
approval of any plat and the rights and duties of the parties thereto shall be
governed by said Article VII of Act 247 and the provisions of the ordinance
adopted thereunder.
   (B)   In accordance with the provisions of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, Act 247, 53 P.S. §§ 10101 et seq., as amended, regulations
governing mobile home (trailer) parks are set forth in §§
154.155 through
154.159.
(Ord. 1286, passed 6-7-1982)
§ 154.004 PLAN REVIEW.
   Before approval of subdivisions under these regulations, the Planning
Commission shall transmit a copy of the proposed subdivision plan to the County
Metropolitan Planning Department for review and report to the Planning
Commission. Pending the receipt and consideration of such report, the
Commission shall defer action thereon, but if such report is not received by
the local authorities within 45 days from the submission of the plan to the
County Metropolitan Planning Department, or within such further time as may be
agreed upon by the local authorities, the Commission may proceed to final
action thereon.
(Ord. 1286, passed 6-7-1982)
§ 154.005 PLAN APPROVAL.
   Plans for subdivisions shall be submitted to and approved by the Planning
Commission before they are recorded.
   (A)   No subdivision of any lot, tract or parcel of land shall be made; no
street, sanitary sewer, storm sewer, water main or other facilities in
connection therewith shall be constructed, opened or dedicated for public use
or travel; or for the common use of occupants of buildings abutting thereon,
except in strict accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   No lot in a subdivision may be sold; no permit to erect, alter or
repair any building upon land in a subdivision may be issued; and no building
may be erected in a subdivision unless and until a subdivision plan has been
approved and recorded and until the improvements recommended by the Planning
Commission and required by the City Council in connection therewith have either
been constructed or guaranteed as hereinafter provided.
   (C)   The provisions of the subdivision and land development regulations
shall apply to and control all land subdivisions whose plans have not been
recorded in the office of the Recorder of Deeds, in and for Erie County,
Pennsylvania, prior to the effective date of the first adopted land subdivision
regulations. The effective date for such regulations was March 1965.
(Ord. 1286, passed 6-7-1982) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.006 SHORT TITLE.
   These regulations shall be known and may be cited as “The City of Corry
Subdivision and Land Development Regulations”.
(Ord. 1286, passed 6-7-1982)
§ 154.007 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This chapter shall become effective on June 7, 1982.
(Ord. 1286, passed 6-7-1982)
§ 154.008 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. The word
“person” includes a corporation, unincorporated association and a partnership
as well as an individual. The word “building” shall be construed as if followed
by the words “or part thereof”. The words “shall” and “will” are mandatory; the
word “may” is permissive. An “agency” shall be construed to include its
successors or assigns.
   APPLICANT. A landowner or developer, as hereinafter defined, who has filed
an application for development including his or her heirs, successors and
assigns.
   ALLEY OR SERVICE DRIVE. A minor right-of-way privately- or publicly-owned,
primarily for service access to the back and sides of properties.
   BASEMENT. A story having more than 50% of its clear height above the average
level of the surrounding ground but with a floor elevation below grade. A
BASEMENT shall be counted as a story for the purpose of height measurement if
the vertical distance between the ceiling and the average level of the
adjoining ground is more than five feet or if used for a dwelling unit not
spaced on other floors of the building.
   BUILDING OR SETBACK LINE. The line within a property defining the required
minimum distance between any building and the adjacent right-of-way and/or
property lines.
   CARTWAY. The surface of a street or alley available for vehicular traffic.
   CELLAR. A story having more than 50% of its clear height below the average
level of the surrounding ground. A CELLAR shall be counted as a story for the
purpose of height measurement if the vertical distance between the ceiling and
the average level of the adjoining ground is more than five feet or if used for
dwelling purposes.
   CITY ENGINEER. An engineer engaged by the city in the official capacity of
City Engineer.
   COMMISSION. The Planning Commission of the city.
   CORNER LOT. A lot, abutting two or more existing or proposed street rights-
of-way at their intersection, on which the front yard building line for all
streets must be observed.
   CROSSWALK. A right-of-way, municipally- or privately-owned intended to
furnish access for pedestrians.
   CUL-DE-SAC. A street intersecting another street at one end and terminating
at the other in a vehicular turn-around.
   CUT. An excavation. The difference between a point on the original ground
and a designated point of lower elevation on the final grade. Also, the
material removed in excavation.
   DEVELOPER. Any landowner, agent of such landowner or tenant with the
permission of such landowner, who makes application for, or who makes or causes
to be made, a subdivision of land.
   DOUBLE-FRONTAGE LOT. A lot with front and rear street frontage.
   DWEL1ING UNIT. An structure, or part thereof, designed to be occupied as
living quarters as a single housekeeping unit.
   EASEMENT. A right-of-way granted for limited use of land and public and
quasi-public purposes including such things as utilities and drainage.
   ENGINEER. A professional engineer licensed as such in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
   EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN. A plan showing all present and proposed
grades and facilities for storm water, drainage, erosion and sediment controls,
and which is in accordance with the requirements of the Department of
Environmental Resources.
   EXCAVATION. Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other similar
material is dug into, cut, quarried, uncovered, removed, displaced, relocated
or bulldozed and shall include the conditions resulting therefrom.
   FILL. Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other material is
placed, pushed, dumped, pulled, transported or moved to a new location above
the natural surface of the ground or on top of the stripped surface and shall
include the conditions resulting therefrom. The difference in elevation between
a point on the original ground and a designated point of higher elevation on
the final grade. The material used to make a fill.
   FLOOD. A temporary inundation of normally dry land areas.
   FLOOD PLAIN. See FLOOD-PRONE AREA.
   FLOOD-FRINGE AREA. That portion of the flood plain outside of the floodway
area.
   FLOOD-PRONE AREA. A relatively flat or low land area which is subject to
partial or complete inundation from an adjoining or nearby stream, river or
watercourse; and/or any area subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation of
surface waters from any source.
   FLOODPROOFING. Any combination of structural and non-structural additions,
changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities,
structures and their contents.
   FLOODWAY AREA. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas required to carry and discharge a flood of the 100-year magnitude.
   GOVERNING BODY. The City Council of the city.
   IMPROVEMENTS. Those physical additions and changes to the land that may be
necessary to produce useable and desirable lots.
   LAND DEVELOPMENT.
      (1)   The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts
or parcels of land for any purpose involving a group of two or more buildings;
or the division or allocation of land or space between or among two or more
existing or prospective occupants by means of, or for the purpose of streets,
common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building groups or other features.
      (2)   A subdivision of land.
   LANDOWNER OR OWNER. The legal or beneficial owner or owners of land
including the holder of an option or contract to purchase (whether or not such
option or contract is subject to any condition), a lessee, if he or she is
authorized under the lease to exercise the rights of the landowner or other
person having a proprietary interest in land, shall be deemed to be a landowner
for the purposes of these regulations.
   LOT. A parcel of land intended for transfer of ownership, use, or
improvements and/or dedication.
   LOT AREA. The area contained within the property lines of the individual
parcels of land as shown on a subdivision plan, excluding space within any
street, but including the area of any easement.
   MARGINAL ACCESS STREETS. A street parallel and adjacent to major traffic
streets, providing access to abutting properties and control of intersections
with major traffic streets and no on-street parking.
   MOBILE HOME. A transportable, single-family dwelling intended for permanent
occupancy, office or place of assembly contained in one unit, or in two units
designed to be joined into one integral unit capable of again being separated
for repeated towing, which arrives at a site complete and ready for occupancy
except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly operations, and
constructed so that it may be used without a permanent foundation.
   MOBILE HOME LOT. A parcel of land in a mobile home park, improved with the
necessary utility connections and other appurtenances necessary for the
erections thereon of a single mobile home, which is leased by the park owner to
the occupants of the mobile home erected on the lot.
   MOBILE HOME PARK. A parcel of land under single ownership which has been
planned and improved for the placement of mobile homes for nontransient use,
consisting of two or more mobile home lots.
   OBSTRUCTION. Any wall, dam, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile abutment,
projection, excavation, channel, rectification, culvert, building, fence,
stockpile, refuse, fill, structure, or matter in, along, across, or projecting
into any channel, watercourse, or flood prone area, which may impede, retard,
or change the direction of the flow of water either in itself or by catching or
collecting debris carried by such water or is placed where the flow of the
water might carry the same downstream to the damage of life end property.
   ONE HUNDRED YEAR FLOOD. A flood that, on the average, is likely to occur
once every 100 years (such as, one that has a 1% chance of occurring each year,
although the flood may occur in any year).
   PLAN, FINAL. A complete and exact subdivision plan prepared for official
recording as required by statute and regulations.
   PLAN, PRELIMINARY. The preliminary drawing indicating the proposed layout of
the subdivision to be submitted to the Commission for consideration.
   PLAN, SKETCH. An informal plan not necessarily to scale indicating salient
existing features of a tract and its surroundings and general layout of the
proposed subdivision.
   PLANNING AGENCY. The Planning Commission.
   PLANNING COMMISSION. The Planning Commission of the city.
   PLAT. The map or plan of subdivision or land development, whether
preliminary or final.
   PUBLIC GROUNDS. Parks, playgrounds and other public areas, and sites for
schools, sewage treatment, refuse disposal and other publicly-owned or operated
facilities.
   PUBLIC SEWER AND WATER. Include municipal systems, mobile home park systems
or other systems that service two or more dwelling units and/or lots of record,
such as private, group, association or project systems.
   REVERSE FRONTAGE LOT. A lot extending between, and having frontage on an
arterial street and a minor street, and with vehicular access solely from the
latter.
   RUNOFF. The surface water discharge or rate of discharge of a given
watershed after a fall of rain or snow that does not enter the soil but runs
off the surface of the land.
   SEDIMENTATION. The process by which mineral or organic matter is accumulated
or deposited by moving wind, water, or gravity. Once this matter is deposited
(or remains suspended in water), it is usually referred to as “sediment”.
   SLOPE. The face of an embankment or cut section; any ground whose surfaces
makes an angle with the plane of the horizon.
   STAFF. Employees, or persons otherwise engaged by the city, who aid in the
administration of these regulations and also serve the Planning Commission in
that capacity.
   STREET. Includes street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway, freeway, parkway,
lane, alley, viaduct and any other ways or strips of land used or intended to
be used by vehicular traffic or pedestrians whether public or private, and
including the entire right-of-way. Particular types of streets are further
defined as follows:
      (1)   COLLECTOR. This class of road serves the internal traffic movement
within the municipality and connects developed areas with the arterial system.
They do not accommodate long, through trips and are not continuous for any
appreciable length. The principal difference between collector and arterial
roads is the length of trip accommodated. The collector system is intended to
simultaneously supply abutting property with the same degree of land service as
a minor street and accommodate local internal traffic movements.
      (2)   LOCAL OR MINOR. The minor streets sole function is to provide
access to immediately adjacent land. They normally represent a fairly large
percentage of the total street mileage, but carry a small portion of the
vehicle miles traveled daily.
      (3)   MINOR ARTERIAL. Arterials bring traffic to and from the expressway
and serve major movements of traffic within or through the areas not served by
expressways. They serve primarily to move traffic, but also perform a secondary
function of land service.
      (4)   PRINCIPAL ARTERIAL OR EXPRESSWAY. This class of highway facility is
devoted entirely to the task of moving large volumes of traffic and performs
little or no land service function. It is generally characterized by some
degree of access control. Normally, this classification should be reserved for
multi-lane, divided roads with few, if any, grade intersections.
   STREET CENTERLINE. An imaginary line which passes through the middle of the
right-of-way and the cartway simultaneously, or which is in the center of the
right-of-way in cases where the cartway is not centered in the right-of-way.
   STRUCTURE. Any man-made object having an ascentainable stationary location
on or in land or water, whether or not affixed to the land.
   SUBDIVIDER. A developer, upon final approval of a subdivision plat.
   SUBDIVISION. The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel of land by
any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land
including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether immediate or
future, of lease, transfer of ownership or building or lot development;
provided, however, that the division of land for agricultural purposes into
parcels of more than ten acres, not involving any new street or easement of
access, shall be exempted. The term SUBDIVISION also includes the following:
      (1)   Any development of a parcel of land, (for example, as a shopping
center, an industrial park or a multiple dwelling project), which involves
installation of streets and/or alleys, even though the streets and alleys may
not be dedicated immediately for purposes of conveyance, transfer or sale;
      (2)   Resubdivision and, as appropriate in these regulations, the process
of subdividing land and the land subdivided; and
      (3)   The division of any part, parcel or area of land into two or more
lots irrespective of the length of time which may elapse prior to the time the
second lot or area is created and became existent.
   SUBDIVISION - MAJOR. Any subdivision which is not a minor subdivision.
   SUBDIVISION - MINOR. A subdivision having ten lots or less and which has all
lots fronting on an existing street, and which does not include or require new
sanitary sewer main extensions, or the dedication of streets or alleys.
   SURVEYOR. A professional surveyor licensed as such in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
   SWALE. A low lying stretch of land which gathers or carries surface water
runoff, but which is mowable and not a ditch.
   TEMPORARY TURN-AROUND. A temporary circular turn-around at the end of a
road.
   TOPSOIL. Surface soils and subsurface soils which presumable are fertile
soils and soil material, ordinarily rich in organic matter or humus debris.
TOPSOIL is usually found in the uppermost soil layer.
   UTILITY PLAN. A plan to show all existing and proposed fire hydrants, water
and sewer lines, and street lighting.
   WATERCOURSE. A permanent stream, intermittent stream, river, brook, creek,
or a channel, drain, or ditch for water, whether natural or man-made.
(Ord. 1286, passed 6-7-1982)
PROCEDURES; MAJOR SUBDIVISIONS
§ 154.020 PRE-APPLICATION INVESTIGATION.
   (A)   Developers are urged to discuss possible development sites with city
officials, the County Metropolitan Planning Department, and other agencies as
required, prior to submission of the preliminary plan. The purpose of the pre-
application meeting is to afford the developer an opportunity to avail himself
or herself of available advice and assistance, and to consult early and
informally with the agencies having jurisdiction or responsibilities in land
development or subdivision.
   (B)   The developer may also consult with other parties with a view to
reaching at this initial stage, firm conclusions regarding the suitability of
the location of the proposed subdivision, the most advantageous subdivision
plan, the arrangement of streets, lots and other features of the proposed
development.
   (C)   A sketch plan may be prepared and presented for review and discussion
at the same time. Sketch plans should generally include those items listed
under §§
154.080 through
154.082.
   (D)   Such discussion and/or sketch plan review will be considered as
confidential. Submission of a sketch plan shall not constitute formal filing of
a plan with the Commission.
(Ord. 1286, passed 6-7-1982)
§ 154.021 PRELIMINARY PLAN APPLICATION.
   (A)   The preliminary plan and all information and procedures relating
thereto shall in all respects be in compliance with the applicable provisions
of these regulations when submitted to the Commission. It is the responsibility
of the developer to coordinate his or her plans pursuant to the provisions of
these regulations with all private and public service agencies and utility
companies.
   (B)   All plans shall be reviewed by the Commission and/or city officials
during regular office hours.
   (C)   In addition to filing an application for approval of a preliminary
plan with the Commission, the plan shall also be concurrently submitted to the
Erie Metropolitan Planning Department.
   (D)   Information to be filed with preliminary plans shall generally include
those items listed under §§
154.080 through
154.082, and shall be prepared in accordance with, and submitted with the
number of copies, as specified therein.
(Ord. 1286, passed 6-7-1982)
§ 154.022 APPROVAL OF PRELIMINARY PLAN.
   (A)   After receipt of all required data, the Commission and/or staff will
discuss the preliminary plan with the developer or his or her agent and will
request the developer to obtain a report from the County Department of Health
if on-site sewage disposal and/or on-site individual water supply are planned.
In cases where the subdivision fronts on an existing or proposed state highway
or has proposed streets entering on such highways, the Commission and/or city
may submit the plans to the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation for
review.
   (B)   The Commission will then review the plan to determine if it meets the
standards as set forth in these regulations.
   (C)   The Commission and City Council shall review the preliminary plan for
approval to determine its conformity to the design standards and requirements
contained in these regulations. Within five calendar days after this review,
the Commission shall notify, in writing, the developer or his or her agent, the
action taken specifying what changes or additions, if any, will be required
prior to review of the final plan.
   (D)   Any modification of the preliminary plan required as prerequisites to
approval shall be noted on four copies of the preliminary plan. One copy will
be returned to the developer, one will be retained by the Commission and one
will be retained by City Council and the fourth will be filed with the County
Metropolitan Planning Department.
   (E)   Approval of the preliminary plan shall constitute approval of the
subdivision as to the character and intensity of development, the arrangement
and approximate dimensions of streets, lots, and other planned features, but
shall not authorize the sale of lots.
   (F)   The city may issue a building permit for the construction of one
sample home upon approval of the preliminary plan, but is not required to issue
such a permit.
(Ord. 1286, passed 6-7-1982)
§ 154.023 FINAL PLAN APPLICATION.
   (A)   After the developer has received official notification that the
preliminary plan has been approved and what changes, if any, must be made if
the plan is to proceed to consideration as a final plan, he or she has one year
in which to submit a final plan. If he or she does not do so within a one-year
period, the approval of the preliminary plan shall become null and void unless
an extension of time is requested by the developer in writing and is granted in
writing by the Commission before the expiration date.
   (B)   When an extension of time is granted for the submission of a final
plan, the Commission shall do one of two things when the final plan is
submitted:
      (1)   Make a finding that the conditions on which its approval of the
preliminary plan was based have not changed substantially; or
      (2)   Require changes in the plan, prior to final approval, that will
reflect any substantial changes on the site of the subdivision or in its
surroundings, that have taken place since the grant of preliminary approval.
   (C)   It is not necessary for the whole plan that received preliminary
approval to be submitted as a final plan. The final plan may be submitted in
sections, each covering a portion of the entire proposed subdivision shown on
the preliminary plan. Except for the initial preliminary plan stage, the one-
year time limit does not apply.
   (D)   The developer must provide sewerage and water plans for the entire
preliminary plan regardless of the number of lots to be initially developed.
   (E)   If completion of improvements is required prior to receiving final
approval of the plan, the final plan may be given conditional approval. The
plan and design requirements for conditional approval are the same as for final
approval. Upon completion of the required improvements, the conditional plan
may proceed to final plan approval. Upon receiving conditional approval, one
sample home may be constructed, if a building permit has been issued by the
city.
   (F)   The information and plans to be filed with the final application shall
include those items listed under §§
154.080 through
154.082, and the submission shall be prepared in accordance with §§
154.080 through
154.082 and in the number of copies specified therein.
   (G)   Assurances of completion, where required, shall be submitted in
accordance with §§
154.055 and
154.056.
(Ord. 1286, passed 6-7-1982)
§ 154.024 APPROVAL OF FINAL PLAN.
   (A)   The Commission shall take action and report within 45 calendar days
from the date of submission of the final plan. Otherwise, such plan shall be
deemed to have been approved, and a certificate as to the date of submission of
the final plan for approval to the Commission and the failure of said
Commission to report action thereon within 45 calendar days shall be issued on
demand of the developer or his or her agent by the Commission. The grounds of
modification or of disapproval of any final plan submitted to the Commission
shall be stated on the records of the Commission, and may include the refusal
or failure of the developer to furnish such documents as the Commission may
require pursuant to these regulations, or to comply with such provisions of the
following division as the Commission may have required as prerequisites to
approval of the final plan.
   (B)   Prior to final approval of the plan by the Planning Commission, the
plan shall be submitted by the Commission, together with recommendations, to
City Council for approval. Final approval by the Commission shall not be
granted unless the plan has been approved by City Council.
   (C)   After completion of all procedures and upon approval of a final plan,
the Commission shall notify the subdivider or his or her agent of such actions.
The developer shall then present this plan for the required signatures of the
County Metropolitan Planning Department, the Commission, and the city, and
subsequently be recorded. In no case shall the plan be recorded after 90 days
from the date of the original approval by the city and Commission. Should the
developer fail to record the final plan within such a period, the approval
shall be null and void unless an extension of time is requested in writing by
the developer.
(Ord. 1286, passed 6-7-1982)
§ 154.025 RECORDING OF PLAN.
   (A)   (1)   The final plan shall be recorded with the County Clerk of
Records before proceeding with the sale of lots or construction of buildings.
Three copies of the plan, 18 x 24 inches in size, in addition to the original,
are required for recording.
      (2)   Minor subdividers of one lot may be recorded in triplicate on plots
of 8-1/2 x 11 inches in connection with the deed.
   (B)   Recording the final plan after approval shall have the effect of an
irrevocable offer to dedicate all streets and other public ways to public use,
and to dedicate or reserve all park reservations, and school sites and other
public service areas as hereafter provided. Approval shall not impose any duty
upon the city concerning maintenance or improvement of any such dedicated
streets, parks, areas or portions of same until the proper authorities of the
city shall have made actual appropriation of the same by ordinance or
resolution, or by entry, use or improvement.
   (C)   The developer may place a notation on the final plan to the effect
that there is no offer of dedication to the public of certain designated public
areas, or (in unusual circumstances), streets or alleys, in which event the
title to such areas shall remain with the owner, and the city and local
authorities shall assume no responsibility for improvement or maintenance
thereof, which fact shall also be noted on the final plan. Where applicable,
the city shall require a notation on each lot of record that is not suitable
for on-lot septic systems as determined by the County Health Department.
(Ord. 1286, passed 6-7-1982)
PROCEDURES; MINOR SUBDIVISIONS
§ 154.040 PRE-APPLICATION INVESTIGATION.
   (A)   Developers shall, where on-site sewage disposal is required, consult
early and informally with the County Health Department.
   (B)   The applicable provisions of the pre-application procedure for major
subdivisions may be followed, but is not required.
(Ord. 1286, passed 6-7-1982)
§ 154.041 PRELIMINARY PLAN APPLICATION AND APPROVAL.
   A preliminary plan is not required, but may be submitted, at the developers
option.
(Ord. 1286, passed 6-7-1982)
§ 154.042 FINAL PLAN APPLICATION AND APPROVAL.
   All applicable provisions of the final plan application and approval
procedures (§§
154.020 through
154.025) shall be followed, as shall the provisions of §§
154.080 through
154.082, except that City Council approval is not required.
(Ord. 1286, passed 6-7-1982)
§ 154.043 RECORDING OF PLAN.
   Minor subdivisions shall be recorded in the same manner and with the same
responsibilities and requirements as the recording of major subdivisions
specified in §§
154.025(A) and
154.082(C).
(Ord. 1286, passed 6-7-1982)
ASSURANCES OF COMPLETION
§ 154.055 IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   The developer shall, for all major subdivisions, agree to complete all
improvements in accordance with these regulations or such other improvements as
the city and/or Commission may require in the public interest as a prerequisite
to approval of the final plan.
   (B)   No plan shall receive final plan approval by the Commission unless the
developer shall have completed all such improvements and the standards required
by these regulations or shall have filed with
the city by performance bond, certified check, letter from a financial
institution guaranteeing the completion of improvements, or other acceptable
performance assurance. All such assurances shall be approved by City Council.
   (C)   The city may require their Engineer to check final construction plans
for the correctness and to inspect the construction of improvements. If the
city decides that the developer pays for the engineering, the developer shall,
prior to approval of the final plan, agree to pay for any such checking and
inspection at a current schedule of fees as shall be mutually agreed upon
between the developer and the Engineer selected.
   (D)   Upon completion of the improvements in accordance with the
specifications of the city and these regulations, the developer shall take the
final steps to dedicate the improvements and have the same accepted by the
city.
   (E)   Improvements shall include, but not necessarily be limited to, the
following:
      (1)   Monuments or markers;
      (2)   Grading and streets;
      (3)   Curbs and walks (if required);
      (4)   Sewers or on-lot disposal units;
      (5)   Water service or on-lot water supplies;
      (6)   Storm drainage as required; and
      (7)   Erosion and sedimentation control measurers.
   (F)   Where grading conditions or other circumstances prohibit the placing
of lot markers or street monuments at the time of submission of final plat, a
cash deposit shall be made with the city in an amount sufficient to cover the
installation of such monumentation at a future date. Should installation of the
above monuments and markers not be completed within three months after
completion date of subdivision by the subdivider, the city shall cause such
installation to be completed and pay therefore from cash deposits.
(Ord. 1286, passed 6-7-1982)
§ 154.056 PERFORMANCE ASSURANCE.
   (A)   An assurance of proper completion of the improvements in the
subdivision shall be made by one of the following methods, or such other method
as shall be satisfactory to the Commission and the City Counci1.
      (1)   A certificate from the developer and signed by the city, that all
improvements and installation in the subdivision required by these regulations
have been made or installed in accordance with specifications;
      (2)   A certificate from the developer and signed by the city that a
bond, a certified check, or other security satisfactory to City Council has
been filed with the city; or
      (3)   (a)   The Commission shall require a bond, certified check, or
other security satisfactory to City Council and the Commission which shall:
            1.   Run or be made payable to the city; and
            2.   Be in the amount determined by the city and Commission to be
sufficient to complete the improvements and installations in compliance with
these regulations.
         (b)   In the case of a bond, it shall also:
            1.   Be with surety satisfactory to the city; and
            2.   Be in form, sufficiency and execution acceptable to the city.
   (B)   The bond, certified check or other securities shall specify the time
for the completion of the required improvements. Such time shall be
satisfactory to the city and Commission. When the improvements have been
completed and approval by the city and Commission, the guarantee shall be
released and returned. When a portion of the required improvements has been
completed and approved by the city and Commission, a portion of the bond,
monies or security commensurate with the cost of the improvements may be
released and returned.
   (C)   In the event that cash or its equivalent is deposited as an
improvement guarantee, it shall be held in an escrow fund, which may bear
interest to the credit of the developer, but the developer shall pay all costs
for the maintaining of such escrow fund. All interest earned shall remain in
the escrow account until such time the work is satisfactorily completed.
(Ord. 1286, passed 6-7-1982)
DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
§ 154.070 GENERAL STANDARDS.
   (A)   It is the policy of the city that these regulations shall state
minimum standards for development in the city. Whenever the city in its zoning,
building codes, sign ordinances, road ordinances, or other ordinances,
resolutions, or regulations require standards that exceed these minimum
standards, other city standards shall apply. Also, whenever the County Health
Department or state or federal law shall require lot sizes larger than those
required herein, their regulations shall prevail. Should the standards of these
subdivision regulations exceed those of the city zoning ordinance, the
standards of these regulations shall apply.
   (B)   The following requirements and guiding principles for land subdivision
shall be observed by all developers, and the Commission shall consider the
suitability as to location of any proposed subdivision with respect to the
following:
      (1)   (a)   Land subject to severe flooding (identified by current flood
zone maps of the Department of Housing and Urban Development) and land if
deemed for specific reasons as may have developed in the planning process by
the Commission to be uninhabitable for other reasons shall not be platted for
residential occupancy nor for other such uses as may increase danger to health,
life, or property or aggravate the flood hazard but such land within a plan
shall be set aside for such uses as will not be endangered by periodic or
occasional inundation.
         (b)   Any development in areas considered by the Commission as
habitable yet subject to periodic or occasional innundation shall comply with
the regulations and standards as established under §
154.103 and any other federal, state, or local regulations concerning such
development of flood plains.
      (2)   The subdivision plan shall conform to such municipal maps or plans
or such parts thereof as shall have been prepared by the Commission of city
agencies and approved by the city.
      (3)   No subdivision showing reserve strips controlling the access to
public ways will be approved, except where the control and disposal of the land
comprising such strips are definitely placed within the jurisdiction of the
municipality.
      (4)   Lot lines shall, where possible, follow municipal and county
boundary lines rather than cross them.
      (5)   The availability of drinking water and sewage disposal shall be a
prime consideration for the size and configuration of development.
(Ord. 1286, passed 6-7-1982)
PLAN REQUIREMENTS
§ 154.080 SKETCH PLAN.
   (A)   A subdivision sketch plan may be submitted by the developer or
property owner as a basis for informal and confidential discussion with the
Commission or staff.
   (B)   Data furnished in a sketch plan shall be at the discretion of the
developer. It is suggested that the following items be included in the sketch
plan presentation:
      (1)   Subdivision boundary;
      (2)   North arrow;
      (3)   Streets on and adjacent to the tract;
      (4)   Topographical and physical features;
      (5)   Proposed general street layout;
      (6)   Proposed general lot layout;
      (7)   Proposed easements; and
      (8)   Information relative to water and sewer lines.
(Ord. 1286, passed 6-7-1982)
§ 154.081 PRELIMINARY PLAN.
   (A)   A preliminary plan is required for major subdivisions. Submitted
copies of the preliminary plan drawing shall be either black on white or blue
on white prints. Sheet size shall be 18 x 24 inches or 24 x 36 inches in size.
Three copies shall be submitted.
   (B)   The preliminary plan shall be drawn at a scale of no less than 100
feet to the inch. Other acceptable scales shall include 20, 30, 40 and 50 feet
to the inch.
   (C)   The following information shall be shown on, or included with, all
preliminary plans when they are submitted to the Commission:
      (1)   Proposed subdivision name or identifying title and notation that
the subdivision is located in the city;
      (2)   Name and address of the owner of the tract or of his or her agent,
if any, and of the developer;
      (3)   Date, north arrow and graphic scale;
      (4)   Total acreage of the tract, number of lots, proposed land use,
remaining acreage of any unsubdivided land;
      (5)   Zoning information - district and lot size;
      (6)   Tract boundaries which, if possible, should show distances and
bearings;
      (7)   A key map, for the purpose of locating the site to be subdivided at
a minimum scale of 2,000 feet to the inch, showing the relation of the tract to
adjoining property and streets, roads, bodies of water, and municipal
boundaries;
      (8)   Contours at vertical intervals of two feet for land with average
natural slope of 4% or less, and at vertical intervals of five feet for more
steeply sloping land. Locations of bench marks, and datum used, shall also be
shown;
      (9)   The names of all owners of all immediately adjacent unplatted land;
the names of all proposed subdivisions or platted subdivisions immediately
adjacent to the development, and the locations and dimensions of any streets or
easements terminating adjacent to the development;
      (10)   The locations and dimensions of all existing streets, roads,
railroads public sewers, aqueducts, water mains, and feeder lines, fire
hydrants, gas electric, communication and oil transmission lines, streams,
intermittent drainageways, swales, and other significant features within the
property proposed to be subdivided, or within 100 feet of said property;
      (11)   The location of all buildings and approximate location of all tree
masses within the property;
      (12)   A description of the existing vegetative cover;
      (13)   A full plan of the development, showing the location of all
proposed streets, roads, alleys, utility easements, parks, playgrounds,
pedestrian ways, and other public areas, sewer and water facilities, proposed
building setback lines for each street; proposed lot lines and approximate
dimensions of lots; lot numbers and/or block numbers in consecutive order; and
all streets and other areas designed for appurtenant facilities, public use, or
future public use, together with the conditions of such dedications or
reservations;
      (14)   County Health Department subdivision on-lot sewage disposal
report, if on-lot sewage disposal system is used; and
      (15)   Typical cross-sections for each proposed street shall be shown on
the preliminary plan.
   (D)   The following certificates, where applicable, shall appear on the
preliminary plan:
      (1)   Certificate for approval or review by the Department;
      (2)   Certificate for approval by the city and by its Planning
Commission; and
      (3)   Any changes that may be proposed in the provisions of the zoning
applicable to the area to be subdivided.
   (E)   Where the preliminary plan submitted covers only a part of the
subdivider’s entire holding, a sketch plan of the prospective future street
system of the unsubmitted part shall be furnished; the street system of the
submitted part will be considered in the light of adjustments and connections
with future streets in the part not submitted.
(Ord. 1286, passed 6-7-1982)
§ 154.082 FINAL PLAN.
   (A)   A final plan is required for all subdivisions. For major subdivisions,
the original and three prints shall be submitted. For minor subdivisions, the
original and one print will be required.
   (B)   The final plan original for major subdivisions shall be drawn on
tracing cloth or stable plastic film, and shall be in India ink. Photographic
reproductions in black or dark brown will be accepted in lieu of ink. For minor
subdivisions, high quality pencil drafting on vellum, stable plastic film, or
other drafting media will be accepted.
   (C)   (1)   Sheet size for recording final plans shall be 18 x 24 inches in
size. Twenty-four by thirty-six inch plats will be accepted for approval
purposes; however, a reduction in size to 18 x 24 inches will be necessary for
recording purposes.
      (2)   Minor subdivisions of one lot may be drawn on plats of 8-1/2 x 11
inches.
   (D)   If the final plan is drawn in two or more sections, it shall be
accompanied by a key map showing the location of the several sections.
   (E)   The final plan shall be drawn at a scale of no less than 100 feet to
the inch. Other acceptable scales shall include 20, 30, 40 and 50 feet to the
inch.
   (F)   The following information, in addition to all items required for
preliminary plans shall be included on final plans where applicable:
      (1)   Block and lot numbers (in consecutive order);
      (2)   Lot lines and tract boundaries with accurate bearings and
distances. Distances to be to the nearest hundredth of a foot. Survey closure
shall be 1:10,000 or less;
      (3)   Exact acreage of entire subdivision and each individual lot.
Acreage to be to the nearest hundredth acre;
      (4)   Setback lines not less than the minimum, or established by these
regulations, or by public authority, or those specified on the deed
restrictions, whichever is greater;
      (5)   Accurate bearings and distances to the nearest established street
corners or official monuments. Reference corners shall be accurately described
on the plan;
      (6)   Accurate locations of all existing and recorded streets
intersecting the boundaries of the tract;
      (7)   Complete curve data for all curves included in the plan, including
radius, delta angle, tangent and arc lengths;
      (8)   Street centerlines with accurate dimensions in feet and hundredths
of feet, with bearings of such street centerlines;
      (9)   Street names;
      (10)   Location and material of all permanent existing and proposed
monuments and lot markers;
      (11)   Easements for utilities and any limitations on such easements;
      (12)   Accurate dimensions of existing public land and of any property to
be dedicated or reserved for public, semi-public or community use; and all
areas to which title is reserved by owner; and
      (13)   Any other pertinent information required by these regulations or
by the Commission.
   (G)   The following certificates, where applicable, shall be shown on the
final plan:
      (1)   Certification, with seal, by a registered professional engineer or
registered land surveyor to the effect that the survey and plan are correct.
All property surveys must be performed by a registered surveyor. All paving,
grading, sewers and other related engineering design shall be performed under
the direction of a registered professional engineer;
      (2)   Certificate for review by the County Metropolitan Planning
Department;
      (3)   A statement duly acknowledged before an officer to take
acknowledgement of deeds and signed by the owner or owners of the property, to
the effect that the subdivision shown on the final plan is the act and deed of
the owner, that he or she is the owner of the property shown on the survey and
plan, and that he or she desires the same to be subdivided and recorded as
shown;
      (4)   Certificates for approval by the Planning Commission;
      (5)   Certificate for approval by the City Council and the City Engineer
(major subdivision only); and
      (6)   A certificate to provide for the recording of the subdivision plan.
   (H)   The following information, in addition to that shown on the final plan
shall be submitted to the Commission for final plan review, when applicable:
      (1)   Application for review or approval (one copy), if required by the
Commission;
      (2)   County Health Department subdivision on-lot sewage disposal report,
if on-lot sewage disposal system is used;
      (3)   Draft of any proposed covenants to run with land (two copies);
      (4)   Tentative timetable for the proposed sequence of development for
the subdivision (two copies);
      (5)   Assurances of completion, where required;
      (6)   Certificate of dedication of streets and other public property (two
copies) - this is the offer of dedication;
      (7)   Where lot sizes are based on public water and/or public sewer
facilities assurance acceptable to the Commission that such facilities will be
installed (two copies);
      (8)   Such certificates of approval by proper authorities of the county
and/or state, as may have been required by the Commission including
certificates approving the water supply system and sanitary sewer system of the
subdivision (two copies);
      (9)   Specifications and drawings for all streets, sewers and other
improvements;
      (10)   Restrictions of all types which will run with the land and become
covenants in the deeds of lots shown on the drawing (two copies); and
      (11)   All covenants running with the land governing the reservation and
maintenance of dedicated or undedicated land or open space, which shall bear
the certificate of approval of the City Solicitor as to their legal sufficiency
(two copies).
(Ord. 1286, passed 6-7-1982)
DESIGN STANDARDS
§ 154.095 GENERAL.
   (A)   The following land subdivision principles, standards, and requirements
shall be applied by the Commission in evaluating the plans for proposed
subdivisions and shall be considered minimum requirements.
   (B)   Land shall be suited for the purpose for which it is to be subdivided.
Land subject to hazards of life, health and safety shall not be subdivided
until such hazards have been removed.
   (C)   In reviewing subdivision plans, the Commission will consider the
adequacy of existing or proposed community facilities to serve the additional
dwelling units proposed by the subdivision. A reservation of land for community
facilities may be requested when appropriate.
   (D)   The subdividing of land shall be done in a manner that will not have
the effect of debarring adjacent property owners from access to the street and
ways of the allotment. The Commission may require dedicated, improved or
undedicated parcels to be provided for future access to adjacent land.
(Ord. 1286, passed 6-7-1982)
§ 154.096 STREETS.
   (A)   Minimum street right-of-way widths and cartway widths shall be as
follows:
 
Cartway - Between Curbs
Type of Street         Right-of-Way
Cul-de-sac     26 feet 50 feet
Minor          26 feet 50 feet
Collector      36 feet 60 feet
Arterial       As prescribed by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
               and/or City Council
 
   (B)   In cases where a new subdivision is planned to join the street system
on an existing subdivision, the above requirements shall apply except where the
existing streets and rights-of-way are larger than required. In this event, the
Commission may require that the new streets and rights-of-way be as large as
those in the existing subdivision or the above minimums. Private covenants may
apply if their provisions are in excess of these regulations. Any street or way
that is planned, though not already established shall be continued at not less
than its width as planned.
   (C)   Provisions for additional street width (right-of-way) may be required
by the Commission in specific cases for:
      (1)   Public safety and convenience;
      (2)   Parking in commercial and industrial areas and areas of high
density residential development; and
      (3)   Widening existing streets (rights-of-way) where the width does not
meet with the requirements of these regulations.
   (D)   General design criteria for streets shall be in accordance with the
design and criteria for streets table in this section.
   (E)   Dead end streets (cul-de-sacs) shall be permitted when it is clear
that through traffic at such a street end is not essential to the street system
in that district, and under the said conditions, a dead end must have adequate
turning space foe vehicles, which shall include a minimum right-of-way radius
of 60 feet, and a minimum outside curb radius of 50 feet.
   (F)   Street intersections shall comply with the following requirements:
      (1)   (a)   All curbs at intersections shall be rounded by a minimum
radius of:
            1.   Collector and arterial streets: 25 feet; and
            2.   Minor streets: 20 feet.
         (b)   Twenty-foot radii may be used where minor streets intersect
collector and/or arterial streets.
      (2)   When fences, hedges or other plantings, structures, or walls on any
lot corner would create a traffic hazard by limiting clear vision across a
corner lot from a height of three feet above the ground or paved area, such
structure and/or vegetation shall be removed in conjunction with grading the
right-of-way to provide a sight triange, formed by the intersection of the
center line of each street; sight triangles shall be formed by the connection
of points on the intersecting street centerlines; such points being 80 feet
from the intersection of the centerlines. Trees may be planted in this triangle
area provided the lowest foliage is eight feet or higher. In computing heights,
the street adjacent to the structure, or the ground line at the structure,
whichever is lower, shall be the elevation from which heights are measured.
Sight triangles shall be shown on the plan.
      (3)   Where the grade of any street at the approach to an intersection
exceeds 5%, a leveling area shall be provided, if possible, with a transitional
grade not to exceed 2% for a distance of 50 feet from the nearest curb line of
the intersection.
      (4)   Intersections of more than two streets shall be avoided.
      (5)   Minimum street intersection angles shall be 60 degrees. Right angle
intersections shall be used whenever possible.
      (6)   Intersecting streets shall be separated by 200 feet or more,
measured between centerlines along the centerline of the intersected street.
   (G)   Horizontal curves shall be laid on all deflecting angles along the
centerline of streets and the degree of curvature shall be set to assure the
proper sight distance as shown in the design criteria for streets table in this
section.
   (H)   Vertical curves shall be used in changes of grade exceeding 1% and
shall be designed for maximum visibility.
   (I)   In general, minor and collector streets shall not adjoin into the same
side of arterial streets at intervals of less than 600 feet.
   (J)   Half streets shall be prohibited. If circumstances render this
impractical, adequate provisions for the concurrent dedication of the remaining
half of the street must be furnished by the developer.
   (K)   Minor streets in a new development shall be designed to discourage
through traffic. However, the provisions for the extension and continuation of
major streets into and from adjoining areas is required. Where a subdivision
abuts or contains an existing or proposed major street, the Commission may
require marginal access streets, reverse frontage lots or such treatments as
will provide protection for abutting properties, reduction in the number of
intersections with the major traffic streets, and separation of local and
through traffic.
   (L)   When the subdivision adjoins unsubdivided acreage, new streets shall
be provided through to the boundary lines of the development with temporary
easements for turn-arounds and the construction of graveled 100 foot diameter
turnarounds.
   (M)   Proposed streets shall be properly related to municipal, county, and
state roads and highway plans which have been prepared and officially adopted,
and shall be logically related to the topography so as to produce useable lots
and reasonable grades.
   (N)   Where a subdivision borders on or contains a railroad right-of-way, an
arterial highway right-of-way or a stream, ravine, steep hill, canal, or swamp,
the Commission may require a street approximately parallel to and on each side
of such right-of-way or other obstruction at a distance suitable for the
appropriate use of the intervening land. Such distances shall also be
determined with due regard for the requirements of approach grades and future
grade separations, and for non-residential uses of land, where permitted.
   (O)   If the lots in a development are large enough for resubdivision, or if
a portion of the tract is not subdivided, suitable access and street openings
for such resubdivision shall be provided.
Design Criteria for Streets
     Type of Street
Item Arterial Collector Minor Cul-De-Sac
Design Criteria for Streets
                           Type of Street
Item                       Arterial Collector Minor    Cul-De-Sac
Maximum grade *            6%       6%        12%      12%
Minimum grade              0.5%     0.5%      1.0%     1.0%
Minimum center line radius 500 feet 300 feet  150 feet 150 feet
Minimum sight distance **  400 feet 250 feet  150 feet 150 feet
Tangent between curves     300 feet 150 feet  100 feet 0
*   Grades in excess of the allowable percentage may be approved by the
Commission where it is clear that it is necessary and that no traffic
hazard is or will be created thereby.
**   Sight distance shall be measured along the centerline of the street
between points located at a height of four feet above the street.
The maps will provide a presentation of the general street requirements of
these regulations.
 
(Ord. 1286, passed 6-7-1982) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.097 A1LEYS.
   (A)   Alleys are prohibited in developments of detached and semi-detached
houses; they may be permitted in other types of residential development.
   (B)   Alleys shall be provided in commercial and industrial districts,
except that the Commission may waive this requirement where other definite and
assured provision is made for service access, such as off-street loading,
unloading and parking consistent with and adequate for the uses proposed.
   (C)   The right-of-way width of alleys shall be 20 feet and alleys shall be
graded to a minimum width of 18 feet and paved. Maximum grades in alleys shall
be 12%, unless otherwise approved.
   (D)   Alley intersections and sharp changes in alignment shall be avoided;
dead-end alleys shall be avoided where possible, but if unavoidable, shall be
provided with adequate turn-around facilities at the dead-end as determined by
the Commission based upon the proposed use of the alley and consideration for
public safety.
(Ord. 1286, passed 6-7-1982) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.098 BLOCKS.
   (A)   In general, all blocks in a subdivision shall have a maximum length of
1,200 feet. Blocks subdivided into lots shall be two lot depths in width,
except lots along a major thoroughfare which fronts on an interior street.
Block lengths shall not be less than 400 feet.
   (B)   In commercial areas, the block layout shall conform, with due
consideration to site conditions, to the best possible layout to serve the
buying public, to permit good traffic circulation and the parking of cars, to
make delivery and pickup efficient, and to reinforce the best design of the
units in the commercial areas.
   (C)   The block layout in industrial areas shall be governed by the most
efficient arrangement of space for present use and future expansion, with due
regard for worker and customer access parking.
   (D)   In large blocks with interior parks and playgrounds, in exceptionally
long blocks where access to a school and/or shopping center is necessary, or
where cross streets are impractical or unnecessary, a pedestrian right-of-way
at least ten feet wide may be required by the Commission near and through the
center of every block over 1,000 feet long and such right-of-way shall be paved
with a walk at least five feet wide.
   (E)   Cul-de-sacs, in general, shall not exceed 700 feet in length, except
where approved by the Commission to provide for future extension.
(Ord. 1286, passed 6-7-1982) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.099 LOTS AND BUILDING LINES.
   (A)   The depth-to-width ratio of useable lot length shall be a maximum of
four to one, except where unusual conditions exist. Additional land required
for on-lot sewage disposal shall not be deemed as a justification for such
exceptions.
   (B)   Double frontage and reverse frontage lots should be avoided except
where essential to provide separation of residential development from traffic
arteries or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation. A
planting screen easement across which there shall be no right of access may be
required by the Commission along the line of lots abutting such a traffic
artery or other disadvantageous use.
   (C)   Side lines of lots, so far as practical, shall be at right angles or
radial to street lines.
   (D)   Corner lots shall be increased in size whenever necessary so as to
provide that any structure to be placed thereon shall conform to the minimum
building setback line for a front yard to each street.
   (E)   Lots abutting local streets shall front upon the streets which
parallel the long dimension of the block, if possible.
   (F)   All lots shall abut by their frontage on a publicly dedicated street
or on a street that has received the legal status as such. Lots abutting on a
private street or easement shall not be approved.
   (G)   The frontage width of lots fronting a cul-de-sac will be determined as
the width at the building line, but shall not be less than 40 feet at the
right-of-way line. The side yard setback requirements will be calculated from
the closest point of the structure to the side line.
   (H)   Lot size and area, height regulations, and yard requirements shall be
in accordance with the official city zoning ordinance.
(Ord. 1286, passed 6-7-1982)
§ 154.100 EASEMENTS.
   (A)   Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway,
channel, or stream, a drainage easement may be required that conforms
substantially with the water line of such watercourse, drainageway, channel, or
stream and of such width as will be adequate to preserve the unimped flow of
natural drainage, or for the purpose of widening, deepening, relocating,
improving or protecting such drainage facilities.
   (B)   Where desirable or necessary, adequate easements or dedications for
public service utilities shall be provided for sewer, water, electric power,
gas lines, storm drainage and similar services; and no structure or obstruction
of any kind shall be placed or allowed to be placed where it will interfere in
any way with such easements.
   (C)   Utility easements, where required, shall have a minimum width of 15
feet and be placed at the side or rear of lots whenever possible.
   (D)   Aerial easements, if required, shall commence at a point 15 feet of
more above ground.
(Ord. 1286, passed 6-7-1982)
§ 154.101 PUBLIC AREAS.
   (A)   The developer shall consider reserved areas for public use where
required, or where topography may preclude use for proper development. Reserve
areas, however, which shall make any area unprofitable for regular or special
assessments or which may revert to untended nuisance areas will not be
approved.
   (B)   The Commission may require that areas for parks and playgrounds (of a
size not to exceed 10% of the land area to be subdivided) be dedicated to the
city for recreation purposes. The city, however, shall retain the right to
accept or decline such dedication. The proposal to dedicate recreation areas in
any proposed subdivision shall be compared with similar existing dedications in
adjoining tracts or subdivisions in order to provide usable recreation areas
where required without imposing hardships on the developer.
(Ord. 1286, passed 6-7-1982)
§ 154.102 STREET NAMES.
   The developer may choose his or her street names subject to the
recommendations of the Commission, and approval of the city and the post
office. No street, other than an extension, may be given a name identical or
similar to another street in the city, or in an adjoining township if proximity
to the township road is close enough to cause confusion.
(Ord. 1286, passed 6-7-1982)
§ 154.103 FLOOD PLAINS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the areas considered as flood-prone within
the city shall be those areas identified in Ordinance 1236, as being subject to
flooding during the 100-year flood. All subdivisions shall meet the
requirements of that ordinance, where applicable, in addition to all normal
subdivision requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. 1286, passed 6-7-1982)
REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
§ 154.115 GENERAL.
   (A)   The construction of subdivision improvements is the responsibility of
the developer in so much as it is his or her property which is being developed.
Adequate streets, utilities and other improvements are essential elements in
the creation and preservation of stable residential, commercial and industrial
areas, and must be completed by the developer.
   (B)   All of the following improvements, as recommended by the Commission
and approved by the city pursuant to the authority granted in the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247, 53 P.S. §§ 10101 et seq., as amended,
shall be completed in accordance with the requirements established by this
chapter prior to final approval of the plan, except as otherwise provided
herein.
   (C)   Final plan approval, except for minor subdivisions, shall not be given
prior to the completion and acceptance of all subdivision improvements, except
where performance guarantees are furnished as hereinafter provided.
   (D)   All the requirements in this subchapter concerning street paving,
curbing and sidewalks shall be adhered to unless otherwise approved by the
Commission as a variance under the provisions of §§
154.170 through
154.174.
(Ord. 1286, passed 6-7-1982)
§ 154.116 IMPROVEMENTS.
   Utility and street improvements shall be provided in each new subdivision as
follows, except that improvements are not required in existing public streets
which may be incorporated into, or be adjacent to, the subdivision:
   (A)   Survey monumentation;
   (B)   Water supply;
   (C)   Sewage disposal;
   (D)   Storm sewers;
   (E)   Street, including required grading, subgrade, base and paving;
   (F)   Subdrains where necessary;
   (G)   Curbing of streets;
   (H)   Sidewalks, except single-family lot frontages which are 80 feet or
more in width at building line;
   (I)   Required utilities, street name signs and required grading; and
   (J)   Erosion control.
(Ord. 1286, passed 6-7-1982)
CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS
§ 154.130 GENERAL.
   The construction of improvements shall be in accord with the requirements of
this section. It is the intent of these regulations, however, that these
construction requirements shall be for the purpose of establishing a standard
of quality and durability. Deviations may be made, if such standards of quality
and durability are maintained, but only with the written approval of the
Commission.
(Ord. 1286, passed 6-7-1982) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.131 MONUMENTS.
   (A)   Survey monuments and markers shall be placed at all points as
determined by the city. Size, length, material and design of monuments shall be
in accordance with the standards established by the city.
   (B)   General city requirements or standards shall meet the following
criteria:
      (1)   Monuments shall be of concrete with a 3/8-inch metal dowel in the
center at the top. Monument size shall be no less than 6 x 6 x 18 inches.
      (2)   Markers shall be ferrous metal pipe or rods, 1/2-inch minimum
diameter by 24 inches minimum length, or may be standard manufactured steel
survey markers of a similar length.
      (3)   Monuments and markers shall be placed so that the center point
shall coincide with the intersection of lines to be marked.
      (4)   Monuments shall be placed so that they protrude approximately two
inches above grade in areas which are not paved, at grade if in a paved area
not subject to vehicle traffic, and four to eight inches below grade if in a
paved area subject to vehicle traffic. Monuments set in areas subject to
traffic shall be protected with a city-approved cast iron frame and access
cover of adequate design for truck traffic.
      (5)   Markers shall be driven into the ground so as to be approximately
flush with the final grade.
      (6)   Monuments shall be set at the major intersection of all lines
forming angles in the boundary of the subdivision, for major subdivisions and
at the intersection of all street lines.
      (7)   Markers shall be set at all lot angles and corners, and at the
beginning and end of all curves in lot and street lines. Curves for corner
radii at intersections need not be marked if the intersection is monumented.
(Ord. 1286, passed 6-7-1982)
§ 154.132 WATER SUPPLY.
   (A)   The developer shall construct, or engage the Water Department to
construct, a system of water mains and connect with the water supply systems.
Water lines shall be so located and of such size as approved by the city or
city municipal authority and subject to the provisions of the water rate and
regulation ordinance.
   (B)   All public water systems shall be laid wherever possible in the
planting strip or street shoulder on the south and east sides of the street and
constructed in accordance with the standards of the current city ordinances and
regulations governing water main installation, and the requirements of the
State Department of Environmental Resources and County Health Department.
   (C)   All phases of construction, including lines, excavation, trench, type
of pipe, backfill, hydrants, tees and valves shall be in accordance with
approved construction drawings if constructed by the developer, and shall meet
State Department of Environmental Resources Standards and be inspected by the
city, its engineer, or its authorized representative, during the construction
period.
   (D)   Street mains shall be no less than six inches diameter, and shall have
valves located at all street intersections, except that mains four inches or
less in size may be approved by the city subject to provisions of water rate
and regulation ordinance for cul-de-sacs and other dead end or otherwise non-
extendable areas.
   (E)   Where water mains are extended through or along adjacent property in
other ownership, the costs of construction may be proportionately shared by
abutting properties upon connecting to the water lines, provided that all such
agreements are in accordance with current city ordinances and regulations, and
are approved in writing by the city.
   (F)   Fire hydrants shall be provided where required and shall be located no
more than 1,200 feet apart; and within 600 feet but no closer than 35 feet,
from any structure unless otherwise approved by the city. Where the system is
not adequate to supply fire service, the mains shall be sized, and tees with
valves shall be provided, in such manner that fire hydrants can be added in the
future in accordance with the above requirements, when improved service becomes
available.
(Ord. 1286, passed 6-7-1982) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.133 SEWAGE DISPOSAL.
   (A)   The developer shall construct a sanitary sewer system and provide
lateral connections for each lot where a public sanitary sewer main is
available at the plat boundary or within a reasonable distance thereto (within
1,000 feet of the subdivision).
   (B)   If a public sewer main is not available under the conditions stated
above and the subdivision conatins ten lots or more, provisions shall be made
by the developer to provide adequate sewage collection and treatment
facilities, including a treatment plant or community disposal system, house
lines, laterals, trunk lines, manholes, and other appurtenances as deemed
mecessary by the city and/or the Department of Environmental Resources.
   (C)   If, in the opinion of the County Health Department, the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Resources, the city and/or the Commission, factors
exist which would create a public health and sanitation problem if a certain
area is subdivided, the Commission will not approve the subdivision plan of
such area until such factors are corrected by an adequate sanitary sewer
system.
   (D)   All design and all phases of construction, including excavation,
trench, pipe, grade, backfill, and manholes shall be in accordance with
construction drawings approved by the State Department of Environmental
Resources and shall be inspected by the City Engineer, city authorized
representative, authority representative or other official as may be designated
by the city.
   (E)   In areas where city sewers are planned to be available but not yet
built, a sewer system shall be provided to the edge of the subdivision closest
to the municipal trunk location and capped. Such system shall include all
mains, laterals and other appurtenances herein required. Until such time as a
municipal sewer becomes available, a project system must be installed. In the
case of a project system, a trunk line shall be provided to connect into the
municipal system.
   (F)   Where public sewers are not available or planned, and the subdivision
contains less than ten lots, individual on-site disposal systems (septic-
systems) may be provided, but must be approved and inspected by the County
Health Department.
   (G)   The minimum diameter of any gravity sewer pipe main shall be eight
inches and any lateral four inches. Six-inch gravity mains and grinder type
pressure systems may be permitted for certain installations when approved by
the County Health Department and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Resources.
(Ord. 1286, passed 6-7-1982)
§ 154.134 STORM SEWERS.
   (A)   A drainage system adequate to serve the needs of the proposed new
streets, natural waterways and overland flow will be required in new
subdivisions. A drainage system may be composed of conduits, waterways, swales,
ditches and curb flow areas, as required. When a public storm sewer main is
available at the plat boundary or within 500 feet, the subdivider shall connect
the drainage system with such storm sewer main if the grade permits and other
more economical solutions are not possible.
   (B)   Bridges or culverts shall be designed to support and carry loads
according to the requirements of the city, but not less than AASHTO Loading HS-
20, and shall be constructed the full width of the cartway plus additional
length as necessary to provide a proper installation.
   (C)   Where open watercourses are planned, adequate safety, erosion control,
drainage, protection of capacity and appearance measures shall be taken by the
developer to ensure proper safe and healthful disposal of storm water. All open
watercourses must be approved by the Commission.
   (D)   Minimum grade of drainage courses shall be designed to create a
minimum cleaning effect (velocity of two feet per second). Lesser grades may be
permitted where such required grades cannot be achieved and the city approves
lesser grades.
   (E)   Storm sewers shall have a minimum diameter of 15 inches and a minimum
grade on .5%. Lesser grades may be permitted when substantiated with
calculations which prove that cleaning velocities will be maintained.
   (F)   Manholes shall normally be spaced at 400 feet maximum spacing where
pipe sized of 24 inches or less are used, and not over 600 feet where larger
sizes are installed. Inlets may, if approved by the Commission and municipality
be substituted for manholes.
   (G)   All phases of construction of open ditches, gutters, or storm sewers
including width, depth, shapes, erosion control, minimum grade, size and area
shall be in accordance with the requirements of these regulations and all storm
drainage facilities shall be inspected and approved by the city.
(Ord. 1286, passed 6-7-1982)
§ 154.135 STREETS, SUBGRADE, SUBDRAINS, PAVEMENT AND CURBS.
   (A)   Streets shall be graded to the full width of the right-of-way,
surfaced, and improved to the grades and dimensions shown on plans, curbed with
profiles and typical cross-sections submitted by the developer and approved by
the Commission. In subdivisions where sidewalks are not required, the sidewalk
areas shall be graded in the same manner as if sidewalks were to be constructed
and shall be brought to within six inches of final sidewalk grade.
   (B)   Side slopes shall be graded to blend with the natural lay of the land
or in accordance with plans approved by the Commission. Where fill material is
necessary to establish uniform grades, compacting shall be required in
accordance with Pennsylvania Department of Transportation Form 408
Specifications for embankment. A slope of two horizontal feet to one vertical
feet beyond the right-of-way line in cut or fill shall ordinarily be required
except for unusual conditions. Street cross sections for minor and collector
streets shall be in accordance with accepted standards and shall be approved by
the city. Arterial street cross sections shall be as approved by the city and
shall be approved by the state where required.
   (C)   The subgrade shall be shaped to rough lines and elevations equal to
the width of the pavement plus two feet. Adequate drainage facilities shall be
installed to provide for the disposition of underground seepage and the
percolation of surface water. The subgrade shall be thoroughly compacted by
power rollers with a minimum weight of ten tons to ensure satisfactory
compaction and stabilization; it shall be compacted at optimum moisture
content. The finished surface shall be uniformly shaped to facilitate drainage
and any irregularities from planned grade shall be corrected prior to placing
the subbase. Where material encountered in the normal excavation has a C.B.R.
value of 2.5 or less and will not develop the required stability and provide
for adequate drainage, the area shall be undercut and granular material added
to a depth of at least 12 inches. It shall then be brought to a firm and
thoroughly compacted surface as hereinbefore specified. The prepared subgrade
shall be protected by the contractor to prevent undue rutting from trucks or
other equipment and if such damage does occur, the subgrade shall be reshaped
and compacted prior to placing the subbase material.
   (D)   Subdrains shall be laid along one side of all streets where there is
apparent ground water percolation or soils are of an unstable type. Side or
diagonal subdrains shall be installed where conditions require additional
subdrainage. Side drains may require pipe in addition to stone backfill. The
required interval for side drains shall be related to ground water conditions.
The developer shall be fully responsible for proper subdrainage of all street
improvements. The Commission may direct that additional subdrainage be added
where conditions warrant. Subdrains shall generally be drained to storm sewer
catch basins, inlets, or manholes, or to natural drainage channels.
   (E)   In general, all pavement, base, and subbase (where required) shall
conform to the following requirements. It is the intent of these specifications
to designate acceptable quality and any substitutions of materials or methods
must be approved.
      (1)   The subbase:
         (a)   No subbase or other work above subgrade shall be commenced until
all sewers, water, drainage and other buried appurtenances are installed and
properly backfilled, and the subgrade is inspected and approved.
         (b)   The subbase (if required) shall be of approved materials as
hereinafter designated for bank-run gravel base, and shall be installed and
compacted in uniform layers in accordance with Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation Specifications, Form 408, current edition, under the section
entitled “Subbase”.
         (c)   The subbase shall be to plan grade, inspected and approved prior
to installation of the base course.
      (2)   The base course:
         (a)   The base course, except for bank-run gravel, shall conform to,
and be installed and compacted in accordance with Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation Specifications, Form 408, current edition, for one of the
following types:
            1.   Bituminous concrete base course; or
            2.   Crushed aggregate base course.
         (b)   1.   Bank run gravel, when used for base course, shall be local
gravels meeting the following sieve analysis, with no shale or consolidated
clay:
 
Sieve Size Percent Minimum Percent Maximum
1-1/2"     100
#4         40              90
#40        10              50
#200       5               15
 
            2.   Bank run materials shall be installed in compacted layers not
exceeding six inches in depth, and shall be compacted with a three-wheel roller
to 95% of maximum density with the addition of water if necessary. Final
rolling shall be with a steel wheeled roller of ten minimum steel weight.
Compaction and finishing operations shall be in general conformation with
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation Specifications, Form 408, current
edition, where applicable.
         (c)   The base course shall be inspected and approved prior to paving.
      (3)   The paving:
         (a)   The paving shall be furnished and installed in accordance with
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation Specifications, Form 408, latest
edition (including supplements) for one of the following types of paving,
(including prime coats and tack coats) as specified in the following table for
the various pavement construction types:
            1.   FJ-1A bituminous surface course;
            2.   ID-2A bituminous wearing course;
            3.   ID-2 bituminous binder course;
            4.   FB-1 bituminous wearing course; and
            5.   CP-2 binder course bituminous surface treatment.
         (b)   Tack and prime coats will be required in conformance with Form
408 specifications and as directed by the municipality and/or department.
Minor Streets
 A B C D E F
Minor Streets
                     A  B   C  D  E   F
Surface courses
   FJ-1A          1" 1"  1" –– –
   FB-1           –– –1" 1"  1"
Binder courses
   ID-2           2" 2"  2" –– –
   CP-2           –– –3" 3"  3"
Base course
   Bituminous cour2" – –2" – –
   Crushed aggrega–– 8" –– 8"
   Bank run gravel–12" ––12" –
Subbase              4" – –4" – –
 
Collector Streets
 A B C
Collector Streets
                     A  B   C
Surface courses
   ID-2           1" 1"  1"
Binder courses
   ID-2           2" 2"  3"
Base course
   Bituminous cour5" 3"  –
   Crushed aggrega–– 10"
Subbase              6" 12" 6"
 
 
Arterial Streets
As shall be approved by the city, with state approval where required
 
(Ord. 1286, passed 6-7-1982) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.136 SIDEWALKS.
   (A)   Sidewalks, where required, shall be constructed along the edge of the
street right-of-way and shall be properly graded to drain, and shall be
normally required on both sides of the street except that authorization may be
given for sidewalks on one side only where the character of use does not
require pedestrian access on both sides of the street.
   (B)   The minimum width for sidewalks shall be five feet, but the city may
require a greater width in the vicinity of shopping centers, schools and
recreation facilities, or where other intensive urban uses exist.
   (C)   Sidewalks shall line up with adequate walks in adjoining subdivisions.
   (D)   All walks shall consist of portland cement concrete with a minimum
compression strength of 3,500 pounds after 28 days.
   (E)   Cement and concrete shall conform to the current edition of the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation Specifications, Form 408, for
portland cement concrete walks.
   (F)   Both fine and course aggregates used shall conform to A.S.T.M.
Specifications C-33. All aggregates as approved by the Pennsylvania Department
of Transportation for their intended use will be accepted. A report from a
reputable testing laboratory, made at the contractor’s cost, will be required
for other aggregates.
   (G)   Subbase and fill material may be gravel or crushed stone and may be
local materials.
   (H)   Expansion joints shall be made of one-half inch non-extruding type of
joint material conforming to A.S.T.M. Specification D-544 and shall extend to
the full width and depth of the concrete.
   (I)   Forms shall be of straight material, so placed as to conform to the
proper grade and shall be of suitable lumber or of steel suitable for form use.
   (J)   All castings, water and gas stops, and the like shall be adjusted by
the contractor to set even with the surface of the finished walk.
   (K)   Forms shall be set so as to allow for a square vertical edge and a
thickness of a full four inches in walking areas and a minimum six-inch walk in
driveway areas and also to allow for a slope of the walk towards the street
which shall under normal conditions be one-fourth of an inch per foot. Walks in
driveways shall be reinforced with steel mesh (6 x 6-10/10 minimum).
   (L)   The contractor shall adjust the grade at street corners so as to
conform as nearly as possible to the curb grades on each street.
   (M)   Expansion joints shall be placed at all points where the proposed walk
meets existing walks, curbs, driveways, catch basins, utility castings, and the
like, as well as at any point where the walk changes in direction 30 degrees or
more. In no case shall the distance between expansion joints be greater than 30
lineal feet.
(Ord. 1286, passed 6-7-1982) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.137 UTILITIES.
   Gas, electric and telephone utilities shall be located in subdivisions in
accordance with utility company practice and in accordance with agreements
with, as approved by, the city.
(Ord. 1286, passed 6-7-1982)
§ 154.138 STREET SIGNS.
   Street name signs shall be installed by the developer at each street
intersection in accordance with standards established by the city for other
streets.
(Ord. 1286, passed 6-7-1982)
§ 154.139 STREET TREES.
   Street trees of a deciduous hardwood type with a minimum caliper of one and
one-half inches shall, when provided, be planted between the curb and the
sidewalk, provided the planting strip is a minimum of six feet wide and located
as near the planting strip as possible, but at no instance shall a tree be
planted closer than three feet to the curb, sidewalk or any other utility above
or below the ground.
(Ord. 1286, passed 6-7-1982)
§ 154.140 STREET LIGHTING.
   Street lighting, if any, shall be provided by the city.
(Ord. 1286, passed 6-7-1982)
§ 154.141 EXISTING NATURAL AREAS.
   In wooded areas, flood plains, wetlands, areas having slopes of 15% or
greater or where other natural conditions exist in such a manner that
development would be hazardous to the safety of life and property or would
cause permanent ecologic instability, the Commission may require that the
developer preserve as much of the original natural conditions as is
economically feasible and ecologically practicable and may limit the amount of
grading and excavating to the minimum improvement standards included herein.
(Ord. 1286, passed 6-7-1982)
§ 154.142 EROSION CONTROL.
   (A)   It shall be a requirement of all major subdivisions that the developer
shall have a soil erosion and sedimentation control plan, prepared in
accordance with current state law and approved by the proper agencies. The
Commission may also require a like plan for any minor subdivision.
   (B)   The plan shall be fully implemented during the construction of the
development.
(Ord. 1286, passed 6-7-1982)
MOBILE HOME PARKS
§ 154.155 GENERAL.
   (A)   A mobile home park shall be as defined in these regulations. A
development designed for mobile homes where the lots are to be conveyed to more
than one owner of record, shall, by definition, be a subdivision and not a
mobile home park. Such developments shall comply fully with the regulations in
this chapter.
   (B)   Recreational camps and campgrounds which may provide spaces for mobile
homes shall not be construed as a mobile home park under the terms of these
regulations. This section is intended to provide guidelines for the development
of mobile home parks only, and, should in no way be construed so as to include
any other subdivision activities.
   (C)   No mobile home park shall be constructed, except upon approval of the
plan by the Commission.
   (D)   Developers are urged to discuss possible development sites with the
Commission, County Planning Department, city officials, and other agencies, as
required prior to submission of the plan. The purpose of the pre-application
meeting is to afford the developer an opportunity to avail himself or herself
of advice and assistance early and informally with the agencies having
jurisdiction or responsibilities in land development.
   (E)   A sketch plan may be prepared and presented for review and discussion.
Such discussion and/or sketch plan review will be considered as confidential
between the developer and the Planning Commission. Submission of a sketch plan
shall not constitute formal filing of a plan.
   (F)   Where other regulations of the state, federal or local government are
in conflict with the provisions of these regulations, the more stringent shall
apply. The developer is responsible for obtaining all required approvals and
permits.
(Ord. 1286, passed 6-7-1982)
§ 154.156 PLAN SUBMISSION.
   (A)   The plan and all information and procedures relating thereto shall in
all respects be in compliance with the applicable provisions of these
regulations when submitted to the Commission. It is the responsibility of the
developer to coordinate his or her plans pursuant to the provisions of these
regulations with all private and public service agencies and utility companies.
   (B)   In order for plans to be considered for approval, the plans and all
required information must be filed with the Commission.
   (C)   In addition to filing an application for approval of a plan with the
Commission, the plan shall also be concurrently submitted to the County
Planning Department.
   (D)   Information to be filed with plans shall generally include those items
listed under plan requirements, and shall be prepared in accordance with, and
submitted with the number of copies, as specified therein.
   (E)   After receipt of all required data, the Commission will discuss the
plan and submit it to the County Department of Health if on-site sewage
disposal and/or on-site individual water supply are planned. A report will be
obtained from the Health Department on the suitability of the land for a mobile
home park in relation to public health standards. In cases where the park
fronts on an existing or proposed state highway or has proposed streets
entering on such highways, the Commission may submit the plans to the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation for review.
   (F)   The Commission will then review the plan to determine if it meets the
standards as set forth in these regulations, and may discuss the plan with
appropriate officials of the County Planning Department. Approval by the
Commission only shall be required to constitute approval of the plan, but such
approval will be granted only after consideration of review comments by the
County Planning Department.
   (G)   Any modification of the plan required by the Commission as
prerequisites to approval shall be noted on three copies of the preliminary
plan. One copy will be returned to the developer, one will be retained by the
Commission and the third will be filed with the County Planning Department.
   (H)   Approval of the plan shall constitute approval of the mobile home park
as to the character and intensity of development, and the arrangement and
approximate dimensions of streets, lots, and other planned features.
   (I)   The developer must provide sewerage and water plans for the entire
plan regardless of the number of lots to be initially developed, and such plans
must be approved by the County Health Department.
(Ord. 1286, passed 6-7-1982)
§ 154.157 PLAN REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   All plans shall be legibly drawn on an acceptable drafting media and
four prints shall be submitted for approval.
   (B)   Plans shall be prepared by a registered professional engineer licensed
in the state.
   (C)   The plan shall show or be accompanied by the following:
      (1)   Description of covenants, if any;
      (2)   Title to include:
         (a)   Location by municipality, county and state;
         (b)   Names and addresses of the owner or owners;
         (c)   Name and seal of registered professional surveyor who surveyed
the property and the registered engineer who prepared the plan; and
         (d)   North arrow, date and graphic scale.
      (3)   Tract boundaries with bearings, distances and area in acres to the
nearest hundredths;
      (4)   Existing easements, their location, width and distance;
      (5)   Contours of vertical intervals of two feet;
      (6)   Datum to which contour elevations refer;
      (7)   Bench marks;
      (8)   Number to identify each lot or site;
      (9)   Existing physical features to include:
         (a)   Watercourses, culverts, bridges and drains;
         (b)   Buildings, sewers, water mains and fire hydrants;
         (c)   Street and alleys on or adjacent to the tract, including name;
         (d)   Subsurface condition of the tract; and
         (e)   Names and addresses of abutting property owners.
      (10)   Lot lines and dimensions;
      (11)   Building lines;
      (12)   Reservations of grounds for public use and/or recreation;
      (13)   All proposed rights-of-way and easements;
      (14)   Location, name and width of all proposed streets and alleys and
paved cartway widths, plus all sidewalks and crosswalks;
      (15)   Profiles showing existing ground and proposed centerline street
grades, and typical cross sections of roadways and sidewalks;
      (16)   General drainage plan for storm water;
      (17)   A plan of the proposed sanitary sewerage system or a plan, where
required, showing the proposed location of on-lot sewage disposal facilities.
The plan shall include location of manholes, invert elevations grades and sizes
of sanitary sewers; and
      (18)   A plan of the proposed water distribution system. The size of all
water pipes and the location of valves and fire hydrants shall be shown.
(Ord. 1286, passed 6-7-1982)
§ 154.158 CONSTRUCTION.
   All construction of streets, sewage disposal, storm sewers, grading, paving
and subdrains in mobile home parks and erosion control measures shall be in
compliance with the applicable provisions of §§
154.130 through
154.142 of these regulations (construction requirements), except as hereafter
modified in §
154.159.
(Ord. 1286, passed 6-7-1982) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.159 PARK STANDARDS.
   (A)   All mobile home parks shall have an area of not less than five acres.
   (B)   All streets shall be generally constructed in accordance with this
subchapter, except for widths of pavement and curbing requirements
   (C)   Mobile home parks shall be fully improved and shall include the
following minimum requirements:
      (1)   Paved streets:
         (a)   One-way: 12 feet minimum width; and
         (b)   Two-way: 18 feet minimum width.
      (2)   Two off-street parking spaces for each mobile home lot;
      (3)   Adequate drainage;
      (4)   Sewage disposal and water supply meeting the requirements of the
regulations for subdivisions;
      (5)   All drives and walks shall be adequately lighted at night. The
Director of Safety may require additional lighting at any time he or she may
deem such as necessary;
      (6)   A permanent lot number for each lot, visible from the street, and
approved by the municipality and the local postmaster;
      (7)   All two-way streets shall have an exit on both ends or an approved
cul-de-sac. All one-way streets shall have an entrance and exit;
      (8)   No dwelling, other than mobile homes, or prefabricated dwellings
less than 15 feet in one demension, will be permitted within the park;
      (9)   Wheels may be removed from mobile homes and foundations may be
constructed under such trailers; any structural additions extending beyond the
limits of the trailer shall not exceed the size of the original tailer in floor
space;
      (10)   The owners of all parks shall submit a monthly report to the city
on forms provided by the office of the City Administrator. The monthly report
shall provide information on the number of trailers in the park, which lots
they go on, who owns each trailer, who lives in each trailer and the size of
each trailer (in the best opinion of the park owner);
      (11)   Trailer sales will not be permitted in the park (sale of new
trailers or used trailers not set) unless permitted under the current zoning
ordinance; and
      (12)   All areas within the park and less than 100 feet from the park
streets shall be improved with lawns and/or approved paintings.
   (D)   Recreation facilities shall be provided and shall be equal to 10% of
the gross area of the park. Location, design, and availability to all lots
shall be carefully considered and shall be subject to the approval of the
Commission.
   (E)   All mobile homes must be skirted to hide utility lines and leveling
devices. Skirting materials must be masonry, fiberglass, aluminum or other
durable material that is manufactured for this purpose.
   (F)   Mobile home parks shall be designed to comply with the following
criteria:
 
Minimum lot frontage                        50 feet
Maximum density per gross park acre         7
Minimum distance from adjacent mobile homes 30 feet
Minimum distance to streets                 25 feet
Minimum distance to park boundaries         35 feet
Maximum height of mobile homes              20 feet
 
   (G)   The Commission may require a ten-foot wide buffer or planting strip
along the sides or rear of mobile home parks where such a requirement is
considered necessary for proper planning and protection.
(Ord. 1286, passed 6-7-1982) Penalty, see §
154.999
ADMINISTRATION AND MODIFICATION
§ 154.170 GENERAL.
   The foregoing regulations shall supersede and replace all other conflicting
subdivisions and land development regulations issued by the city and the
Planning Commission previous to the approval date of this chapter.
(Ord. 1286, passed 6-7-1982)
§ 154.171 CHANGES.
   The City Council may from time to time revise, modify and amend this chapter
by appropriate action in accordance with the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, Act 247, 53 P.S. §§ 10101 et seq., as amended.
(Ord. 1286, passed 6-7-1982)
§ 154.172 VARIANCES.
   (A)   Where the Commission finds that extraordinary hardships may result
from the strict compliance with this chapter, it may vary the regulations so
that substantial justice may be done and the public interest secured; provided
that such variance will not have the effect of nullifying the intent and
purpose of this chapter.
   (B)   A variance of the standards and requirements of these regulations may
be allowed by the Planning Commission, with approval of City Council, in the
case of a plan and program for a planned development, a cluster subdivision, or
a neighborhood unit, which in the judgement of the Planning Commission and City
Council provides adequate public spaces and improvements for the circulation,
recreation, light, air and service needs of the tract when fully developed and
populated and which also provide such covenants or other legal provisions as
will assure conformity to and achievement of the plan, and conformance to the
intent of the design standards of these regulations.
   (C)   In granting variances and modifications, the Commission may require
such conditions as will, in its judgement, secure substantially the objectives
of the standards or requirements so varied or modified. The reasons for
granting the variance shall be recorded in the Commission’s official record.
(Ord. 1286, passed 6-7-1982)
§ 154.173 RECORDS.
   The Commission shall maintain an accurate public record of all plans upon
which it takes action and of its findings, decisions and recommendations in
relation thereto.
(Ord. 1286, passed 6-7-1982)
§ 154.174 VALIDITY.
   Should any section or provision of this chapter be declared by a court of
competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such decision shall not effect the
validity of the remainder of the chapter as a whole, or any individual part
thereof.
(Ord. 1286, passed 6-7-1982)
§ 154.999 PENALTY.
   Any person, partnership or corporation who or which being the owner or agent
of the owner of any lot, tract or parcel of land shall lay out, construct,
open, or dedicate any street, sanitary sewer, storm sewer, water main or other
improvements for public use, travel or other purposes or for the common use of
occupants of buildings abutting thereon, or who sells, transfers or agrees or
enters into an agreement to sell any land in a subdivision of land development
whether by reference to or by other use of a plat of such subdivision of land
development or otherwise, or erect any building thereon, unless and until a
final plan has been prepared in full compliance with the provision of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247, 53 P.S. §§ 10101 et seq.,
as amended, and of the regulations adopted hereunder and has been recorded as
provided herein, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof,
such person, or the members of such partnership, or the officers of such
corporation, or the agent of any of them, responsible for such violation pay a
fine not exceeding $1,000 per lot or parcel or per dwelling within each lot or
parcel. All fines collected for such violations shall be paid over to the City
Treasurer and deposited in the general fund. The description of metes and
bounds in the instrument of transfer or other document used in the process of
selling or transferring shall not exempt the seller or transferer from such
penalties or from the remedies herein provided.
(Ord. 1286, passed 6-7-1982)
APPENDIX A: STATEMENTS AND ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
RECOMMENDED STATEMENTS AND ACKNOWLEDGMENTS TO APPEAR ON THE PRELIMINARY PLAN OR
THE FINAL PLAN AS APPLICABLE
1.   Certificate by surveyor that the survey and plans are correct:
I, _____________________________________ hereby certify that I am a registered
Land Surveyor in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. I further certify that this
plat correctly represents a survey completed by me and that all monuments and
markers shown hereon actually exist and that their location, type and material
are accurately shown.
   DATE _______________________________   SIGNATURE ________________________
         Seal
   A seal which includes the name of the surveyor (for major subdivisions)
2.   Certificate for Erie County Metropolitan Planning Department:
Reviewed by the Erie County Metropolitan Planning Department on
_______________, ___, 20___.
   Director ______________________________   Reviewed by
_________________________
3.   Certification of Ownership and Acknowledgement of Subdivision Plans:
On this, the ______day of _______________, 20___ before me, the undersigned
officer, personally appeared _______________________________, who being duly
sworn according to law, deposes and says that he or she is the owner and/or
equitable owner of the property shown on this plan, and that he or she
acknowledges the same to be his or her act and plan and desires the same to be
recorded as such according to law.
   Witness my name and seal the day and date above written.
   _____________________________________
   Notary Public or other officer
   _____________________________________   ____________________________________
   Seal                               My Commission Expires
4.   Certificates for Municipality and its Planning Commission:
Approved by resolution of the Council of the City of Corry this ____ day of
_______________, 20___.
   ATTEST:
   ________________________________   ______________________________________
   City Clerk                         Mayor
Approved by the Planning Commission of the City of Corry this _____ day of
________________, 20___.
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
RECOMMENDED STATEMENTS AND ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS WHICH WILL BE SEPARATE INSTRUMENTS
REFERENCED TO THE FINAL PLAN
5.   Certificate of Dedication:
We, the undersigned owners of the real estate shown and described herein, do
hereby certify that we have laid off, platted and subdivided, and hereby lay
off, plan and subdivide, said real estate in accordance with the within plat,
that the subdivision shall be known and designated as
__________________________________________ (Name of Subdivision) and that all
streets and alleys shown and not heretofore dedicated, are hereby dedicated to
public use.
   Date: _____________________________   _____________________________________
                                 _____________________________________
                                 _____________________________________
APPENDIX B: LOT SIZE AND AREA, HEIGHT REGULATIONS, AND YARD REQUIREMENTS
Lot Size and Area, Height Regulations, and Yard Requirements
 R-1 R-2 R-3 C-1 C-2 C-3 I-1 I-2 P
Lot Size and Area, Height Regulations, and Yard Requirements
                                                       R-1 R-2 R-3 C-1   C-2   C-3   I-1    I-2    P
Building height
   Maximum height (stories)1                        3   3   3   3     3     3     3      3      3
   Maximum height (feet)                            35  35  35  40    40    40    60     60     35
Lots
   Minimum width (feet)                             3   3   3   20    60    20    100    100    None
   Minimum area (square feet)2                      3   3   3   2,000 8,000 2,000 20,000 20,000 None
   Maximum building coverage                        30% 40% 30% 85%   50%   85%   80%    80%    25%
Front yards
   Minimum depth (feet)                             22  22  22  0     25    10*   25     25     30
Side yards
   Number required                                  2   2   2   None  2     2     2      2      2
   Minimum width (feet):
      Main building - one side*                  10  10  10  0     10    5**   10     10     10
      Main building - opposite side*             5   5   5   0     10    5**   10     10     10
      Accessory uses*                            3   3   3   0     10    5**   10     10     10
         *Except corner lots
   Corner lots (minimum side yard abutting adjacent 15  15  15  5     10    5**   15     15     15
street)4
Rear yards
   Minimum depth (feet)
      Accessory uses                             3   3   3   5     10    5**   10     10     10
      Main building                              10  10  10  5     10    5**   10     10     10
*      25 feet if property fronts on Columbus Avenue
 
**   10 feet if property fronts on Columbus Avenue
 
1.   Basements shall be considered as one-half story; cellars and attics are not included
 
2.   The minimum lot area shall be increased by 1,000 or 600 square feet for each family unit more than
one in accordance with the following schedule:
Dwelling units other than efficiency units (as defined): 1,000 square feet
Efficiency dwelling units as defined in this chapter: 600 square feet
 
3.   Lot areas and widths, in residential districts, shall be as follows:
Without public water and public sewer
Minimum area of 20,000 square feet
Minimum width of 100 feet
Lots with public water, but not public sewers and vice versa
Minimum area of 10,000 square feet
Minimum width of 70 feet
Lots with both public water and sewer
Minimum area of 7,000 square feet
Minimum width of 60 feet
 
4.   Minimum shal1 be greater where required by sight-triangle regulations
 
In addition to the required lot size shown, the site shall be restricted by the specified building
coverage and parking requirements, and no more than one-half the open area (lot area excluding
buildings) shall be devoted to off-street parking or parking spaces
 
CHAPTER 155: SCHEDULE OF FEES
Section
   
155.01   Street excavation permits
   
155.02   Zoning application
   
155.03   Zoning appeals
   
155.04   Building Code
   
155.05   Building Code appeals
   
155.06   Subdivision review
   
155.07   Stormwater management
   
155.08   Ordinance amendments
   
155.09   Sewage planning module review
   
155.10   Other fees
   
155.11   Tax collector
   
155.12   Residential rental registry
   
155.13   Water and sewer rate and regulation fees
   
155.14   Property Maintenance Code
§ 155.01 STREET EXCAVATION PERMITS.
   (A)    The PennDOT fee schedule will be assessed on highway occupancy
permits issued for installations/construction within state routes that are also
city street rights-of-way. This fee schedule is available by contacting
PennDOT.
   (B)   In addition to this schedule are permits necessary for installation of
private driveway for egress to a city right-of-way and other excavations in
city rows.
      (1)   A driveway residential permit application fee: $50.
      (2)   A driveway commercial and industrial permit application fee: $125.
      (3)   The city will provide installation of up to 40 feet of pre-
purchased driveway pipe with aggregate overlay for a driveway entering a city
roadway upon receipt of $400/driveway and signed waiver. Addition driveway
widths will be installed upon receipt of an additional $10 per linear foot. The
city will neither excavate nor install concrete or asphalt surfacing. Bonding
security for open excavation is required in the following amounts:
         (a)   Other excavations in right-of-way: $50;
         (b)   Curb cutting: $50;
         (c)   Sidewalk construction: $50;
         (d)   Tree removal in right-of-way: $25.
(Res. 18-06, passed 3-5-2018; Res. 20-24, passed 11-2-2020; Res. 21-19, passed
12-9-2021; Res. 24-42, passed 12-16-2024)
§ 155.02 ZONING APPLICATION.
   (A)   New structures, additions and alterations: the zoning application fee
shall be based upon the applicant’s estimated cost of construction. The fee
schedule is as follows. Documentation of costs may be requested by the City
Zoning Officer to verify the cost of construction of any application.
 
Cost of Construction Application Fee
$0 - $1,000          $25
$1,001 - $10,000     $50
$10,001 - 100,000    $100
$100,001 - 250,000   $250
$250,001 and up      $500
 
   (B)   Placement of a manufactured home in a mobile home park (MHP): $100.
   (C)   Placement of a manufactured home on a parcel outside a MHP: $250.
   (D)   Sign installation: $100.
   (E)   Change of use: $50.
   (F)   Demolition:    $25 ($0 - $5,000)
            $50 ($5,001 - $10,000)
            $100 ($10,001 - $100,000)
            $250 ($100,001 - $250,000)
            $500 ($250,001 and up)
   (G)   Penalty provisions (for failure to obtain advance approval of a
project):
      (1)   First violation: $100;
      (2)   Second violation: $250; and
      (3)   Third violation: $500.
(Res. 18-06, passed 3-5-2018 ; Res. 20-24, passed 11-2-2020; Res. 21-19, passed
12-9-2021; Res. 24-42, passed 12-16-2024)
§ 155.03 ZONING APPEALS.
   (A)    Zoning Hearing Board: $750, deposit required for costs incurred by
the city with remaining balance refunded. These appeals include: variance;
special exception; non-conforming uses; validity challenges; determinations of
the Zoning Officer or Municipal Engineer.
   (B)   Governing body: $500, deposit required for costs incurred by the city
with remaining balance refunded. These appeals include: conditional use;
curative amendment; all petitions for amendment of the zoning ordinance.
   (C)   Continuation of any hearing: to be determined by the Zoning Officer
per each case.
(Res. 18-06, passed 3-5-2018 ; Res. 20-24, passed 11-2-2020; Res. 21-19, passed
12-9-2021; Res. 24-42, passed 12-16-2024)
§ 155.04 BUILDING CODE.
   The city employs two third parties to administer the Uniform Construction
Code (UCC). Building Inspection Underwriters, Inc. (BIU) or Construction Code
Inspectors (CCI) issues any required building permits after plan review.
Inspection fees are paid directly to BIU or CCI prior to the issuance of a
building permit. Fee schedules are available from each provider upon request.
An administrative fee of 10% is applied to each building permit issued by BIU
and CCI for city services.
(Res. 18-06, passed 3-5-2018 ; Res. 20-24, passed 11-2-2020; Res. 21-19, passed
12-9-2021; Res. 24-42, passed 12-16-2024)
§ 155.05 BUILDING CODE APPEALS.
   The city employs the Erie County Association of Township Officials UCC
Appeals Board to review allowable appeals. A $1,500 deposit is required with
filing of the appeal application. These appeals include: variance; extension of
time; and appeal of a Building Code Official decision.
(Res. 18-06, passed 3-5-2018 ; Res. 20-24, passed 11-2-2020; Res. 21-19, passed
12-9-2021; Res. 24-42, passed 12-16-2024)
§ 155.06 SUBDIVISION REVIEW.
   Land subdivision/development is regulated by the city land use/subdivision
ordinance. However, all proposed land developments and/or subdivisions require
Erie County Planning Department review for compliance with local regulations.
Exhibits are not available on the website.
   (A)   Minor subdivision: $100.
   (B)   Major subdivision/land development: $250.
(Res. 18-06, passed 3-5-2018 ; Res. 20-24, passed 11-2-2020; Res. 21-19, passed
12-9-2021; Res. 24-42, passed 12-16-2024)
§ 155.07 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT.
   (A)   Construction of new or additional impervious or semi-pervious surfaces
(e.g., driveways, parking lots and the like) and the construction of new
buildings, additions to existing buildings and earthmoving activities involving
over 1,000 square feet in conjunction with regulated activities, requires the
submission of a stormwater management (SWM) application and/or site plan and
report. A municipal SWM review fee is imposed to defray costs incurred by the
city. The costs covered may include: administrative expense; plan review;
construction meetings; inspections; and any additional work required to enforce
permit provisions.
   (B)   Administrative and clerical costs shall be as follows.
 
Administrative and Clerical Costs                                      Fee
Small project SWM application involving less than 2,500 square feet    $25
Small project SWM application involving 2,500 - 4,999 square feet      $50
Single-family residential exemption application                        $50
Plan submission for regulated activity involving 5,000 square feet and $100
greater; and all waiver requests
 
   (C)   Engineer or professional consultant fees will be reimbursed according
to the scheduled annual rate per hour. A review fee reimbursement agreement
must be signed and a minimum escrow amount must be deposited with the city with
an application/plan in accordance with the following.
 
                                                             Minimum Escrow
Small project SWM application involving 2,500 - 4,999 square  $500
feet
Plan submission for regulated activity involving 5,000 square $2,000
feet and greater; and all waiver requests
 
(Res. 18-06, passed 3-5-2018 ; Res. 20-24, passed 11-2-2020; Res. 21-19, passed
12-9-2021; Res. 24-42, passed 12-16-2024)
§ 155.08 ORDINANCE AMENDMENTS.
   All petitions for amendment of a city ordinance: $500, deposit required to
reimburse the city for costs incurred with remaining balance refunded.
(Res. 18-06, passed 3-5-2018 ; Res. 20-24, passed 11-2-2020; Res. 21-19, passed
12-9-2021; Res. 24-42, passed 12-16-2024)
§ 155.09 SEWAGE PLANNING MODULE REVIEW.
   (A)   Sewage planning is occasionally required outside the scope of a
subdivision/land development plan.
   (B)   These planning modules require city review for compliance with local
regulation.
      (1)   Small flow treatment facility: $100.
      (2)   Public sewer extension: $250.
      (3)   Other modules: $100.
   (C)   Engineer or professional consultant fees will be reimbursed according
to the scheduled annual rate per hour. A review fee reimbursement agreement
must be signed and a minimum escrow amount must be deposited with the city with
an application/plan in accordance with the following:
 
                                    Minimum Escrow
(1)   Small flow treatment facili$500
(2)   Public sewer extension     $500
(3)   Other modules              $500
 
(Res. 18-06, passed 3-5-2018; Res. 20-24, passed 11-2-2020; Res. 21-19, passed
12-9-2021; Res. 24-42, passed 12-16-2024)
§ 155.10 OTHER FEES.
   (A)   City maps: actual reproduction costs plus actual administrative costs
incurred by the city.
   (B)   (1)   Copies of the city zoning ordinance: $25, mailing and handling
fee: $5.
      (2)   Copies of other city ordinances: as open record.
   (C)   Municipal no-lien letters: $25.
   (D)   Zoning compliance letter: $25.
   (E)   Check returned by bank due to non-sufficient funds: $45.
   (F)   Plot plan creation: $50.
   (G)   Banner application: $50.
   (H)   Solicitation permit: $50, plus $10 per each additional associate.
   (I)   Camera audio and/or video recordings – police, fire and code
enforcement:
      (1)   Copy of body camera audio and/or video recording: $100 per camera
per incident.
      (2)   Copy of vehicle camera audio and/or video recordings:
         (a)   Each police vehicle has five cameras, cost $100 per camera: $500
per incident.
         (b)   Each fire vehicle has one camera, cost $100 per camera: $100 per
incident.
         (c)   Cost subject to change with number of cameras in vehicle.
   (J)   Burn permit application: $5, see §§
92.01 through
92.08 and
92.99.
(Res. 18-06, passed 3-5-2018 ; Res. 20-24, passed 11-2-2020; Res. 21-19, passed
12-9-2021; Res. 24-42, passed 12-16-2024)
§ 155.11 TAX COLLECTOR.
   (A)   Check returned by bank due to non-sufficient funds: $45.
   (B)   Treasurer’s no-lien letter: $25.
   (C)   Treasurer’s tax certification letter: $25.
(Res. 18-06, passed 3-5-2018 ; Res. 20-24, passed 11-2-2020; Res. 21-19, passed
12-9-2021; Res. 24-42, passed 12-16-2024)
§ 155.12 RESIDENTIAL RENTAL REGISTRY.
   Not currently to be administered as of January 1, 2022.
   (A)   Administrative filing of all residential rental units: no charge.
   (B)   Failure to file: $100 per month.
(Res. 18-06, passed 3-5-2018 ; Res. 20-24, passed 11-2-2020; Res. 21-19, passed
12-9-2021)
§ 155.13 WATER AND SEWER RATE AND REGULATION FEES.
   (A)   Service connection fees.
      (1)   Water service install fee (new or customer requested change of
water service from main to curb stop). This fee covers the installation cost of
the install materials and labor associated with the install. If required will
also include the installation of the new meter.
 
5/8 and 3/4 inch service line $1,000
1 inch service line           $1,250
1-1/2 inch service line       $1,500
2 inch service line           $3,000
4 inch service line           $3,500
6 inch service line           $4,000
8 inch service line           $5,000
 
      (2)   Water new service fixed asset fee (tapping fee). This fee has been
calculated per Act 57 guidelines.
         Per EDU connected to the system: $725.
      (3)   Sewer service installation or repair inspection fee: $25. This fee
covers the inspection process by the Public Works Department of any new or
repaired connection to the city sewer main.
      (4)   Sewer new service fixed asset fee (tapping fee). This fee has been
calculated per Act 57 guidelines.
         Per EDU being connected to the system: $725.
   (B)   Fire connection fees.
 
4 inch service line $3,500
6 inch service line $4,000
8 inch service line $5,000
 
   (C)   Frozen meter charge.
 
Up to 3/4 inch meter repair $75 plus costs (during business hours)
                            $150 plus costs (after business hours)
1 inch or larger meter      $150 plus costs (during business hours)
                            $225 plus costs (after business hours)
 
   (D)   Meter and/or MIU installation (replacement or maintenance due to
damage or tampering):
 
First occurrence    $50 plus the cost of materials
Second occurrence   $100 plus the cost of materials
Further occurrences $250 each plus the cost of materials
 
   (E)   Temporary meter removal (reconnection fee). Flat fee of $50, minimum
bill remains in effect.
   (F)   Turn on fee (account fee). Flat fee for each disconnection/
reconnection: $50.
   (G)   Temporary water for construction, circus, bazaar, fair and the like.
 
2 inch or less $50 per day plus water consumption
3 inch         $75 per day plus water consumption
 
   (H)   Non-fire use of hydrant.
 
Un-metered flow through on 2 ½ inch hydrant $5 per minute
nozzle
Metered flow through hydrant                 $75 minimum per day plus water
                                             consumption
 
   (I)   Metered water purchase at city garage. $25 per fill up plus water
consumption.
   (J)   Customer deposit.
 
Public utility deposit/residential       $100
Public utility deposit/commercial/public $150
Public utility deposit/industrial        $200
Those customers who do not have both water and sewer will be charged a 50%
deposit rate
 
   (K)   Returned check for insufficient funds. Flat fee of $45.
   (L)   Non-payment/NSF disconnection/reconnection fee. $50.
(Res. 18-06, passed 3-5-2018 ; Res. 20-24, passed 11-2-2020; Res. 21-19, passed
12-9-2021); Res. 24-42, passed 12-16-2024)
§ 155.14 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE.
   Filing deposit fee for appeals to International Property Maintenance Code
Appeals Board: $250 (deposit required for cost incurred by the city with
remaining balance refunded).
(Res. 20-24, passed 11-2-2020; Res. 21-19, passed 12-9-2021); Res. 24-42,
passed 12-16-2024)
CHAPTER 156: ZONING
Section
General Provisions
   
156.001   Title
   
156.002   Compliance
   
156.003   Conflict of laws
   
156.004   Community development objectives
   
156.005   Definitions
District Regulations
   
156.020   Zoning map
   
156.021   Zoning districts
   
156.022   District boundaries
   
156.023   District regulations
Non-Conforming Uses
   
156.035   Continuing non-conforming uses
   
156.036   Damaged structures
   
156.037   Yard and parking requirements
   
156.038   New non-conforming use
   
156.039   Change in construction, size and the like
   
156.040   Safe conditions
   
156.041   Reverting to non-conforming use
   
156.042   Change in boundaries
   
156.043   Abandoned building
   
156.044   Zoning regulations still applicable
District Regulations
   
156.055   R-1 Single-Family Residential
   
156.056   R-2 General Residential
   
156.057   R-3 Special Residential
   
156.058   C-1 Light Commercial and C-2 Light Highway Commercial
   
156.059   C-3 Transitional Commercial
   
156.060   I-1 Light Industrial-Heavy Commercial
   
156.061   I-2 Heavy Industrial
   
156.062   P Preserve and Recreation
   
156.063   Lot size and area, height regulations and yard requirements
   
156.064   Official zoning map
Off-Street Loading and Parking
   
156.075   Off-street loading
   
156.076   Off-street loading space requirements
   
156.077   Off-street parking
   
156.078   Off-street parking space requirements
Supplemental Regulations
   
156.090   Existing lots of record
   
156.091   Application of yard regulations
   
156.092   Temporary structures
   
156.093   Height limitation
   
156.094   Performance standards
   
156.095   Water recreation and storage areas
   
156.096   Signs/canopies
   
156.097   Agriculture
   
156.098   Floodplains
   
156.099   Junkyards and similar storage areas
   
156.100   Sanitary landfill areas
   
156.101   Drive-in theaters
   
156.102   Home occupations
   
156.103   Home professional offices
   
156.104   Mineral excavations
   
156.105   Special residential and commercial projects
   
156.106   Transitional commercial districts
   
156.107   City-owned structures
   
156.108   Outside storage
   
156.109   Sight line
   
156.110   Outside toilets
   
156.111   Service stations, auto repair and public garages
   
156.112   Vehicle doors
   
156.113   Shrubbery and trees
   
156.114   Fences and walls
   
156.115   Garage sales
   
156.116   Parking vehicles in residential districts
Administration and Enforcement
   
156.130   Office of Zoning Officer
   
156.131   Duties and powers of the Zoning Officer
   
156.132   Application for building/zoning permit and zoning certificate of use
and occupancy
   
156.133   Action on permits and certificates of use and occupancy
   
156.134   Fee schedule
   
156.135   Notice of violation
   
156.136   Prosecution of violation
   
156.137   Stop work order
Zoning Hearing Board Functions
   
156.150   General
   
156.151   Functions
   
156.152   Hearings
   
156.153   Appeal from Board’s decision
Amendments
   
156.165   General
   
156.166   Petitions
   
156.167   Referral
   
156.168   Action
   
156.169   Curative amendments
 
   
156.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 156.001 TITLE.
   The official title of this chapter is “The Corry 1991 Zoning Ordinance”.
(Ord. 1347, passed 3-18-1991)
§ 156.002 COMPLIANCE.
   No structure shall be located, erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved,
altered, converted or enlarged, nor shall any structure or land be used or
designed to be used except in full compliance with all the provisions of this
chapter and after the lawful issuance of all permits and certifications
required by this chapter.
(Ord. 1347, passed 3-18-1991)
§ 156.003 CONFLICT OF LAWS.
   Whenever there is a difference between minimum standards or dimensions or
provisions specified herein and those contained in other regulations,
resolutions or ordinances of the city, the highest standards shall govern.
(Ord. 1347, passed 3-18-1991)
§ 156.004 COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT OBJECTIVES.
   (A)   This chapter and zoning map are intended to promote, protect and
facilitate the public health, safety, morals, general welfare, coordinated and
practical community development, proper density of population, civil defense,
the provisions of adequate light and air, police protection, vehicle parking
and loading space, transportation, water and sewage, schools, public grounds
and other public requirements; as well as preventing the overcrowding of land,
blight, danger and congestion in travel and transportation, loss of health,
life or property from fire, flood, panic or other dangers. More specifically,
these broad purposes are designed to clearly achieve the objective of the city
Comprehensive Plan as incorporated in “A Comprehensive Plan for the City of
Corry and Wayne Township”, completed in 1974.
   (B)   The specific objectives upon which this chapter have been based
included the following:
      (1)   To support and encourage order and beauty in the development of the
city’s environment for the convenience and pleasure of present citizens and
future residents through sound land development practices and the provision of
adequate public utilities and facilities;
      (2)   To encourage future land development to compliment a logical,
harmonious and efficient pattern of future city growth;
      (3)   To encourage future residential use to occur in a harmonious
arrangement within compact neighborhood units;
      (4)   To preserve strategic properties suitable for industrial
development for the establishment of suitable diversified industry throughout
the city;
      (5)   To guide commercial development in such a way so as to minimize
adverse influence on adjacent roads or land values, to maintain and protect
existing commercial uses and to encourage new commercial facilities to locate
in functional designed centers with safe and adequate highway access;
      (6)   To protect property values to ensure suitable, attractive and
efficient development of the community;
      (7)   To encourage development of integrated and cohesive suburban
development; and
      (8)   To encourage developers to incorporate adequate public facilities
and open spaces in neighborhood design.
(Ord. 1347, passed 3-18-1991)
§ 156.005 DEFINITIONS.
   Except where specifically defined herein, all words used in the chapter
shall carry their customary meanings. Words used in the present tense shall
include the future. The singular number shall include the plural, and the
plural the singular. The word “shall” is always mandatory and not permissive.
The words “uses” or “occupied”, as applied to any land or building, shall be
construed to include the words “intended, arranged or designed to be used or
occupied”.
   ABANDONED VEHICLES. Unused, stripped, junked, wrecked or otherwise unusable
vehicles which do not carry a current registration plate or inspection sticker
and which are no longer safely usable for the purpose for which they were
manufactured and which have been in place for a period of 30 days or more.
   ACCESSORY USE. A use customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal
use of building and located on the same lot with such principal use or
building.
   ACCESSORY USE PARKING. Parking customarily incidental and subordinate to the
principal use of a building located on or adjacent to the lot where the parking
occurs.
   AGRICULTURE. Any agricultural use, including farming, dairying, pasturage
agriculture, horticulture, floriculture, viticulture, animal and poultry
husbandry, kennels and forestry.
   ALLEY. Area of a lot or site shall be calculated from dimensions derived by
horizontal projections of the site.
   BASEMENT. A story having more than 50% of its clear height above the average
level of the surrounding around but with a floor elevation below grade. A
BASEMENT shall be counted as a story for the purpose of height measurement if
the vertical distance between the ceiling and the average level of the
adjoining ground is more than five feet or if used for a dwelling unit, not
common space for other floors of the building.
   BED AND BREAKFAST FACILITY. A residential building other than a hotel in
which part or parts are kept, used or held, to be a place where sleeping
accommodations are offered for hire and limited meals may be served to
overnight guests only; a BED AND BREAKFAST FACILITY is open to transient
guests.
   BILLBOARD. A sign (see definition of sign in this chapter) which advertises
a service, activity, product or business pursuit, but which is not located on
the premises of the item advertised.
   BOARD. The Zoning Hearing Board of the City of Corry, Erie County,
Pennsylvania.
   BOARDING, ROOMING, TOURIST OR LODGING HOUSE. A building where lodging is
provided, for compensation, for two or more persons who are not a family.
   BUILDING. A roofed structure enclosed by walls, columns or piers for the
shelter, housing or enclosure of persons, goods, materials or animals.
   BUILDING HEIGHT. The vertical distance from the average elevation at grade
level, to the highest point of the deck of a flat roof or mansard roof, or to
the mean height between the eaves and the ridge for gable, hip and gambrel
roofs.
   BUILDING OR SETBACK LINE. Imaginary line parallel to or concentric with the
nearest right-of-way line and which is located at the setback distance from the
street right-of-way line, said line being a boundary or limit, beyond which no
permanent part of a building shall project.
   BUSINESS SERVICE. Any business activity which renders service to other
commercial or industrial enterprises.
   CARTWAY. The portion of a road or alley which is paved, graded or improved
for travel by vehicles.
   CELLAR. A story having more than 50% of its clear height below the average
level of the surrounding ground. A CELLAR shall be counted as a story for the
purposes of height measurement if the vertical distance between the ceiling and
the average level of the adjoining ground is more than five feet or if used for
dwelling purposes.
   CITY. The City of Corry, Pennsylvania.
   CITY COUNCIL. The Council or legislative body of the City of Corry, Erie
County, Pennsylvania.
   CLINIC. Any establishment where human patients are examined and treated by
doctors or dentists but not hospitalised overnight.
   CLUB. Any establishment operated for social, recreational or educational
purposes, but open only to members and invited guests and not the general
public.
   COMMISSION or PLANNING COMMISSION. The Planning Commission of the City of
Corry, Erie County, Pennsylvania.
   CONDITIONAL USE. A modification of the regulations of the chapter which City
Council is permitted to authorize in specific instances listed in this chapter,
under the terms, procedure and conditions prescribed herein.
   COMMERCIAL. Engaging in a business, enterprise, activity or other
undertaking for profit, except an activity including only the manufacture and
sale of goods.
   COVERAGE. The percentage of the lot area covered by principal and accessory
use structures.
   DECISION. Final adjudication of any board or other body granted jurisdiction
under any land use ordinance or this chapter to do so; either by reason of the
grant of exclusive jurisdiction or by reason of appeals from determinations.
All DECISIONS shall be appealable to the County Court of Common Pleas and
judicial district wherein the municipality lies.
   DENSITY. The area of a lot or group of lots computed exclusive of any
portion of the right-of-way of any road divided by the number of families
housed on the lot or group of lots.
   DETERMINATION. 
      (1)   Final action by an officer, body or agency charged with the
administration of any land use ordinance or applications thereunder, except the
following:
         (a)   The governing body;
         (b)   The Zoning Hearing Board; or
         (c)   The Planning Agency, only if and to the extent the Planning
Agency is charged with final decision on preliminary or final plans under the
subdivision and land development ordinance or planned residential development
provisions.
      (2)   DETERMINATIONS shall be appealable only to the boards designated as
having jurisdiction for such appeal.
   DRILLING. The drilling or redrilling of any well or the deepening of any
existing well.
   DRIVE-IN FACILITY. A commercial business that provides service to the
occupants of a vehicle from a window, booth or other structure designed to
provide such service without the occupants leaving the vehicle. This shall
include, but not be limited to, such establishments as drive-in banks, drive-in
beverage distributors, restaurants, laundries and service stations. Also
included in this category are automobile washing facilities that are designed
to allow the vehicle to be driven or propelled, through a wash bay.
   DWELLING. Any building (including cottages) designed or used as a permanent
or temporary living quarters for one or more families.
   DWELLING, MULTIPLE. A building arranged or used as residence for two or more
families independently of each other and doing their own cooking therein,
including apartment houses, apartment hotels, flats and group houses.
   DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY. A detached building arranged or used for occupancy
by one family containing a habitable floor area of at least 800 square feet of
dwelling space.
   DWELLING UNIT. One or more rooms for living purposes, together with separate
cooking and sanitary facilities used or intended to be used by one or more
persons living together and maintaining a common household, and accessible from
the outdoors either directly or through an entrance hall shared with other
dwelling units.
   EFFICIENCY DWELLING UNIT. A dwelling unit having no more than three rooms,
no more than one of which shall be a bedroom, and which has a floor space of
500 square feet or less. Basements, attics and storage rooms shall not be
considered as rooms if used for non-living purposes. Bathrooms are not
included.
   ESSENTIAL SERVICES. The erection, construction, alteration or maintenance by
public utilities or municipal or other governmental agencies of underground or
overhead gas, electrical, television cable, steam or water transmission or
distribution systems, collection, communication, supply or disposal systems,
including poles, wire, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduit cables, radio
transmissions, fire alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants,
and other similar equipment and accessories in connection therewith; reasonably
necessary for the furnishing of adequate services by such public utilities or
municipal or other governmental agencies or for the public health or safety or
general welfare, but not including structures of buildings.
   ESSENTIAL STRUCTURES. Buildings and other large structures necessary for
providing essential services.
   FAMILY.
      (1)   One or more persons related by blood, marriage or adoption, plus
domestic servants, occupying a dwelling unit, including not more that one
boarder, roomer or lodger; or
      (2)   Less than six unrelated persons occupying a dwelling unit, living
together and maintaining a common household.
   FINISHED, GRADE. The average grade on all sides of a structure immediately
adjacent to the structure.
   FLOOR AREA. The enclosed area of a building designed and intended for all
season use.
   GARAGE SALES. A private non-continuous sale of surplus used household goods
which is held on the premises in a district not zoned for commercial sales.
   GOLF COURSE. Land for playing the sport of golf, consisting of a minimum of
nine holes, but excluding miniature golf, par-three golf, pitch and putt,
driving ranges and similar golf-associated activities, except as accessory uses
on a golf course.
   GROUP LIVING; ARRANGEMENTS. A single nonprofit housekeeping unit that
provides room and board to persons who are handicapped persons as defined in
Title VIII of the Civil Rights Act of 1968 and who are residents by virtue of
receiving supervised specialized services limited to health, social and/or
rehabilitative services provided by governmental agencies, their licensed or
certified agents or any responsible non-profit social service corporation.
Supervision shall be provided by responsible adults whose number shall be
determined and certified by the sponsoring agency. However, one responsible
adult shall always be in the actual residence on a 24 hour a day basis. The
number of residents shall not exceed eight persons including supervisory adults
and the children of supervisory adults per 1,000 square feet of floor space
excluding basement and garage areas.
   HEIGHT. See BUILDING HEIGHT.
   HOME OCCUPATION. Any use customarily carried on entirely within a dwelling
by occupants thereof, which use is clearly incidental and subordinate to the
use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes and which does not change the
residential character thereof.
   JUNK VEHICLE. Any vehicle which is without a currently valid license plate
(s) or inspection sticker and is in either a stripped, rusted, wrecked,
dismantled, partly dismantled, inoperative or abandoned condition. A JUNK
VEHICLE shall be classified as to its condition in one of the two following
categories:
      (1)   RESTORABLE JUNK VEHICLE. A vehicle that is in a condition whereby
repairs to same could reasonably be made to place it in operating condition
without exceeding the estimated value when repaired.
      (2)   NON-RESTORABLE JUNK VEHICLE. A junk vehicle in such condition that
it is economically unsound to restore same to operating condition considering
the repairs to be made, age of the vehicle, market value of the vehicle if it
were restored or in such condition that the zoning officer determines that it
warrants such classification. The Zoning Officer shall make the final
determination as to the classification to be assigned to any particular
vehicle.
   JUNK YARD. Land or structure used for the collection, storage, processing
and sale of scrap metal, scrapped, abandoned or junked motor vehicles,
machinery, equipment, waste paper, glass, rags, containers and other discarded
materials. It shall not include, however, refuse or garbage kept in a proper
container for the purpose of prompt disposal.
   KENNEL. Any establishment wherein four or more dogs are kept for the purpose
of breeding, hunting, training, renting, research or vivisection, buying,
boarding, sale, show or any other similar purpose and is so constructed that
dogs cannot stray therefrom. For the purpose of this chapter, classify under
agricultural use.
   LANDOWNER. The legal or beneficial owner or owners of land including the
holder of an option or contract to purchase (whether or not such option or
contract is subject to any condition), a lessee if he or she is authorized
under the lease to exercise the rights of the landowner, or other person having
a proprietary interest in land.
   LIGHT MANUFACTURING. The processing or fabrication of certain materials and
products which does not produce objectionable noise, vibration, air pollution,
fire hazard or other disturbances or dangers to neighboring properties.
   LOADING SPACE. A portion of a lot usable for the loading or unloading of
motor vehicles.
   LOT. A parcel of land occupied or capable of being occupied by one or more
buildings devoted to a common interest or use, and including accessory uses and
open yard space.
   LOT, CORNER. A lot at the junction of, and fronting on, two or more
intersecting street rights-of-way.
   LOT, DEPTH OF. A mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot
lines.
   LOT, MINIMUM AREA OF. The area of a lot computed exclusive of any portion of
the right-of-way of any public or private thoroughfare, street, road, alley or
easement of access of use, but including any easement for essential services.
   LOT, MINIMUM WIDTH OF. The minimum width measured at right angles to its
depth.
   LOT, WIDTH, OF. The width, measured along the setback line.
   LOT OF RECORD. Any lot which individually or as a part of a subdivision has
been recorded in the office of the County Recorder of Deeds.
   MAIN BUILDING. A building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot
on which it is situated.
   MOBILE HOME. A transportable, single-family dwelling intended for permanent
occupancy contained in one unit, or in two or more units designed to be joined
into one integral unit, capable of again being separated for repeated towing,
which arrives at a site complete and ready for occupancy except for minor and
incidental unpacking and assembly operations, and designed so that it may be
used with or without a permanent foundation and whether or not it is placed on
a permanent foundation. A travel trailer or motorized home, as defined herein,
shall be construed as a MOBILE HOME if occupied or connected with utilities.
   MOBILE HOME PARK. A parcel of land under single ownership which has been
planned and improved for the placement of mobile homes for non-transient use,
consisting of two or more mobile home lots.
   MOTORIZED HOME. A portable dwelling designed and constructed as an integral
part of a self-propelled motor vehicle, including non-collapsible portable
dwellings which are mounted on a truck bed.
   NON-CONFORMING LOT. A lot, the area or dimension of which was lawful prior
to the adoption or amendment of a zoning ordinance, but which fails to conform
to the requirements of the zoning district in which it is located by reasons of
such adoption or amendment.
   NON-CONFORMING STRUCTURES. A structure or part of a structure manifestly not
designed to comply with the applicable use or extent of use provisions in a
zoning ordinance or amendment heretofore or hereafter enacted, where such
structure lawfully existed prior to the enactment of such ordinance or
amendment of prior to the application of such ordinance or amendment to its
location by reason of annexation. Such NON-CONFORMING STRUCTURES include, but
are not limited to, non-conforming signs and non-conforming buildings.
   NON-CONFORMING USE. A use, whether of land or of structure, which does not
comply with the applicable use provisions in a zoning ordinance or amendment
heretofore or hereafter enacted, where such use was lawfully in existence prior
to the enactment of such ordinance or amendment, or prior to the application of
annexation.
   OFF-STREET PARKING SPACE. A private parking space, whether or not enclosed,
located off the right-of-way of any public or private road.
   OPEN SPACE. Any area of land which is predominantly free of structures.
   OUTSIDE RECREATIONAL USES. Commercial uses for recreation purposes which are
predominately outside activities, such as golf courses, softball, tennis,
football, outside swimming and hiking, excluding such commercial activities as
miniature golf, driving ranges and the like.
   PENNSYLVANIA PLANNING CODE. Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code (53
P.S. §§ 10101 et seq.), Act 247 of July 31, 1968, and amendments to same as may
be adopted from time to time.
   PERMANENT FOUNDATION. A foundation around and under all perimeter walls of a
building, mobile home or structure. A PERMANENT FOUNDATION shall be constructed
to a depth below frost level, which shall in no case be less than 42 inches
below the outside ground surface at the building, and shall be of portland
cement concrete, masonry or other approved materials and, shall comply in all
respects with the city’s Building Code currently in effect. Footings shall be
required under all foundation walls.
   PERMITTED USE. The main or primary purpose for which a building, other
structure and/or land may be used, occupied or maintained under the provisions
of the zoning ordinance. The use or any other provisions prescribed for the
Zoning District in which a building, structure or property is located.
   PERSON. Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company,
organization or entity of any kind, and shall include both the singular and the
plural.
   PERSONAL SERVICES. An enterprise conducted for man which primarily offers
services to the general public such as: shoe repairs; valet service; watch
repairing; barber shops; beauty parlors; and related activities.
   PLANNING COMMISSION. The Planning Commission of the City of Corry, Erie
County, Pennsylvania.
   PORTABLE BUILDING. A movable building not exceeding 120 square feet in gross
floor area which is built on skids and has no concrete slab or below grade
foundation.
   PRIVATE GARAGE. An accessory building for the storage of motor vehicles
owned and used by the owner or tenant of the lot for a purpose accessory to the
use of the lot, and for not more than two additional motor vehicles owned and
used by others. The total number of vehicle spaces in any private garage(s)
shall not exceed four spaces per dwelling unit if single-family, and not more
than one additional vehicle space for each dwelling unit more than one.
   PROFESSIONAL OFFICES. The use of offices and related spaces for professional
services as are provided by doctors, dentists, teachers, lawyers, architects,
engineers and certified accountants.
   PUBLIC GARAGE. A building, not a private garage, used for storage or repair
of motor vehicles.
   RECREATION. See OUTSIDE RECREATIONAL USES.
   ROAD OR STREET. The entire right-of-way of a public street, thoroughfare,
highway or of a private road providing access to two or more properties.
   ROOMING HOUSE. A residential building other than a hotel in which part or
parts are kept, used or held to be a place where sleeping accommodations are
offered for hire for three or more persons, but not open to transient guests.
   SERVICE STATION. A retail place of business engaged primarily in the sale of
motor fuels, but also in supplying goods and services generally required in the
operation and maintenance of automotive vehicles and the fulfilling of motorist
needs. They may include sale of petroleum products; sales and servicing of
tires, batteries, automotive accessories and replacement items; washing and
lubrication services; the performance of minor automotive maintenance and
repair; and the supplying of other incidental customer services and products,
but shall not include auto body repairs.
   SIGN. Any structure or device to attract attention by words or graphic
display, including any writing (letter, word or numeral); pictorial
representation, including illustration or decoration; emblem, including device,
symbol or trade mark; flag, including banner or pennant, but excluding the
state and nation flags; or any other figure of similar character which is
visible from outside a building, or which is a structure or any part thereof,
or is attached to, painted on or in any other manner represented on a building,
or post, or on any open space or lot. An illuminated sign within a building and
located in a window is a SIGN, as are political banners and placards.
   SPECIAL EXCEPTION. A modification of the regulations of the ordinance which
the Board is permitted to authorize in specific instances listed, in this
chapter, under the terms, procedures and conditions prescribed herein.
   STORY. The portion of a building included between the surface of any floor
and the surface of the floor next above it, or if there is no floor above it,
the space between such floor and the ceiling above it. A basement shall be
considered as a STORY if more than 50% of its clear height is above finished
grade, or if it is used for business or dwelling purposes.
   STREET. Includes street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway, freeway, parkway,
lane, alley, viaduct and any other ways used or intended to be used by
vehicular traffic or pedestrians whether public or private.
   STREET LINE. The line defining the edge of the legal width of a street
right-of-way.
   STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires a
fixed location on the ground or an attachment to something having a fixed
location on the ground, including, in addition to buildings, carports, porches
and other building features, but not including sidewalks, fences, drives, open
patios at ground level, and walls less than one foot in height.
   TOURIST HOME. A rooming house primarily for transient guests.
   TRAILER. Any licensed or unlicensed piece of mobile equipment designed or
constructed to be towed or pulled by a motor vehicle.
   TRAVEL TRAILER. A mobile vehicle, with wheels, designed for overnight
occupancy or camping purposes, capable of being towed by a passenger automobile
or a truck.
   TRUCK TERMINAL. A facility to accommodate the service, repair and storage of
trucks and other motorized equipment, and which may incidentally provide
warehousing activities.
   VARIANCE. A departure from the strict letter of the chapter as it applies to
a specific property, authorized by the Zoning Hearing Board.
   WELL. A bore hole drilled or being drilled for the purpose of or to be used
for producing, extracting or injecting any gas, petroleum or other liquid
related to oil or gas production or storage, including brine disposal, but
excluding bore holes drilled to produce potable water to be used as such.
   YARD. Any open space located on the same lot with a building unoccupied and
unobstructed from the ground up. The minimum depth or width of a yard shall
consist of the horizontal distance between the lot line or right-of-way line
and nearest point of a permanent part of a building.
   YARD, FRONT. An open space extending the full width of the lot between the
building and the road right-of-way line.
   YARD, REAR. An open space extending the full width of the lot between the
building and the rear lot line.
   YARD, SIDE. An open space extending from the front yard to the rear yard
between a building and the nearest side lot.
   ZONING CERTIFICATE. The written authorization issued by the Zoning Officer
for the use of land, buildings or structures.
   ZONING MAP. The map containing the zoning districts of the City of Corry,
Erie County, Pennsylvania together with all amendments subsequently adopted.
   ZONING OFFICER. The Zoning Officer or his or her authorized representative,
appointed by the Council of the City of Corry, Erie County, Pennsylvania.
(Ord. 1347, passed 3-18-1991)
DISTRICT REGULATIONS
§ 156.020 ZONING MAP.
   A map entitled “Zoning Map of the City of Corry, 2012” is hereby adopted as
part of this chapter. The zoning map shall be kept on file and available for
examination at the city’s Municipal Building.
(Ord. 1517, passed 5-7-2012)
§ 156.021 ZONING DISTRICTS.
   The city is divided into the districts stated in this chapter as shown by
the district boundaries on the zoning map.
(Ord. 1347, passed 3-18-1991)
§ 156.022 DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.
   The boundaries between districts are center lines of streets, alleys,
railroad right-of-ways, streams or such lines extended, or lines parallel
thereto or concentric therewith, or property lines when proximate thereto, or
may be lines otherwise indicated on the zoning map. When the Zoning Officer
cannot definitely determine the location of a district boundary, he or she
shall deny the application and the Board, upon appeal, shall interpret the
location of the district boundary.
(Ord. 1347, passed 3-18-1991)
§ 156.023 DISTRICT REGULATIONS.
   Lot and yard dimensions, permitted uses, conditional uses, special
exceptions, maximum height of structures and density are specified for each
district in §§
156.055 through
156.064. Uses not expressly listed for a district, as being of the same
classification as a listed use, are prohibited in that district. Conditional
uses require approval of City Council and special exceptions require approval
of the Board, whereas permitted uses require only normal application
procedures. Uses which are normally accessory to the declared permitted use are
also permitted.
(Ord. 1347, passed 3-18-1991)
NON-CONFORMING USES
§ 156.035 CONTINUING NON-CONFORMING USES.
   Any non-conforming use may be continued but may not be extended or expanded
or changed unless to a conforming use, except as permitted by the Board in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter, provided, however, that such
continuance is in conformity with any conditions established by the Board, or
previous board, or City Council, under a previous zoning ordinance for a zoning
variation.
(Ord. 1347, passed 3-18-1991)
§ 156.036 DAMAGED STRUCTURES.
   Any legal non-conforming structure damaged by fire, flood, explosion or
other causality subsequent to the date of this chapter may be reconstructed and
used as before if such reconstruction is performed within 12 months of the date
of such causality and if the restored structure covers no greater area and
contains no greater cubic content than before such causality. If approved by
the Board, a reconstructed structure may exceed its original lot coverage and
cubic content, but must meet the minimum yard requirements of the district in
which the structure is located and must meet the off-street parking and loading
requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. 1461, passed 7-18-2005)
§ 156.037 YARD AND PARKING REQUIREMENTS.
   The non-conforming use of a building may be extended throughout those parts
thereof which were manifestly arranged or designed for such use at the time of
adoption of this chapter. A non-conforming building or structure may, with the
approval of the Board, be extended, enlarged or replaced but must meet the
minimum yard requirements of the district in which the structure is located and
must meet off-street parking and loading requirements of this chapter. No
change in a non-conforming use which increases vehicle traffic or is otherwise
objectionable to the neighborhood shall be permitted by the Board.
(Ord. 1347, passed 3-18-1991)
§ 156.038 NEW NON-CONFORMING USE.
   If no structural alterations are made, a non-conforming use of a building
may be changed to another non-conforming use of the same or more restricted
classification.
(Ord. 1347, passed 3-18-1991)
§ 156.039 CHANGE IN CONSTRUCTION, SIZE AND THE LIKE.
   Nothing contained herein shall require any change in the overall layout,
plans, construction, size or designated use of any development, building,
structure or part thereof for which official approval and required permits have
been granted, or where no approvals are necessary, where construction has been
legally started before the enactment of this chapter and complete within a one-
year period.
(Ord. 1347, passed 3-18-1991)
§ 156.040 SAFE CONDITIONS.
   Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the strengthening or restoring to a
safe condition of any portion of a building or structure declared unsafe by a
proper authority.
(Ord. 1347, passed 3-18-1991)
§ 156.041 REVERTING TO NON-CONFORMING USE.
   Once changed to a conforming use, no structure or land shall be permitted to
revert to a nonconforming use.
(Ord. 1347, passed 3-18-1991)
§ 156.042 CHANGE IN BOUNDARIES.
   Whenever the boundaries of a district shall be changed so as to transfer an
area from one distract to another district of a different classification, this
subchapter shall also apply to any uses which hereby become non-conforming.
(Ord. 1347, passed 3-18-1991)
§ 156.043 ABANDONED BUILDING.
   (A)   A non-conforming use of a building or land which has been abandoned
shall not thereafter be returned to such non-conforming use.
   (B)   A non-conforming use shall be considered abandoned as follows:
      (1)   When the intent of the owner to discontinue the use is apparent;
      (2)   When the characteristic equipment and furnishings of the non-
conforming use have been removed from the premises and have not been replaced
by similar equipment within 12 months, unless other facts show intention to
resume the non-conforming uses;
      (3)   When a non-conforming use has been discontinued for a period of 12
months; or
      (4)   When it has been replaced by a conforming use. This, however, shall
not apply to the rotation of crops, or the alternating use of land for pasture
and/or for cultivation from year to year, of land now used for general farming
purposes, which may be used in the same manner as heretofore.
(Ord. 1347, passed 3-18-1991)
§ 156.044 ZONING REGULATIONS STILL APPLICABLE.
   Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted as authorization for or
approval of the continuance of the use of a structure or premises in violation
of zoning regulations in effect at the time of the effective date of this
chapter.
(Ord. 1347, passed 3-18-1991)
DISTRICT REGULATIONS
§ 156.055 R-1 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL.
   (A)   Permitted uses.
      (1)   Single-family detached dwellings, except mobile homes;
      (2)   Parks and playgrounds;
      (3)   Educational and religious, non-profit;
      (4)   Home gardening (no sale of products);
      (5)   Private garages (accessory use);
      (6)   Private swimming pool (accessory use);
      (7)   Garden shed or shelter (accessory use);
      (8)   Cemeteries;
      (9)   Essential services;
      (10)   Mineral excavation, in accordance with §
156.104; and
      (11)   Group living arrangements.
   (B)   Special exceptions.
      (1)   Agriculture (see §
156.097);
      (2)   Essential structures;
      (3)   Home occupations (see §
156.102); and
      (4)   Home professional offices (see §
156.103).
   (C)   Conditional uses.
      (1)   Special residential and commercial projects (see §
156.105);
      (2)   Hospitals, clinics and nursing homes;
      (3)   Colleges, institutes of learning;
      (4)   Funeral homes;
      (5)   Expansion for existing abutting commercial and industrial uses; and
      (6)   Non-conforming re-use, in accordance with §
156.036.
(Ord. 1347, passed 3-18-1991)
§ 156.056 R-2 GENERAL RESIDENTIAL.
   (A)   Permitted uses.
      (1)   Permitted uses shown for District R-1;
      (2)   Accessory uses permitted in R-1;
      (3)   Multiple dwellings, except mobile homes;
      (4)   Group housing projects, except mobile homes;
      (5)   Rooming houses, except mobile homes;
      (6)   Recreation areas (accessory use);
      (7)   Educational or day-care school; and
      (8)   Essential services
   (B)   Special exceptions.
      (1)   Special exceptions shown for District R-1;
      (2)   Bed and breakfast facilities;
      (3)   Essential structures; and
      (4)   Outside recreational uses, as defined.
   (C)   Conditional uses.
      (1)   Conditional uses shown for District R-1;
      (2)   Clubs, lodges or fraternities; and
      (3)   Non-conforming re-use, in accordance with §
156.036.
(Ord. 1347, passed 3-18-1991)
§ 156.057 R-3 SPECIAL RESIDENTIAL.
   (A)   Permitted uses.
      (1)   Permitted uses shown for District R-1;
      (2)   Mobile homes with permanent foundations on individual lots of
record;
      (3)   Mobile home parks, regulated by the subdivision ordinance; and
      (4)   Essential services.
   (B)   Special exceptions.
      (1)   Special exceptions shown for District R-1; and
      (2)   Essential structures.
   (C)   Conditional uses.
      (1)   Conditional uses shown for District R-1;
      (2)   R-2 permitted and conditional uses, and R-2 special exceptions; and
      (3)   Non-conforming re-use, in accordance with §
156.036.
(Ord. 1347, passed 3-18-1991)
§ 156.058 C-1 LIGHT COMMERCIAL AND C-2 LIGHT HIGHWAY COMMERCIAL.
   (A)   Permitted uses.
      (1)   Non-residential uses permitted in R-2;
      (2)   Retail stores and shops;
      (3)   Wholesale and distributors, no outside storage;
      (4)   Restaurants, tea rooms;
      (5)   Inside storage facilities;
      (6)   Banks, studios and offices;
      (7)   Service establishments, such as barber shops, beauty parlors and
commercial laundry (include coin operated laundry);
      (8)   Dry cleaning, pressing or tailor shops using non-explosive
solvents;
      (9)   Hotel or motel;
      (10)   Theater or assembly hall;
      (11)   Pool hall, bowling alleys or any legal inside recreational use;
      (12)   Bakery goods and candy manufacturer with retail outlet in which a
minimum of 25% of manufactured output is sold retail from the premises;
      (13)   Bus or taxi stations;
      (14)   Printing establishments;
      (15)   Automobile sales, including minor repairs and service conducted
inside the building;
      (16)   Commercial parking (surface or within a building);
      (17)   Club, lodge or fraternities;
      (18)   Taverns, cocktail lounges;
      (19)   Gasoline service stations;
      (20)   Drive-in facilities;
      (21)   Car washing;
      (22)   Industrial office buildings; and
      (23)   Essential services.
   (B)   Special exceptions.
      (1)   Residential use in combination with commercial use;
      (2)   Essential structures;
      (3)   Outside recreational uses, as defined; and
      (4)   Agriculture.
   (C)   Conditional uses.
      (1)   Industrial uses;
      (2)   Non-residential conditional uses shown for District R-2; and
      (3)   Non-conforming re-use, in accordance with §
156.036.
(Ord. 1347, passed 3-18-1991)
§ 156.059 C-3 TRANSITIONAL COMMERCIAL.
   (A)   Permitted uses.
      (1)   Permitted uses in R-2;
      (2)   Banks, studios and offices;
      (3)   Barber shops and beauty parlors;
      (4)   Accessory use parking (surface or inside);
      (5)   Home occupations and professional offices; and
      (6)   Bed and breakfast facilities.
   (B)   Special exceptions.
      (1)   Residential use in combination with commercial use;
      (2)   Retail or service businesses, in accordance with §
156.106;
      (3)   Essential structures; and
      (4)   Special exceptions shown for Districts R-1 and R-2.
   (C)   Conditional uses.
      (1)   Conditional uses shown for Districts R-1 and R-2; and
      (2)   Non-conforming re-use, in accordance with §
156.036.
(Ord. 1347, passed 3-18-1991)
§ 156.060 I-1 LIGHT INDUSTRIAL-HEAVY COMMERCIAL.
   (A)   Permitted uses.
      (1)   Wholesale, storage (retail sales shall not exceed 25% of gross
sales);
      (2)   Building materials/lumber yards;
      (3)   Distributing plant, parcel delivery service and motor trucking
center;
      (4)   Bottling plant;
      (5)   Public garage, auto and mobile equipment repair;
      (6)   Contractor, equipment storage in opaque enclosure equipment, exempt
from enclosed storage, shall include the following: operable vehicles; mobile
motorized equipment; trailers and trailer mounted equipment;
      (7)   Light manufacturing (as defined in this chapter) including
production of the following goods: home appliances; electrical instruments;
office machines; precision instruments; electronic devices; timepieces;
jewelry; optical goods; musical instruments; novelties; wood products; printed
material; lithographic plates; type composition; machine tools, dyes, and
gauges; ceramics; apparel; lightweight nonferrous metal castings; sheet metal
products; plastic goods; pharmaceutical goods and food products, but not
including animal slaughtering curing nor rendering of fats;
      (8)   Research center;
      (9)   Storage of coal and other bulk products;
      (10)   Bakery goods, candy manufacture without a retail outlet;
      (11)   Laundry, cleaning and dyeing plants; and
      (12)   Essential services and structures.
   (B)   Special exceptions.
      (1)   Agriculture (see §
156.097); and
      (2)   Outside recreational uses.
   (C)   Conditional uses.
      (1)   Mobile home parks;
      (2)   Planned commercial projects;
      (3)   Gasoline service stations;
      (4)   Mineral excavation (see §
156.104);
      (5)   Permitted uses in Districts C-1 and C-2;
      (6)   Expansion for existing commercial uses; and
      (7)   Non-conforming re-use, in accordance with §
156.036.
(Ord. 1347, passed 3-18-1991)
§ 156.061 I-2 HEAVY INDUSTRIAL.
   (A)   Permitted uses.
      (1)   Permitted uses shown for District I-1;
      (2)   Bulk storage of gasoline, fuel oil or other inflammable or
explosive liquids (2,000 gallons maximum);
      (3)   Steel fabricators;
      (4)   Metal goods manufacture with foundries, heavy presses and the like;
      (5)   Chemical industry;
      (6)   Asphalt manufacture or refining;
      (7)   Concrete plant, rock crushing;
      (8)   Monuments works; and
      (9)   Essential services and structures.
   (B)   Special exceptions.
      (1)   Agriculture (see §
156.097); and
      (2)   Outside recreational uses.
   (C)   Conditional uses.
      (1)   Conditional uses in District I-1;
      (2)   Mineral excavation (see §
156.104);
      (3)   Mobile home parks;
      (4)   Planned commercial projects;
      (5)   Gasoline service stations;
      (6)   Permitted uses in Districts C-1 and C-2;
      (7)   Wrecking or dismantling of motor vehicle (storage of the parts and
materials from such operations and the storage of other junk (see §
156.099));
      (8)   Bulk storage of gasoline, fuel oil or other inflammable or
explosive liquids where total capacity per site exceeds 2,000 gallons (tank to
be measured in accordance with water capacity); and
      (9)   Non-conforming re-use, in accordance with §
156.036.
(Ord. 1347, passed 3-18-1991)
§ 156.062 P PRESERVE AND RECREATION.
   (A)   Permitted uses.
      (1)   Parks and recreation; and
      (2)   Essential services.
   (B)   Special exceptions. Essential structures.
   (C)   Conditional uses. Mineral excavation, in accordance with §
156.104.
(Ord. 1347, passed 3-18-1991)
§ 156.063 LOT SIZE AND AREA, HEIGHT REGULATIONS AND YARD REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   General regulations.
 R-1 R-2 R-3 C-1 C-2 C-3 I-1 I-2 P
                              R-1 R-2 R-3 C-1   C-2   C-3   I-1    I-2    P
Building Height:
Max. height (stories)(1)      3   3   3   3     3     3     3      3      3
Max. height (feet)            35  35  35  40    40    40    60     60     35
Lots:
Min. width (feet)             3   3   3   20    60    20    100    100    None
Min. area (sq.ft.)(2)         3   3   3   2,000 8,000 2,000 20,000 20,000 None
Max. bldg. coverage           30% 40% 30% 85%   50%   85%   80%    80%    25%
Front Yards:
Min. depth (feet)             22  22  22  0     25    10**  25     25     30
Side Yards:
Number required               2   2   2   None  2     2     2      2      2
Minimum width (feet):
Main bldg., on one side*      10  10  10  0     10    5***  10     10     10
Main bldg., opposite side*    5   5   5   0     10    5***  10     10     10
Accessory uses*               3   3   3   0     10    5***  10     10     10
*Except corner lots
Corner lots (abutting on      15  15  15  5     10    5**   15     15     15
adjacent street)(4)(5)
Rear Yards: Minimum depth
(feet):
Main buildings                10  10  10  5     10    5***  10     10     10
Accessory uses                3   3   3   5     10    5***  10     10     10
Accessory uses (facing alley) 10  10  10  15    15    15    15     15     15
**25 feet if property fronts on Columbus Avenue
***10 feet if property fronts on Columbus Avenue
 
   (B)   Basements shall be considered as one-half story; cellars and attics
are not included.
   (C)   The minimum lot area shall be increased for each family unit more than
one. In accordance with the following schedule:
      (1)   Dwelling units other than efficiency units, as defined: 1,000
square feet; and
      (2)   Efficiency dwelling units as defined in this chapter: 600 square
feet.
   (D)   Lot areas and widths, in Residential Districts, shall be as follows:
 
Without public water and public sewer             Minimum Area  20,000 sq. feet
                                                  Minimum Width 100 feet
Lots with public water, but not public sewers and Minimum Area  10,000 sq. feet
vice versa                                        Minimum Width 70 feet
Lots with both public water and public sewer      Minimum Area  7,000 sq. feet
                                                  Minimum Width 60 feet
In addition to the required lot size shown above, the site shall be restricted
by the specified building coverage and parking requirements, and no more than
one-half of the open area (lot area excluding buildings) shall be devoted to
off-street parking or parking access.
 
   (E)   The minimum setback shall be greater where required by sight-triangle
regulations see §
156.109.
   (F)   If the use is a garage with vehicle door(s) facing adjacent street,
then the minimum setback to the vehicle door(s) shall be the same as the front
yard minimum for the district or 15 feet, whichever shall be greater.
(Ord. 1347, passed 3-18-1991)
§ 156.064 OFFICIAL ZONING MAP.
   The official zoning map attached to the ordinance codified herein, shall be
known as the “Zoning Map of the City of Corry, 2012”.
(Ord. 1517, passed 5-7-2012)
OFF-STREET LOADING AND PARKING
§ 156.075 OFF-STREET LOADING.
   Off-street loading spaces shall be provided in accordance with the following
specifications in all districts whenever any new use is established or an
existing use is enlarged.
   (A)   Each loading space shall not be less than ten feet in width, 45 feet
in length and 14 feet in height.
   (B)   Off-street loading areas shall be provided so that the loading and
unloading of trucks and all other vehicles shall be conducted in such a manner
that no part of said truck or vehicle, or the operations of the loading or
unloading shall extend onto the adjacent sidewalk or roadway or in any other
manner hinder or impede the use thereof.
   (C)   The number of off-street loading spaces required is set forth below.
Where the use of the premises is not specifically mentioned, requirements for
similar uses shall apply.
(Ord. 1347, passed 3-18-1991)
§ 156.076 OFF-STREET LOADING SPACE REQUIREMENTS.
Uses Square Feet of Floor Area Required Off-Street Loading Berths
Uses                      Square Feet of Floor Area  Required Off-Street
                                                     Loading Berths
                          10,000 - 25,000            1
                          25,000 - 40,000            2
Commercial, wholesale     40,000 - 60,000            3
manufacturing and storage 60,000 - 100,000           4
                          for each additional 50,000 1 additional
                          or major fraction thereof
                          10,000 - 300,000           1
Hospitals (in addition to for each additional
space for ambulance)      300,000 or major fraction  1 additional
                          thereof
Hotels                    10,000 or more             1
Schools                   15,000 or more             1
Undertakers and funeral   5,000                      1
parlors
(Ord. 1347, passed 3-18-1991)
§ 156.077 OFF-STREET PARKING.
   Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the following
specifications in all districts whenever any new use is established or an
existing use is enlarged.
   (A)   Size and access. Each off-street parking space shall have an area of
not less than 180 square feet, exclusive of access drives or aisles, and be in
usable shape and condition. Except in the case of dwellings, no parking area
shall contain less than two spaces. Parking areas which have space for three or
more vehicles, shall be designed and constructed to provide sufficient turn-
around area to allow vehicles to exit via designated driveways. All driveways
between the street and a point ten feet outside the street right-of-way shall
be constructed at an angle with the street of not less than 60 degrees.
Barriers shall be placed so vehicles are not permitted to cross any sidewalk or
exit on to any street or alley except at a designated driveway. The maximum
driveway width shall not exceed 20 feet and the minimum distance between
driveways serving the same parking lot shall not be less than 30 feet. Where a
lot does not abut on a public street or alley or easement of access, there
shall be provided an access drive leading to the parking, loading or storage
areas.
   (B)   Number of parking spaces required. The number of off-street parking
spaces required is set forth below. Where the use of the premises is not
specifically mentioned, requirements for similar uses shall apply.
(Ord. 1347, passed 3-18-1991)
§ 156.078 OFF-STREET PARKING SPACE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   General regulations.
Uses Required Parking Spaces
Uses            Required Parking Spaces
Automobile
sales and       1 for each 400 sq. ft. of floor area
services
garages
Automobile
washing         1 for each employee (see division (F) below)
facility
Banks or        1 for each 200 sq. ft. of floor area, plus 1 for each employee
professional    (see division (F) below)
offices
Bowling alleys  7 for each alley
Churches and    1 for each 4 seats in an auditorium or 1 for each 17 classroom
schools, and    seats, whichever is greater. Seating capacity of benches and
similar         continuous seats shall be construed to be 20” per seat space
institutions
Community
buildings,
social halls    1 for each 400 sq. ft. of floor area
and similar
institutions
Drive-in        1 for each employee, plus 1 for each 100 sq. ft. of floor area
facilities      (see division (F) below)
Dwellings       1 for each family or dwelling unit including space in garage
Food            1 for each 200 sq. ft. of floor area
supermarkets
Funeral homes   10 for first parlor, 5 for each additional parlor
and mortuaries
Home            (see §
occupations     156.102)
Home            (see §
professional    156.103)
offices
Hospitals,
nursing or      1 for each 3 beds, plus 1 for each employee
convalescing
homes
Hotels and      1 for each living or sleeping unit, plus 1 for each employee
motels
Manufacturing
plants,
research or     1 for each 500 sq. ft. of floor area
testing
laboratories
Restaurants,    1 for each 100 sq. ft. of floor area (see division (F) below)
take out only
Restaurants,
taverns and     1 for each 4 seats
night clubs (w/
seating)
Retail stores   1 for each 200 sq. ft. of floor area (see division (F) below)
and shops
Rooming houses  1 for each separately leased area, plus one for each employee
Service         4 for each service bay, but no less than 1 per employee (see
stations        division (F) below)
Sports arenas,
auditoriums,    1 for each 4 seats
theaters and
assembly halls
Trailer or      1 for each 2,500 sq. ft. of lot area
monument sales
Wholesale       1 for each employee on maximum shift. Total parking area shall
establishments  not be less than 25% of the building floor area
or warehouses
 
   (B)   Location of parking areas. Required parking spaces shall be located on
the same lot with the principal use. The Board may permit parking spaces to be
located not more than 300 feet distance from the lot of the principal use if
located in the same zoning district as the principal use, and the Board finds
that is impractical to provide parking on the same lot with principal use. For
uses within C-1 zoned parts of the city, on-street and municipal parking shall
be considered as meeting the parking requirements, except for drive-in
facilities.
   (C)   Screening and landscaping. Off-street parking areas for more than five
vehicles, and off-street loading areas, shall be effectively screened on each
side which adjoins or faces any residential district, except where there is a
separation by public alley, street or railroad.
   (D)   Surfacing. All commercial and industrial parking areas for more than
two automobiles shall have a paved or treated surface (see Appendix “A”) graded
and drained to dispose of all surface water, and designed to provide for
orderly and safe loading, parking and dust control, and shall be approved by
the city.
   (E)   Lighting. Any lighting used to illuminate off-street parking or
loading areas shall be arranged so as to reflect the light away from adjoining
premises of any residential district.
   (F)   Drive-in facilities. Any establishment which has drive-in facilities,
as defined in this chapter, shall, in addition to the spaces required by §
156.077(B), provide lane spaces between the service structure and the public
right-of-way as designated below. A lane space shall be one vehicle in width
and 22 feet long. The vehicle position at the pump island, service window, wash
bay, service booth or other service structure, may be counted as one lane
space.
      (1)   Drive-in theaters. Eight lane spaces per each ticket window.
      (2)   Service stations. Three lane spaces per each side of a pump island.
      (3)   Banks. Seven lane spaces per service window.
      (4)   Car wash facilities. Eight lane spaces per wash bay.
      (5)   Other facilities. Four lane spaces per service window or other
service structure.
   (G)   Modifications. The requirements for off-street parking for dwellings
may be modified for elderly apartment complexes, if approved by resolution of
City Council, but shall be no less than one parking space for each five
apartments.
(Ord. 1347, passed 3-18-1991)
SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS
§ 156.090 EXISTING LOTS OF RECORD.
   Any lot of record existing at the effective date of this chapter and held in
separate ownership of adjoining lots may be used for the erection of a
structure conforming to the use regulations of the district in which it is
located, even though its dimensions are less than the minimum requirements of
this chapter.
(Ord. 1347, passed 3-18-1991)
§ 156.091 APPLICATION OF YARD REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Permanent parts of all structures, whether attached to the principal
structure or not, and whether open or enclosed, including porches, carports,
antennae, balconies, decks or platforms above normal grade level shall not
project into any minimum front, side or rear yard. Antennae, towers and similar
electronic equipment projecting more than six inches above ground level shall
not be constructed within such minimum front, side or rear yard areas. In no
case shall such antennae, towers or similar electronic equipment be located
closer to the street than the front building line.
   (B)   A wall under four feet in height, or higher if a retaining wall, and
paved terraces, drives, walks, or other areas without walls, roofs or other
enclosure, may be erected within the limits of any yard.
   (C)   Non-residential buildings hereafter constructed or uses hereafter
established shall not be located or conducted closer to any lot line in any of
the residential districts, unless separated by a street, railroad or alley,
than the distances specified in the following schedule:
 
Use                                                  Minimum Side or Rear Yard
Off-street parking spaces and access drives for non- 10 feet
residential uses
All other non-residential uses or structures         20 feet
 
   (D)   All commercial building frontage shall either face Columbus Avenue or
away from secondary streets.
(Ord. 1347, passed 3-18-1991)
§ 156.092 TEMPORARY STRUCTURES.
   Temporary structures, including trailers and temporary chemical toilets used
in conjunction with construction work or recreation, shall be permitted only
during the period that the construction work or recreation is in progress.
Permits for temporary structures shall be issued for a period of time not to
exceed six months. Residing in basement of foundation structures before
completion of the total structure shall be permitted only if approved by the
Board. The Board shall establish a reasonable period of time for completion.
(Ord. 1347, passed 3-18-1991)
§ 156.093 HEIGHT LIMITATION.
   When the following conditions are met, height limits may be increased.
   (A)   Building height in excess of the height above average ground level
allowed in any district may be permitted, provided all minimum front, side and
rear yard depths are increased one foot for each additional foot of height.
   (B)   The following structures are exempt from height regulations, provided
they do not constitute a hazard to an established airport television and radio
towers, ornamental towers and spires, chimneys, elevator bulkheads, smoke
stakes, conveyors, flag poles, silos, standpipes, elevated water tanks,
derricks and similar structures.
(Ord. 1347, passed 3-18-1991)
§ 156.094 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
   (A)   No use, land or structure in any district shall involve any element or
cause any conditions that may be dangerous, injurious or noxious to any other
property or persons in the city. In cases involving performance standards, the
Board may require a plan of the proposed construction or development, a
description of machinery proposed, and techniques to be used; and the Board may
obtain qualified expert consultants to testify as to whether a proposed use
will conform to the performance requirements. The cost of such service shall be
borne by the applicant.
   (B)   Furthermore, every use of land or structure in any district must
observe the following performance requirements.
      (1)   Fire protection. Fire protection and fighting equipment acceptable
to the Board of Fire Underwriters shall be readily available when any activity
involving the handling or storage of flammable or explosive materials is
carried on.
      (2)   Electrical disturbances. No activity shall cause electrical
disturbances adversely affecting radio or other equipment in the neighboring
area.
      (3)   Noise. Noise which is determined to be objectionable because of
volume or frequency shall be muffled or otherwise controlled, except fire
sirens and related apparatus used solely for public purposes, which shall be
exempt from this requirement.
      (4)   Smoke. The maximum amount of smoke emission permissible shall be
determined by use of the Standard Ringleman Chart issued by the U.S. Bureau of
Mines. No smoke of a shade darker than No. 2 will be allowed.
      (5)   Odors. In any district except the Industrial District, no
malodorous gas or matter shall be permitted which is discernible on any
adjoining lot or property. This shall not apply to any form of fertilizer in
districts where agriculture is a permitted use.
      (6)   Air pollution. No pollution of air by fly-ash, dust, vapors or
other substance shall be permitted which is harmful to the health, or to
animals, vegetation or other property.
      (7)   Glare. Reflective material or lighting devices which produce
objectionable direct or reflected glare on adjoining properties or through
thoroughfares shall not be permitted.
      (8)   Erosion. No erosion by wind or water shall be permitted which will
carry objectionable substances onto neighboring properties.
      (9)   Water pollution. The method for discharging wastes to public
sewers, drains or watercourses shall be acceptable to the state’s Department of
Environmental Resources.
(Ord. 1347, passed 3-18-1991) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.095 WATER RECREATION AND STORAGE AREAS.
   Any public or private facility such as swimming pools, swimming clubs,
reservoirs or sewage lagoons shall comply with the following regulations.
   (A)   The facility must meet the yard requirements for the applicable
district.
   (B)   Before a permit shall be issued to the operator or owner of a public
or commercial facility, a plan shall be approved by the Board as to size of
facility, proposed use, parking arrangement and the use of buildings on site,
surrounding properties and their usage and any other pertinent information,
such as fences.
   (C)   All private swimming pools shall be fenced for the protection of small
children. The fence shall be four feet minimum in height. Pools which have a
rim four feet or higher above adjacent ground and non-climbable sides shall be
construed to be fenced. A gate shall be provided in the fence, or at the steps
or ladder of a pool not requiring fencing (or the steps or ladder shall be
readily removable). The gate shall have a lock or catch sufficient to prevent
opening by small children. This shall not apply to portable pools with a one-
foot maximum water depth which are 12 feet or less in maximum dimension.
(Ord. 1347, passed 3-18-1991) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.096 SIGNS/CANOPIES.
   (A)   General. Signs or canopies may be erected and maintained only when in
compliance with the provisions of this chapter and any and all other ordinances
and regulations of the city relating to the erection, alteration or maintenance
of signs and similar devices. Signs or canopies may be erected for the
following purposes and no other.
   (B)   R-1 Districts.
      (1)   Signs advertising the sale, lease, rental or development of the
property on which the signs are placed, providing the area of the sign does not
exceed four square feet in area. Signs advertising the sale of lots in new
major subdivisions shall not exceed 96 square feet in area and, unless approved
by the Board, shall not remain on the property for more than two years; and
shall not be closer to the street right-of-way than 25 feet.
      (2)   Signs erected by churches, schools, educational facilities,
hospitals, funeral homes or similar institutions, provided the area of the sign
does not exceed 36 square feet.
      (3)   Small announcement or professional signs designating home
occupations, home professional offices or agricultural uses, providing such
sign or announcement does not exceed two square feet in area.
      (4)   The bottom-most part of a sign not attached to a building shall not
exceed the height of six feet above ground level.
      (5)   The top-most part of a sign attached to a building shall not exceed
a height of ten feet above ground level.
      (6)   Signs shall be located a minimum distance of five feet from the
street right-of-way line or property edge of sidewalk, whichever is farther
from the street centerline.
      (7)   No sign in this district shall be illuminated in any way, except
for incidental illumination from ornamental light sources which are not
installed for sign illumination, or as part of the sign.
      (8)   No more than one sign may be erected on one property. A double-
faced (front and back) sign may be considered as a single sign.
   (C)   R-2 and R-3 Districts.
      (1)   The provisions for the erection of signs in R-1 Districts shall
also apply in the R-2 and R-3 Districts, with the following additional signs
and requirements being permitted.
      (2)   Signs erected by rooming houses, housing projects, apartments,
mobile home courts, clubs, day care schools operated for profit, and similar
uses, providing the area of the sign does not exceed 12 square feet.
      (3)   Signs in this district may be indirectly illuminated by a hooded
light source constructed in such a way that the light source itself is not
visible from the street, or with interior illumination, but no sign or display
may be made of gaseous discharge (neon and the like) tubing.
      (4)   No more than one sign may be erected on one property.
   (D)   C-1 and C-2 Districts, and I-1 and I-2 Districts.
      (1)   Signs advertising an activity or business pursuit, but only if such
signs are located on the premises of the activity or business advertised, and
providing such signs do not exceed four square feet in size for each foot of
width of the principal building. On corner lots, the width of the principal
building facing each street shall be included. The combined total area of all
signs on the premises shall not exceed the permitted area stated herein.
      (2)   Signs, parking areas and buildings may be illuminated providing the
use of such illumination does not confuse, blind or distract vehicle operators
on the highways or streets. No sign shall be permitted which is a nuisance to
adjacent property owners.
      (3)   Except in C-1 Districts, signs shall be located a minimum distance
of 18 inches from the street right-of-way line or property edge of the
sidewalk, whichever is farther from the centerline of the street.
   (E)   C-3 Districts.
      (1)   The provisions for the erection of signs in R-2 and R-3 Districts
shall also apply in C-3 Districts, except that two signs will be permitted per
property, with said two signs not exceeding the following sizes and mounting
heights.
 
Main sign                     50 square feet
Maximum height to top of sign 15 feet
Secondary sign                20 square feet
 
   (F)   P Districts. No signs will be permitted in these districts, except for
identity and directional signs which do not exceed 50 square feet in area and
which are designed to conform to the recreational and park atmosphere of
development. Undeveloped land in P Districts shall have no signs.
   (G)   Additional sign requirements.
      (1)   No sign or display shall make use of blinking or intermittent
lights, animation or moving parts, except that portion of a sign which displays
the time, temperature, humidity, weather or similar information will be
permitted in C-1, C-2, I-1 and I-2 Districts, this requirement shall not apply
to interior commercial displays in C-1, C-2, I-1 or I-2 Districts, provided
such lights or moving displays do not create a distraction to motorists.
      (2)   No sign shall be installed with any portion of the foundation, post
or mounting hardware within any street, walk or alley right-of-way of the city.
      (3)   No sign shall project into any public right-of-way, except that
signs in C-1 Districts, if required, may project up to two feet into such
right-of-way if authorized by permit, and if such signs are mounted to read
horizontally and are attached to the face of a building in such a manner as to
be visible and readable from the front of the building. Permits for such
projecting signs shall be issued only when such projection is required for
proper sign installation because of limited mounting area.
      (4)   Any existing sign which has not been installed in accordance with
regulations in effect at the time of installation, including the securing of
the proper permit or permits, shall be immediately removed.
      (5)   Any existing legally installed sign which projects into a public
right-of-way more than two feet or otherwise is in non-conformance with the
requirements of this chapter shall be removed, and/or reinstalled in such a
manner as to conform to said requirements, prior to April 1, 1994. Existing
marquees and time and temperature signs shall be exempted from this
requirement, but may not be replaced within the public right-of-way. City
approved business identification signs under sidewalk canopies may be
permitted.
      (6)   In addition to the other requirements of this chapter, all signs
must be constructed of durable materials, kept in good condition and repair and
not allowed to become dilapidated.
      (7)   All signs shall be removed when the circumstances leading to their
erection no longer apply.
      (8)   Billboards are prohibited in all districts.
      (9)   No signs or other advertising displays shall be permitted except
those specifically pertaining to the property or use of the property on which
they are located.
      (10)   All lighting and illumination of signs shall conform to
regulations regarding hazards to traffic in accordance with state and local
laws and regulations.
      (11)   Signs maintained pursuant to and in conformance with any law,
ordinance, governmental regulation of function shall be exempt from the
requirements of this chapter, including official “City of Corry” name and/or
“Welcome to Corry” signs and Corry Industrial Park signs.
         (a)   No trespassing, no soliciting and similar regulatory signs will
be permitted but shall not exceed two square feet in area and shall not be
spaced closer than 25 feet between signs, and shall not be more than ten feet
above ground. Installation, size and location of such signs shall conform as
close as possible to these regulations.
         (b)   Signs posted on the premises of schools, hospitals or other
emergency care centers which regulate the movement of traffic or identify
special facilities on said premises shall not exceed eight square feet in area
per sign.
         (c)   Hospitals, schools with 50 or more students and industries
located in the city with 100 or more employees may place not more than two
signs, on state routes where possible, indicating the direction to their
facilities. Such signs shall be for directional purposes only and shall include
only the name of the facility with arrows. Each sign shall not exceed 150
square inches in area (six inches by twenty-five inches) Additional signs may
be permitted if approved as a conditional use.
      (12)   Portable signs, whether illuminated or non-illuminated with wheels
attached or not, exceeding 200 pounds in weight are prohibited in the city.
      (13)   Political signs are permitted one month before an election date,
but must be removed no more than two weeks following the election, and are
subject to the following restrictions:
         (a)   No such signs are permitted on utility poles or trees, whether
in or out of public rights-of-way;
         (b)   Political signs in R-1, R-2, R-3 and C-3 are limited to a
maximum of two square feet in area;
         (c)   Political signs are not permitted in P Districts;
         (d)   Exterior political signs in C-1, C-2, I-1 and I-2 Districts are
limited to a maximum of 25 square feet in area; and
         (e)   The cost of removal of political signs which are not in
conformance with this chapter may be charged against the party responsible for
installing the sign.
      (14)   All exterior signs ten square feet or larger, and all exterior
signs mounted in such a manner that any portion of the sign is within five feet
of a public right-a-way, except paper or cloth signs, shall require a permit.
Fees for all sign permits will be in accordance with a schedule of fees
established from time to time by City Council.
      (15)   Special signs for public purposes may be approved by City Council,
but shall be temporary, installed for a specified period of time and may
include signing for public events, fund raising and the like.
   (H)   Projections into the public right-of-way.
      (1)   Signs constructed as a canopy or sign and canopy combinations, with
plastic translucent faces which are detachable, not permanent part of the
building, may be permitted to project into the public right-of-way in C-
1 Districts, provided that they extend not more than four feet from the
building and the bottom most portion shall be minimum of nine feet above
sidewalk grade. The sign portion shall face the street and be approximately
parallel with the street. Only a back lit type of illumination shall be
permitted.
      (2)   Permanent canopies of extended features on facades which are an
integral non-detachable part of the building may be permitted to project into
the public right-of-way from existing structures in areas zoned C-1, provided
that they extend not more 18 inches from the building and the bottom most
portion shall be a minimum of nine feet above sidewalk grade.
      (3)   On existing structures only, in I-1 or I-2 Districts, canopies or
sign and canopy combinations, with plastic translucent faces which are
detachable, not a permanent part of the building, may be permitted to project
into the public right-of-way; provided, that they extend not more than three
feet from the building and the bottom most portion shall be a minimum of nine
feet above sidewalk grade. The sign portion shall face the street and be
approximately parallel with the street. Only a back lit type of illumination
shall be permitted.
      (4)   In C-1 Districts, no door shall be mounted in such a manner that
the door, when opened, may enter into or interfere with any public right-of-
way.
(Ord. 1347, passed 3-18-1991) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.097 AGRICULTURE.
   Agriculture uses when permitted as a special exception shall comply with the
following.
   (A)   Intensively used facilities for animal raising and care, including,
but not limited to, such facilities as kennels, feed lots, runs and pens, shall
not be constructed within 100 feet of neighboring residential buildings, and
shall be conducted in strict compliance with all performance standards, but
especially standards for noise and odor. The act of animal breeding must be
conducted in an area shielded from view of general public and neighboring
properties.
   (B)   Roadside stands for the sale of agricultural products shall be:
      (1)   Temporary;
      (2)   Erected at least 15 feet back from the nearest edge of the roadway
surface, but not on a public walk or within the street right-of-way, and
providing no hazard is created thereby; and
      (3)   Provided with parking spaces off the traveled portion of the
street, unless the street is of adequate width to allow unrestricted two-way
traffic in addition to the necessary parking.
(Ord. 1347, passed 3-18-1991)
§ 156.098 FLOODPLAINS.
   The location and boundaries of land subject to periodic flooding shall be
determined by reference to the current floodplain map approved by the Federal
Department of Housing and Urban Development, or other official authority.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, land subject to periodic
flooding shall be used only in accordance with the applicable provisions of the
current city ordinance regulating floodplain land use.
(Ord. 1347, passed 3-18-1991) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.099 JUNKYARDS AND SIMILAR STORAGE AREAS.
   (A)   All junkyards shall be completely screened from roads or developed
areas with a solid fence or wall eight feet or more in height. Maintained in
good condition and painted, except for masonry construction, or with suitable
planting. All existing junkyards shall comply with this requirement within one
year of the date of this chapter or shall terminate their operation.
   (B)   Junkyards with outside storage shall be permitted only as a
conditional use in accordance with §
156.061, and shall be located no closer than 500 feet to a city street or
highway.
   (C)   All junkyards shall comply with all state and federal regulations, and
written evidence of such compliance shall be furnished to the Zoning Officer
upon three days’ notice.
(Ord. 1347, passed 3-18-1991) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.100 SANITARY LANDFILL AREAS.
   Sanitary landfills are not permitted within the city except upon full
approval of the state’s Department of Environmental Resources and the City
Council.
(Ord. 1347, passed 3-18-1991) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.101 DRIVE-IN THEATERS.
   Access shall be to minor roads, where possible, rather than highways, to
reduce traffic congestion. Theater screens shall be placed so that they are not
visible from a highway, or shall be screened with adequate fencing or planting.
All parts of the theater shall be no closer than 200 feet to any Residential
District, and all lights shall be directed away from the residences.
(Ord. 1347, passed 3-18-1991)
§ 156.102 HOME OCCUPATIONS.
   (A)   A home occupation, when approved as a special exception use, shall be
clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling unit for
residential purposes. Home occupations may include, but are not limited to, art
or craft studios, dressmaking, music teaching, minor repairs and similar
activities. However, a home occupation shall not be interpreted to include
commercial stables, kennels, restaurants, beauty shops, barber shops, auto
repair services or other activities which by their nature will produce heavy
traffic concentrations, parking problems and/or noise which is objectionable.
   (B)   The following additional conditions shall be mandatory, plus any other
conditions which the Board may impose at the time of approval.
      (1)   The occupation may be customarily carried on in a dwelling unit,
without the addition of special remodeling being necessary, and shall be an
activity of a type which does not require the permanent installation of special
equipment.
      (2)   The occupation is carried on by a member or members of the
immediate family residing in the dwelling unit, with no employees outside the
family.
      (3)   The occupation is carried on wholly within the principal structure
or accessory structure, with no evidence of the activity being visible from the
street or from the adjacent properties.
      (4)   There shall be no exterior display, exterior sign other than
permitted by ordinances of the city, no exterior storage of materials and no
variation from the residential character of the principal or accessory
structures.
      (5)   No offensive odor, vibration, noises, smoke, dust, heat or glare
shall be produced.
      (6)   There shall be no commodity sold on the premises, except that
commodities which are incidental to a craft or art course may be sold during
classes, but not otherwise, and shall be sold only in such quantity as shall be
established by the special exception use granted.
      (7)   The area devoted to the home occupation shall occupy no more than
20% of any above ground floor of the principal structure, nor shall it occupy
more than 50% of a basement area, or 50% of a residential garage or other
accessory building.
      (8)   Off-street parking for any home occupation shall meet the following
minimum requirements. One parking space for each 100 square feet of space
devoted to the home occupation, plus one space for each vehicle owned by, or
customarily operated by, the members of the household. Any home occupation
requiring more than six additional off-street spaces, in accordance with this
section, shall not be permitted. Parking spaces must be accessible, and in
accordance with §
156.077(A).
      (9)   No off-street loading facilities shall be installed, and no truck
loading or unloading relating to the home occupation shall be permitted.
Trucks, for the purposes of this section, shall include any open or closed bed
vehicle used for hauling, including vans and pickup trucks.
(Ord. 1347, passed 3-18-1991) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.103 HOME PROFESSIONAL OFFICES.
   (A)   A home professional office shall be a professional office, as defined
in this chapter, which is located in a residential dwelling and which is
secondary to the use of the structure as a dwelling.
   (B)   Such use shall be permitted, only when approved as a special exception
and shall be so approved only subject to the following conditions, plus any
other conditions that may be added by the Board at the time of approval.
      (1)   No more than one professional person, plus one receptionist, plus
two licensed nurses or technicians may perform professional services on the
site at any one time.
      (2)   The structure shall be used as the principal residence of the
professional person, who must be a sole proprietor, and no partnership or
corporation business shall be conducted on the premises.
      (3)   No evidence of the business activity shall be visible from the
street or adjacent properties and no signs shall be allowed except as permitted
by ordinance. There shall be no variation from the residential character of the
principal or accessory structures.
      (4)   The business services performed on the premises shall be confined
to those of the profession, with no sale of products, except for medicinal or
professionally prescribed products.
      (5)   The portion of any floor of the principal structure devoted to the
professional use shall not exceed 40% of the usable floor area, and no portion
of such business shall be conducted in an accessory building, except for
storage.
      (6)   Off-street parking for home professional offices shall be adequate
to serve all clients visiting the premises, and shall in no case be less than
one parking space for each 100 square feet of office space, plus one space for
each vehicle owned by, or customarily operated by, the members of the
household. In addition, a parking space shall be provided for each nurse,
technician or professional practitioner who is not a member of the household.
Parking spaces must be accessible and in accordance with §
156.077(A).
(Ord. 1347, passed 3-18-1991) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.104 MINERAL EXCAVATIONS.
   (A)   Drilling for oil or gas, including injection wells, and excavation of
sand, gravel, coal or other material from the ground shall comply with the
following minimum requirements, and if such use is classified within the zoning
district where the drilling or excavation occurs as a conditional use, it shall
also comply with any other measures that City Council may specify to protect
the public interest. A zoning certificate shall be required for each property.
   (B)   No drilling or excavation work shall commence prior to the issuance of
a zoning certificate.
   (C)   (1)   Prior to the issuance of a zoning certificate, the following
documents shall be submitted to and approved by the city:
         (a)   A plot plan of the site, drawn to scale;
         (b)   A plan showing how soil erosion and sedimentation is to be
controlled;
         (c)   A plan for maintenance and restoration of the site; and
         (d)   Written proof that all registration and other requirements of
the state’s Department of Environmental Resources have been satisfied.
      (2)   The information submitted to and approved by the state’s Department
of Environmental Resources may be accepted by the city to fulfill this
requirement.
   (D)   No drilling or mineral excavation shall be conducted closer than 50
feet from an adjacent property, unless under common lease or ownership, and no
closer than 100 feet to any street right-of-way line.
   (E)   No drilling or mineral excavation operations shall be conducted closer
than 300 feet to an existing dwelling, or to a school, hospital or similar use,
nor shall such operations be conducted closer than 50 feet from any commercial
or industrial building.
   (F)   No oil, gas or injection well shall be drilled north of an east-west
line running through the centerline of the Sciota Road Bridge over Hare Creek
within 1,000 feet of Hare Creek. Said limits shall be determined by measuring
from the proposed well site to the closest point on the centerline of Hare
Creek.
(Ord. 1347, passed 3-18-1991) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.105 SPECIAL RESIDENTIAL AND COMMERCIAL PROJECTS.
   City Council may permit, as a conditional use, departures from the zoning
regulations for properly planned project if the planned project meets with the
following requirements:
   (A)   The area of land to be developed is not less than two acres;
   (B)   Adjacent properties will not be adversely affected;
   (C)   Where dwelling units occur, the average density shall not be greater
than the density requirements in the district in which the planned area is
located. The use of the land shall not differ substantially from the uses
permitted in the district, except that limited commercial facilities intended
to serve only a special residential project area and fully integrated into the
design of a residential project may be allowed;
   (D)   The plan shall be consistent with the intent and purpose of this
chapter;
   (E)   For residential areas, a minimum of one acre per 20 dwelling units
shall be improved for recreational use. At least one recreation area shall be a
minimum of one-half acre with the size of remaining areas to be approved by the
Planning Commission; and
   (F)   All parking requirements of this chapter shall be met.
(Ord. 1347, passed 3-18-1991) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.106 TRANSITIONAL COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS.
   In Transitional Commercial District C-3 (§
156.059), all uses shall conform to the following requirements.
   (A)   Hours of operation. Between 7:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. current time,
except for hotels, motels, parking, essential services and residential use.
   (B)   Drive-in facilities. Not permitted.
   (C)   Landscaped or open areas. The following minimum side and back yard
requirements shall separate transitional commercial facilities from abutting
residential zoned property, except where separation is provided by a street,
alley, railroad, creek or other land which cannot be used for residential
purposes. Residential uses which may be permitted are exempt from these
provisions.
 
                            C-3
Buildings and structures    10 feet
Parking, loading and drives 5 feet
 
   (D)   Buffers and fences. A buffer or fence shall be installed where land in
District C-3 abuts property zoned or used for residential purposes, except
where separation is provided by a street, alley, railroad, creek or other land
which cannot be used for residential purposes. Residential uses which may be
permitted are exempt from these provisions. Acceptable fences or buffers shall
be installed within five feet or the residential property line and may include
any of the following, or such other fence or buffer as the Board may approve:
      (1)   Fences, solid type, neat and properly maintained on both sides,
between six and seven feet high, and including basket weave type, vertical
board type, horizontal board type, cyclone type with opaque inserts and
stockade type;
      (2)   Walls of concrete between six and seven feet in height shall be
neat and properly maintained on both sides; and
      (3)   Walls of evergreen vegetation, such as spruce or pine, no less than
five feet in height at planting, and maintained and/or replaced as necessary to
provide a continuous and perpetual visibility shield.
   (E)   Retail or service businesses. Retail businesses permitted as a special
exception shall, in addition to meeting the provisions of Section 802.4, be of
such a nature that they do not create heavy pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
Such uses as the following may be permitted by the Board if they comply in all
other respects with the provisions of this chapter:
      (1)   Clothing or shoe stores;
      (2)   Flower or gift shops, jewelry stores and the like;
      (3)   Dry-cleaning establishments (no coin operation);
      (4)   Government or government agency facilities;
      (5)   Day-care facilities;
      (6)   Retail bakery or candy sales; and
      (7)   Uses which, in the opinion of the Board, are similar to the above.
   (F)   Transitional commercial on corner lots. Where a corner lot is zoned C-
3, all commercial frontage and signs shall face the major traffic street.
(Ord. 1347, passed 3-18-1991) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.107 CITY-OWNED STRUCTURES.
   Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the city or its agencies from locating
buildings, structures, services or other community facilities in any zoning
district, when the installation of such facilities is deemed by City Council to
be in the best interest of the city for the protection of public health or
safety, or for the general welfare of the community.
(Ord. 1347, passed 3-18-1991)
§ 156.108 OUTSIDE STORAGE.
   No lot or premises shall be used as a garbage or storage dump, or as a
storage area for manure, rubbish or miscellaneous refuse, or for the storage of
vehicle parts or junk vehicles which are not classified as restorable. No such
refuse may be stored in an open area in any district. The number of restorable
junk vehicles on any lot in residential districts shall not exceed one vehicle
per property. In the case of multi-family use of land, the landowner shall be
responsible for compliance with this provision, see definition of junk vehicle.
Commercial repair of vehicles shall not be performed in residential districts.
No non-restorable junk vehicle shall be parked on any lot in residential
districts at any time for more than 12 hours.
(Ord. 1347, passed 3-18-1991) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.109 SIGHT LINE.
   No fence, wall, hedge, screen, sign or other structure or planting shall be
higher than three feet in any district within the triangle area (sight
triangle) formed by the intersection of the centerline of each street; sight
triangles shall be formed by connection of points on the intersecting street
centerlines; such points being 80 feet from the intersection of the
centerlines. Trees may be planted in this triangle area, provided the lowest
foliage is eight feet or higher. In computing heights, the street adjacent to
the structure or the ground line at structure, whichever is lower, shall be the
elevation from which heights are measured.
(Ord. 1347, passed 3-18-1991) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.110 OUTSIDE TOILETS.
   No outside privy or toilet shall be constructed or installed within the city
limits, except in accordance with §
156.092, and all toilets hereafter installed must be connected with city
sewers, if available, with a septic tank which has been approved by the proper
authorities and for the installation of which a permit has been issued.
(Ord. 1347, passed 3-18-1991) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.111 SERVICE STATIONS, AUTO REPAIR AND PUBLIC GARAGES.
   All facilities which are otherwise permitted by this chapter, and which
provide for the storage and sale of vehicle fuel and lubricating oil, and/or
which provide for the repair of vehicle, shall be in conformance with the
following.
   (A)   No portion of such facility or its equipment shall be located less
than 40 feet from a residential district, as established by this chapter,
unless separated from such district by a street or alley.
   (B)   No equipment for the service of gasoline or oil shall be placed closer
to any street line, sidewalk or public way than ten feet.
   (C)   No vehicle parts or equipment shall be stored outside a building.
   (D)   No repair facilities shall be maintained on the front portion of the
lot or in the front portion of the first story of the building within 20 feet
of the street, or in any portion of the lot or building within 100 feet of the
premises of any school, hospital, church or public library.
(Ord. 1347, passed 3-18-1991) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.112 VEHICLE DOORS.
   Any door for vehicles, opening upon a street, which is used for commercial
or industrial purposes, shall be at least 15 feet from the street line and an
open, unoccupied space shall be maintained between said door and the street
line. The height of such open, unoccupied space shall not be less than ten feet
and the other dimensions shall be such that no part of the structure encroaches
on the trapezoidal area circumscribed by lines diverging from each side of the
doorway at a 45-degree angle with the street.
(Ord. 1347, passed 3-18-1991) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.113 SHRUBBERY AND TREES.
   (A)   No tree or shrub of any kind shall be planted closer to the street
line or sidewalk than 30 inches, nor shall be allowed to grow closer than 18
inches, except at heights of ten feet or more.
   (B)   The following trees shall not be planted in front or side years:
poplar; willow; and cottonwood.
   (C)   The following trees shall not be planted in any area or district
within the city: American elm and boxelder.
   (D)   Trees may be planted within the public right-of-way between the
sidewalk and street only if there is a minimum clear area of five feet from
curb to sidewalk. All such plantings shall be centered in the clear area. Where
no curbs exist, trees shall be planted three feet from the public walk, or
future walk location. All trees planted in public rights-of-way shall be hard
maples, Norway maples or an ornamental tree with a mature height of 35 feet or
less.
(Ord. 1347, passed 3-18-1991) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.114 FENCES AND WALLS.
   (A)   In residential districts, an open or solid fence or wall shall not
exceed seven feet in height, and shall not extend closer to the street line
than the front building line, unless the building line is over 30 feet from the
street line, in which case the fence or wall may be constructed no closer to
the street line than 30 feet.
   (B)   An ornamental fence may be erected in the area between the building
line and street line to a height not exceeding six feet, providing that 30% of
more of the fence is open and not solid.
   (C)   No fence, wall or other structure of any type or height in any
district shall be installed closer to the street line or edge of sidewalk than
18 inches, except in districts having no front setback requirement.
   (D)   All fences shall be neat and properly maintained on both sides.
(Ord. 1347, passed 3-18-1991) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.115 GARAGE SALES.
   Garage sales, as defined in this chapter, shall be permitted from any one
structure or premise no more than a total of ten days annually. A DAY shall be
construed to be any calendar day, or portion thereof, on which goods are
offered for sale on the premises.
(Ord. 1347, passed 3-18-1991)
§ 156.116 PARKING VEHICLES IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.
   No vehicle with a gross vehicle weight (GVW) rating in excess of 15,000
pounds shall be permitted to be parked on any property in a residential
district. This provision shall not apply to vehicles making deliveries to, or
pick ups from, said property or to vehicles involved in permitted construction
on said property, however, such vehicles may only be parked on said property so
long as they are actively engaged in such work. Non-commercial recreational
vehicles are exempt from the provisions of this section.
(Ord. 1347, passed 3-18-1991) Penalty, see §
156.999
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 156.130 OFFICE OF ZONING OFFICER.
   (A)   Creation of office. The office of Zoning Officer of the city is hereby
created.
   (B)   Appointment. The Zoning Officer shall be appointed by City Council in
accordance with 53 P.S. § 10614 of the state’s Municipalities Planning Code
(Planning Code).
   (C)   Official records. An official record shall be kept of all business of
the Zoning Officer.
   (D)   Compensation of the Zoning Officer. The compensation of the Zoning
Officer shall be fixed by City Council.
(Ord. 1347, passed 3-18-1991)
§ 156.131 DUTIES AND POWERS OF THE ZONING OFFICER.
   (A)   The Zoning Officer shall administer and enforce all the provisions of
the zoning ordinance in accordance with its literal terms.
   (B)   The Zoning Officer shall have such duties and powers as are conferred
on him or her by the zoning ordinance and the Planning Code, and shall include,
but not be limited to, the following.
      (1)   Applications, permits, zoning certificates of use and occupancy.
The Zoning Officer shall receive applications for zoning certificates and
building permits and issue permits and zoning certificates of use and
occupancy.
      (2)   Inspection and right of entry. The Zoning Officer may examine or
cause to be examined all structures and/or land for which an application has
been filed for zoning certificate and he or she may conduct such inspections
from time to time during and at completion of the work for which a zoning
certificate has been issued. The Zoning Officer shall have the authority to
enter, at any reasonable hour, any structure and/or land in the city to enforce
the provisions of the zoning ordinance. A letter or other identification of his
or her authority shall be provided by City Council and shall be displayed for
the purpose of identification.
      (3)   Non-conforming uses. The Zoning Officer shall identify and keep an
up-to-date register of all nonconforming uses and non-conforming structures.
      (4)   Civil enforcement. The Zoning Officer shall be authorized to
institute civil enforcement proceedings as a means of enforcement when acting
within the scope of his or her employment.
(Ord. 1347, passed 3-18-1991)
§ 156.132 APPLICATION FOR BUILDING/ZONING PERMIT AND ZONING CERTIFICATE OF USE
AND OCCUPANCY.
   The application for a building permit also applies for a zoning permit/
certificate as a required by this chapter. The permit and certificate may be
combined on one form.
   (A)   When permit is required. It shall be unlawful to erect, enlarge,
construct, reconstruct or structurally alter any building and/or other
structure or change the use, intensity of use or extend or displace the use of
any building, other structure and/or land in the city without first filing an
application with the Zoning Officer in writing and obtaining the required
permit.
   (B)   When a zoning certificate of use and occupancy is required. It shall
be unlawful to use and/or occupy any building, other structure and/or land for
which a permit is required until a zoning certificate of use and occupancy for
such building, other structure and/or land has been issued by the Zoning
Officer. The application for issuance of a certificate of use and occupancy
shall be made at the same time an application for a permit is filed with the
Zoning Officer.
   (C)   Forms of application. The application for a permit and a zoning
certificate of use and occupancy shall be submitted in such form as the Zoning
Officer may prescribe and shall be accompanied by the required fee as
established by City Council.
   (D)   By whom application is made. Application for a permit and a zoning
certificate of use and occupancy shall be made by the owner or lessee of the
building, other structure and/or land or agent of either or by the contractor,
engineer or architect employed in connection with the proposed work. If the
application is made by a person other than the owner in fee, it shall be
accompanied by a duly verified affidavit of the owner that the qualified person
making the application for the proposed work is authorized to make such
application. The full names and addresses of the owner, lessee, applicant and
of the responsible officers, if the owner or lessee is a corporate body, shall
be stated in the application.
   (E)   Description of work. The application shall contain a general
description of the proposed work, its location, the use and/or occupancy of all
parts of the building, other structure and of all portions of the site or lot
not covered by the building and/or other structure and use of land, proposed
parking and/or loading facilities, if required herein, and such additional
information as may be required by the Zoning Officer.
   (F)   Plat plan.
      (1)   There shall also be filed not less than one copy of a plat plan
showing to scale or approximate scale at least the following:
         (a)   Size and location of all new construction and all existing
buildings, and/or other structures on the site, dimensions and area of the lot,
distances from lot lines and the location and approximate street grades;
         (b)   All existing, proposed, extended and/or new uses of buildings,
other structures and/or land;
         (c)   Proposed and existing parking and/or loading facilities if
required herein;
         (d)   The plat plan shall be drawn in accordance with an accurate
boundary line survey or such other evidence of property ownership as is
acceptable to the Zoning Officer; and
         (e)   Such additional information as may be required by the Zoning
Officer.
      (2)   Where complete and accurate information is not readily available
from existing records, the Zoning Officer may require the applicant to furnish
a survey of the lot by a registered engineer or surveyor at the applicant’s
expense. Each applicant shall be required to attest to the correctness of the
data and statements furnished in the application.
   (G)   Expiration of permits. If work described in any permit is not started
within 12 months from the date of issuance, the permit shall expire and a
written notice shall be given by the Zoning Officer to the persons affected. If
work described in any permit has not been substantially completed within the
time specified in division (H) below, the permit shall expire and written
notice to that effect shall be given by the Zoning Officer to the persons
affected. Work as described in the cancelled permit shall not proceed unless a
new permit is obtained.
   (H)   Substantial completion.
      (1)   The outside of all new structures for which a building permit has
been issued shall be substantially completed within a period of time from the
date construction is started. Substantially completed shall be construed to
mean that roof and exterior walls are finished, including painting, except
block, brick or prefinished material, and that all exterior doors and windows
are installed.
      (2)   It shall also mean that the lot shall be cleared of debris and
graded. Maximum periods for substantial completion are as follows:
 
Additions to gross floor area (residential and non-residential)        1 year
Demolition or miscellaneous construction which does not increase floor 6 months
area
Non-residential construction (new)                                     2 years
Residential construction (new)                                         2 years
Residential garages                                                    1 year
 
(Ord. 1347, passed 3-18-1991)
§ 156.133 ACTION ON PERMITS AND CERTIFICATES OF USE AND OCCUPANCY.
   (A)   Action on application. The Zoning Officer shall act on all
applications for a permit within ten business days after the completed
application is filed. If the requirements of the zoning ordinance and other
applicable ordinances are satisfied, a permit shall be issued.
   (B)   Posting a permit. The permit issued by the Zoning Officer shall be
posted at the work site until the permit expires or the certificate of use and
occupancy is delivered.
   (C)   Revoking a permit. The Zoning Officer may revoke an issued permit if
it is determined that any false statement or misrepresentation of fact was in
the application for the permit.
   (D)   Action upon completion.
      (1)   Upon completion of the permitted work and prior to use and
occupancy, the holder of the permit shall notify the Zoning Officer of such
completion. Within ten business days after receiving notice of completion, the
Zoning Officer shall conduct a final inspection of all permitted structures
and/or land. All violations of the permit and plans shall be recorded and
presented in writing to the holder of the permit within 15 business days of
receipt of notification of completion of work.
      (2)   If the Zoning Officer has determined that the completed work
conforms with the issued permit and complies with the zoning ordinance and
other applicable ordinances, he or she shall issue a certificate of use and
occupancy for the use indicated in the permit within 15 business days of
notification of completion of work.
(Ord. 1347, passed 3-18-1991)
§ 156.134 FEE SCHEDULE.
   No permit shall be issued until the applicant pays the respective fee
prescribed by the city. A permit fee schedule shall be established by
resolution of City Council.
(Ord. 1347, passed 3-18-1991)
§ 156.135 NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
   (A)   If the Zoning Officer shall find that any of the provisions of this
chapter are being violated, he or she shall notify in writing the person
responsible for such violation, indicating the nature of the violation and
ordering the action and specifying the maximum number of days to correct the
violation.
   (B)   The notice shall include the fact that the recipient has the right to
appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board within a prescribed period of time. This
enforcement notice shall comply with 53 P.S. § 10616.1 of the Planning Code.
(Ord. 1347, passed 3-18-1991)
§ 156.136 PROSECUTION OF VIOLATION.
   (A)   If the notice of violation is not complied with, the Zoning Officer
has the authority to institute civil enforcement proceedings as a means of
enforcement when acting within the scope of his or her duties under this
chapter.
   (B)   In addition, City Council may institute any appropriate action or
proceedings under 53 P.S. § 10617 of the Planning Code. Enforcement remedies
shall be initiated before the District Justice.
(Ord. 1347, passed 3-18-1991)
§ 156.137 STOP WORK ORDER.
   (A)   Notice to owner. Upon notice from the Zoning Officer that work on, or
use or occupancy of any building, other structure and/or land has been
determined, to be contrary to the zoning ordinance, such work shall be
immediately stopped. The stop work order shall be in writing to the owner of
the property involved and shall state the conditions under which work or use or
occupancy may be resumed.
   (B)   Conditions of discontinued work. Any person who has been served with a
stop work order or discontinues or abandons work shall not leave any building,
other structure and/or land in such condition as to be a hazard to the public.
The Zoning Officer shall have the authority to require that such building,
other structure and/or land shall be put in such condition as he or she
determined, and the work on it shall be at the full expense of the recipient of
a stop work order.
(Ord. 1347, passed 3-18-1991)
ZONING HEARING BOARD FUNCTIONS
§ 156.150 GENERAL.
   (A)   In accordance with Article IX of the Planning Code, a Zoning Hearing
Board shall be appointed by City Council, which shall adopt rules to govern its
procedures. The Board shall hold meetings, keep minutes and pursuant to public
notice, conduct hearings, compel the attendance of witnesses, take testimony
under oath, and render decisions or reports or findings. For the filing of any
appeal or proceeding with the Board, a hearing fee shall be charged in
accordance with a schedule established by City Council. All city costs
associated with §§
156.151 through
156.153 over and above the hearing fee shall be borne by the applicant. The
costs, however, shall not include legal expenses of the Board, expenses for
engineering, architectural or other technical consultants or expert witness
costs which the Board may require in order to render a decision. The
stenographer’s appearance fee shall be split between the applicant and the
Board, while the transcription costs shall be paid by the party requesting the
transcript.
   (B)   The membership of the Board shall be established in accordance with
the provisions of 53 P.S. § 10903 of the Planning Code. The organization of the
Board shall be based upon 53 P.S. § 10906 of the Planning Code and the removal
of any members of the Board shall be undertaken pursuant to 53 P.S. § 10905 of
the Planning Code. City Council may from time to time appropriate monies for
clerical, technical or legal consultants for necessary services based, upon 53
P.S. § 10907 of the Planning Code.
(Ord. 1347, passed 3-18-1991)
§ 156.151 FUNCTIONS.
   The Zoning Hearing Board shall conduct meetings, hearings and make decisions
on matters as provided by this chapter in accordance with the provisions of 53
P.S. §§ 10908, 10909, 10910, 10912 and 10914 of the Planning Code which
includes the following functions.
   (A)   Request and application procedure. All requests, applications or
appeals made to the Board shall be in writing on forms prescribed by the Board.
Every appeal or application shall refer to the specific provision of the
ordinance involved and shall set forth the interpretation that is claimed, the
use which is sought, and/or the details of the variance that is applied for,
and the grounds on which it is claimed a request should be granted. At least
ten days before the date of the hearing, on a request, application or appeal,
the Board shall transmit to the Planning Commission a copy of said request,
application or appeal in order that the Planning Commission may have an
opportunity to submit a report to the Board, if it so desires.
   (B)   Appeals from the Zoning Officer. The Board shall hold a hearing and
decide all appeals where it is alleged by the appellant that the Zoning Officer
has failed to follow prescribed procedures or has misinterpreted or misapplied
any provisions of this chapter or map, or any valid rule or regulation
governing the action of the Zoning Officer. Such appeals of determination shall
be filed in accordance with 53 P.S. §§ 10919 of the Planning Code. All appeals
and applications made to the Board shall be in writing on forms prescribed by
the Board.
   (C)   Variances. The Board shall hear requests for variances, in accordance
with 53 P.S. §§ 10910.2 of the Planning Code, where it is alleged that the
provisions of this chapter inflict unnecessary hardship upon the applicant. The
Board may grant a variance provided the following findings are relevant:
      (1)   That there are unique physical circumstances or conditions,
including irregularity, narrowness or shallowness of lot size or shape, or
exceptional topographical or other physical conditions peculiar to the
particular property and that the unnecessary hardship is due to such conditions
and not the circumstances or conditions generally created by the provisions of
the zoning ordinance in the neighborhood or district in which the property is
locate;
      (2)   That because of such physical circumstances or conditions, there is
no possibility that the property can be developed in strict conformity with the
provisions of the zoning ordinance and that the authorization of a variance is
therefore necessary to enable the reasonable use of the property;
      (3)   That such unnecessary hardship has not been created by the
appellant;
      (4)   That the variance, if authorized, will not alter the essential
character of the neighborhood or district in which the property is located, nor
substantially or permanently impair the appropriate use or development of
adjacent property, nor be detrimental to the public welfare;
      (5)   That the variance, if authorized, will represent the minimum
variance that will afford relief and will represent the least modification
possible of the regulation in issue; and
      (6)   In granting any variance, the Board may attach such reasonable
conditions and safeguards as it may deem necessary to assure compliance with
the objectives of this chapter.
   (D)   Special exceptions. The Board shall have the power to decide
applications for special exceptions as specified in this chapter, in harmony
with its general purpose and intent and in accordance with the standards set
forth. The Board shall approve a special exception use only if it meets with
the following standards and criteria:
      (1)   The use is compatible with adjacent uses and structures;
      (2)   The use is suited to the topography and other characteristics of
the site;
      (3)   The use complies with all other provisions and regulations of this
chapter, including regulations specific to the particular special exception for
which application is made; and
      (4)   The interpretation and application of the provisions of this
chapter shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the health, safety and
general welfare of the city. In granting a special exception, the Board may
attach such reasonable conditions and safeguards, in addition to those
expressed in this chapter, as it may deem necessary to assure compliance with
the objectives of this chapter. Such conditions may include, but not be limited
to, parking, buffer strips, hours of operation, lighting, traffic flow, signs
and performance standards.
   (E)   Non-conforming uses. The Board shall have the power to authorize
changes of lawful non-conforming uses in accordance with §§
156.035 through
156.044.
   (F)   Conditional uses. City Council shall have the power to decide
applications for conditional uses as specified in this chapter, in harmony with
its general purpose and intent and in accordance with the standards set forth.
City Council shall consider applications for conditional uses only after
receiving recommendations from the Planning Commission, and shall approve a
conditional use only if it meets with the following standards and criteria:
      (1)   The use is compatible with adjacent uses and structures;
      (2)   The use is suited to the topography and other characteristics of
the site;
      (3)   The use complies with all other provisions and regulations of this
chapter, including regulations specific to the particular conditional use for
which application is made; and
      (4)   The interpretation and application of the provisions of this
chapter shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the health, safety and
general welfare of the city. In granting a conditional use, the Board may
attach such reasonable conditions and safeguards, in addition to those
expressed in this chapter, as it may deem necessary to assure compliance with
the objectives of this chapter. Such conditions may include, but not be limited
to, parking, buffer strips, hours of operation, lighting, traffic flow, signs
and performance standards.
   (G)   Performance standards. In cases involving performance standards, the
Board may:
      (1)   Require a plan of the proposed construction or development, a
description of machinery proposed and specifications for the mechanisms and
techniques to be used;
      (2)   Obtain qualified expert consultants to testify as to whether a
proposed use will conform to the performance requirements. The cost of such
services shall be borne by the applicant; and
      (3)   Impose such conditions as it deems necessary for the protection of
adjacent property and the public interest.
(Ord. 1347, passed 3-18-1991)
§ 156.152 HEARINGS.
   The Board shall conduct hearings and make decisions in accordance with 53
P.S. §§ 10908 and 10909.1 of the Planning Code.
(Ord. 1347, passed 3-18-1991)
§ 156.153 APPEAL FROM BOARD’S DECISION.
   Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Board or City Council may,
within 30 days after such decision of the Board of City Council, appeal
therefrom in accordance with Article X-A of the Planning Code.
(Ord. 1347, passed 3-18-1991)
AMENDMENTS
§ 156.165 GENERAL.
   The City Council may introduce and consider amendments to this chapter and
to the zoning map, as proposed by a member of the City Council, by the Planning
Commission, or by a petition of a person residing or owning property within the
city, in accordance with 53 P.S. §§ 10609 of the Planning Code.
(Ord. 1347, passed 3-18-1991)
§ 156.166 PETITIONS.
   Petitions for amendment shall be filed with the Planning Commission and the
petitioner, upon such filing shall pay an advertising deposit and a filing fee,
in accordance with a schedule established by City Council resolution. The
Planning Commission shall review the proposed amendment and report its findings
and recommendations in writing to City Council.
(Ord. 1347, passed 3-18-1991)
§ 156.167 REFERRAL.
   Any proposed amendment presented to City Council shall be referred to the
City Planning Commission and the County Department of Planning for review and
recommendations prior to a public hearing by City Council. A 30-day review
period by these planning agencies shall be allowed before the City Council may
take final action on the amendment.
(Ord. 1347, passed 3-18-1991)
§ 156.168 ACTION.
   (A)   Before acting upon a proposed amendment, City Council shall hold a
public hearing thereon. Notice of such public hearing shall be published once
each week for two successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the
city. Such notice shall state the time and place of the hearing and the
particular nature of the amendment to be considered. The first publication
shall be not more than 30 days and the second publication shall not be less
than seven days from the date of the hearing.
   (B)   If the proposed amendment involves a zoning map change, notice of said
public hearing shall be conspicuously posted by the city at points deemed
sufficient by the city, along the perimeter of the tract to notify potentially
interested citizens. The affected tract or area shall be posted at least one
week prior to the date of the hearing.
   (C)   Within 30 days after enactment, a copy of the amendment to the zoning
ordinance shall be forwarded to the County Department of Planning.
(Ord. 1347, passed 3-18-1991)
§ 156.169 CURATIVE AMENDMENTS.
   A landowner in the city who desires to challenge on substantive ground the
validity of this zoning ordinance or map, or any provision thereof which
prohibits or restricts the use or development of land in which he or she has an
interest, may submit a curative amendment to the City Council with a written
request that his or her challenge and proposed amendment be heard and decided
as provided in 53 P.S. §§ 10609.1 and 10609.2 of the Planning Code. As with
other proposed amendments, the curative amendment shall be referred to the
Planning Commission and the County Department of Planning at least 30 days
before the public hearing is conducted by City Council.
(Ord. 1347, passed 3-18-1991)
§ 156.999 PENALTY.
   Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated or
permitted the violation of the provisions of this zoning ordinance shall, upon
being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced by the
city, pay a judgment of not more than $500 plus all court costs, including
attorney fees incurred by a municipality as a result thereof. If the defendant
neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the city may enforce the said
judgment pursuant to the applicable rules of civil procedure. Each day that a
violation continues shall constitute a separate violation, unless the district
justice determining that there has been a violation further determines that
there was a good faith basis for the person, partnership or corporation
violating the ordinance to have believed that there was no such violation, in
which event there shall be deemed to have been only one such violation until
the fifth day following the date of the determination of a violation by the
District Justice and thereafter each day that a violation continues shall
constitute a separate violation. All judgments, costs and reasonable attorney
fee collected for the violation of this chapter shall be paid to the city.
(Ord. 1347, passed 3-18-1991)
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
   Table
      
I.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
      
II.   PROPERTY TRANSFERS AND REGULATIONS
      
III.   AGREEMENTS
      
IV.   FRANCHISES
      
V.   PLANS AND PROGRAMS
      
VI.   MISCELLANEOUS
TABLE I: STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Ord./Res. Date Passed Description
Ord./Res. Date Passed Description
Ord. 1198 - -         Opening and establishing McFarland Street
Ord. 1199 - -         Opening and establishing Viking Avenue
Ord. 951  9-6-1960    Vacating Northwest Street as a public street
Ord. 960  12-30-1960  Description of Meadow Lane
Ord. 964  6-5-1961    Opening Oakley Avenue in the city
Ord. 1057 4-18-1966   Vacating a portion of an alley
Ord. 1058 4-18-1966   Opening and establishing Penn Alley
Ord. 1062 8-8-1966    Vacating a portion of Pine Street
Ord. 1063 8-8-1966    Opening and establishing a portion of Pine Street
Ord. 1118 6-2-1969    Vacating a portion of West Columbus Avenue
Ord. 1119 6-2-1969    Changing the name of a portion of Columbus Avenue to
                      Turnpike Road
Ord. 1121 6-2-1969    Opening West Columbus Avenue in the Third Ward of the
                      city
Ord. 1152 6-7-1971    Vacating a portion of Duane Street
Ord. 1153 6-7-1971    Opening and establishing Duane Street
Ord. 1154 8-2-1971    Opening and establishing Clinton Street
Ord. 1164 4-17-1972   Opening and establishing a portion of West Main Street
Ord. 1169 8-21-1972   Vacating an alley connecting Maple Avenue and East
                      Washington Street
Ord. 1170 8-21-1972   Opening and establishing Abbey Alley
Ord. 1186 9-17-1973   Vacating a portion of Second Avenue
Ord. 1193 4-1-1974    Vacating Sherman Alley
Ord. 1197 7-1-1974    Widening First Avenue
Ord. 1203 10-7-1974   Vacating Meadow Lane
Ord. 1204 10-7-1974   Opening and establishing of Meadow Lane
Ord. 1211 7-21-1975   Opening and establishing Plastics Road
Ord. 1259 4- -1980    Opening and establishing Center Alley
Ord. 1255 5-19-1980   Vacating a portion of Center Alley
Ord. 1265 11-3-1980   Vacating a portion of Heath Alley
Ord. 1266 11-3-1980   Opening and establishing Heath Alley
Ord. 1272 5-4-1981    Opening and establishing Sixth Street
Ord. 1143 9-8-1981    Vacating a portion of East Street
Ord. 1289 10-18-1982  Vacating a portion of W. Pleasant Street
Ord. 1308 7-1-1985    Vacating a portion of Catherin Street
Ord. 1359 8-3-1992    Vacating a portion of Kinley Alley
Ord. 1432 6-17-2002   Establishing Shady Avenue extension
Ord. 1526 1-21-2013   Establishing Shady Avenue extension
Ord. 1528 8-19-2013   Vacation of a portion of Ajax Alley
Ord. 1664 3-17-2025   Vacation of a portion of Second Avenue
                     
 
 
TABLE II: PROPERTY TRANSFERS AND REGULATIONS
Ord./Res. Date Passed Description
Ord./Res.  Date Passed Description
Ord. 1014  6-5-1964    Appropriation of land for expansion of airport
Ord. 1038  6-21-1965   Property transfer to the city
Ord. 1044  8-4-1965    Lease of golf course
Ord. 1105  5-6-1968    Annexation of property
Ord. 1157  7-10-1971   Supplement to agreement of lease dated 8-1-1965
Res.       4-5-1976    Designating property for public street purposes
Res.       11-7-1977   Regulations for property at the corner of West Main
                       Street and Spring Street
Ord. 1257  5-19-1980   Authorizes the selection and appropriation of certain
                       tracts of ground and air space situated in the city
Res. 95-11 8-7-1995    Lease agreement with Nicholson
Res. 03-10 9-15-2003   Lease agreement with McCray
Ord.       3-14-2011   Lease agreement for property
 
 
TABLE III: AGREEMENTS
Ord./Res. Date Passed Description
Ord./ Date   Description
Res.  Passed
Res.  2-1-   Amendment to agreement with Mr. and Mrs. Heaster
      1960
Res.  11-4-  Authorizing a cooperation agreement concerning housing
      1968
Ord.  1-29-  Agreement with the bank to take a loan
1178  1973
Res.  12-22- Purchase agreement for the water supply company
      1973
Res.  8-20-  Agreement with the trustees of the property of Penn Central Transportation
      1974   Company
Res.  5-19-  Agreement with the state for modernizing traffic signal installations
      1975
Res   7-7-   Agreement with Penn Central Transportation Company
      1975
Res.  12-7-  Agreement with the country for bridge inspection
      1981
Res.  7-19-  Agreement with PennCentral Corporation
      1982
Res.  6-3-   Agreement with the country for bridge inspection
      1985
Ord.  7-1-   Intergovernmental agreement with the county’s Solid Waste Management
1309  1985   Council
Res.  7-5-   Agreement with redevelopment authority
      1988
Res.  3-6-   Transfer of refuse removal agreement
      1992
Res.  9-6-   Agreement with Conrail for acquisition of the railroad line
      1994
Res.  1-3-   Agreement with redevelopment authority
      1995
Res.  2-14-  Agreement with the state’s Department of Transportation
      1995
Ord.  2-22-  Intergovernmental cooperation with Penn Hills for purchases
1385  1995
Res.  5-20-  Cooperation agreement with the redevelopment authority
96-11 1996
Res.  9-15-  Agility agreement with PennDOT
97-17 1997
Res.  1-11-  Agreement with the state’s Department of Environmental Protection
00-01 2000
Res.  9-18-  Agreement with the state’s Department of Transportation for winter
00-14 2000   services
Res.  6-2-   Agreement to participate in the judicial sale of tax delinquent properties
03-07 2003
Res.  11-3-  Agility agreement between PennDOT and the city
03-13 2003
Res.  7-18-  Agreement with the state’s Department of Transportation for snow and ice
      2005   removal
Res.  5-1-   Intergovernmental agreement creating the Uniform Construction Code Joint
06-08 2006   Board of Appeals
Res.  2-19-  Agreement for the inter-municipal purchase, use and maintenance of a
07-04 2007   chipper and trailer
Ord.  4-16-  Intergovernmental agreement for enforcement of the Uniform Construction
1478  2007   Code
Res.  4-6-   Agreement concerning payment in lieu of taxes; Berry Plastics Corporation
09-05 2009
Res.  5-4-   Agreement with state’s Department of Transportation concerning on-line
09-06 2009   reporting system
Res.  11-2-  Approval of contract entered into by the county and a law firm regarding
09-15 2009   judicial tax sales
Res.  9-24-  Agreement for snow removal services
10-09 2010
Res.  2-21-  Agreement concerning a civil penalty for the Safe Drinking Act
11-02 2011
Res.  6-6-   Agreement among the county Tax Claim Bureau and a law firm
11-04 2011
Res.  3-18-  Agreement concerning tax collection
13-01 2013
Res.  4-7-   Amendment to the cooperation agreement with the redevelopment authority
14-04 2014
Res.  4-21-
14-03 2014   Support for designating a road as a state byway
(S)
Res.  8-4-   Agreement among the county Tax Claim Bureau and a law firm
14-08 2014
Res.  12-15- Amendment to cooperation agreement with the housing authority
14-18 2014
Res.  4-17-  Agreement with the county Tax Claim Bureau
17-06 2017
Res.  11-6-  Agreement with Berkheimer to be the exclusive tax officer for tax
17-22 2017   collection
Res.  6-17-  Agreement with the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation to use the
19-10 2019   dotGrants on-line reporting system
Ord.  10-21- Agreement with the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation to use the
1594  2019   dotGrants on-line reporting system
Ord.  10-21- Authorizing the incurrence of lease rental debt through the issuance and
1595  2019   sale of a guaranteed revenue note
Ord.  12-16- Authorizing the incurrence of lease rental debt through the issuance and
1602  2019   sale of a guaranteed revenue note
Res.  8-17-  Agreement among the County of Erie, Erie County Tax Claim Bureau and the
20-08 2020   law firm of MacDonald, Illig, Jones and Britton LLP
Res.  5-27-  Utilizing grant funding for IMPACT CORRY partnership green space
21-06 2021   improvements
Ord.  1-16-  Authorizing the incurrence of lease rental debt through the issuance and
1632  2023   sale of a guaranteed revenue note
Res.  6-19-  Entering into the updated Intergovernmental Cooperation Agreement 2023 for
23-08 2023   the Conelway Regional Emergency Management Agency.
Res.  1-15-  Authorizing agility agreement between the city and the Commonwealth of
24-06 2024   Pennsylvania through the Department of Transportation.
Res.  7-15-  Agreement with the Corry Area School District to assist with the
24-23 2024   enforcement of violations of 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 3345.1
Res.  7-15-  Rescinding Res. 21-06 and cancelling the Corry Junction Greenway Trail
24-24 2024   Extension Phase 1A.2 Project
Res.  9-16-  Authorizing the modification of existing lease rental debt incurred
24-27 2024   through the issuance and sale of a guaranteed revenue note
Ord.  12-16- Authorizing the incurrence of lease rental debt through the issuance and
1661  2024   sale of a guaranteed debt obligation
            
 
 
TABLE IV: FRANCHISES
Ord./Res. Date Passed Description
Ord./Res.  Date Passed Description
Res.       - -         Granting a cable television franchise
Res.       5-15-1961   Allowing cable franchise to install poles to provide
                       cable service
Ord. 1249  9-17-1979   Amendment to television franchise (Ord. 895)
Ord. 1293  12-20-1982  Granting a cable television franchise
Ord. 1363  11-16-1992  Granting a cable television franchise
Ord. 1449  6-7-2004    Granting a cable television franchise
Res. 19-06 6-17-2019   Granting a cable television franchise
                      
 
 
TABLE V: PLANS AND PROGRAMS
Ord./Res. Date Passed Description
Ord./ Date   Description
Res.  Passed
Res.  - -    Approving the Urban Renewal Plan
Res.  - -    Adoption of amendment to the Official Plan
Res.  12-31- Approving the Urban Renewal Plan
      1968
Res.  11-16- Amending the Land Use Plan and the Thoroughfare Plan
      1970
Res.  9-7-   Adoption of the Official Sewage Plan
      1971
Res.  3-10-  Adoption of part of the Comprehensive Plan
      1975
Res.  12-17- Amendment to Downtown Urban Renewal Project
      1979
Res.  12-15- Adoption of the Official Plan of the municipality
      1980
Res.  5-17-  Adoption of the Official Plan of the municipality
      1982
Res.  6-1-   Change to the Urban Renewal Plan
      1982
Res.  9-7-   Adoption of the Official Plan of the municipality
      1982
Res.  3-7-   Approval of the county Solid Waste Management Plan
      1983
Res.  3-6-   Adoption of the Official Plan of the municipality
      1989
Res.  3-4-   Approval of the Erie County Act 101 Plan
      1991
Ord.  6-9-   Approving the plan for the refunding of sewer revenue bonds
1357  1992
Ord.  3-23-  Approving the plan for the refunding of sewer revenue bonds
1378  1994
Res.  12-5-  Adoption of official Sewage Facilities Plan revision
      1994
Res.  1-15-  Ratifying the 1995 revised County Act 101 Municipal Solid Waste Management
96-03 1996   Plan
Ord.  12-7-  Approving the plan for the issuance of sewer revenue bonds
1409  1998
Res.  4-17-  Adoption of official Sewage Facilities Plan revision
00-07 2000
Res.  4-17-  Adoption of official Sewage Facilities Plan revision
00-08 2000
Res.  10-2-  Adoption of Act 537 Sewage Facilities Plan update
00-15 2000
Ord.  8-6-
1426- 2001   Authorizing a certain capital improvement project and the financing therefor
1-01
Res.  12-17- Adoption of a Comprehensive Act 537 Sewage Facilities Plan update revision
01-12 2001
Ord.  4-21-
1442- 2003   Authorizing a certain capital improvement project and the financing therefor
03-02
Ord.  12-1-
1445- 2003   Authorizing a certain capital improvement project and the financing therefor
03-05
Res.  4-3-   Approval of 2005 County Municipal Solid Waste Management Plan
06-06 2006
Res.  5-7-   Authorizing the county housing authority to complete administrative
07-05 2007   requirements for the Housing Rehabilitation Program and Hazard Control Grant
             Program
Ord.  8-6-   Approving the plan for the issuance of sewer revenue bonds
1479  2007
Res.  5-18-  Adoption of official Sewage Facilities Plan
09-07 2009
Res.  6-7-   Housing Rehabilitation Program and Lead Hazard Control Grant Program
10-08 2010
Res.  9-4-   Adoption of the Corrective Action Plan
12-09 2012
Res.  8-19-  Adoption of official Sewage Facilities Plan
13-09 2013
Res.  11-18- Adoption of official Sewage Facilities Plan
13-16 2013
Res.  2-3-   Adoption of official Sewage Facilities Plan
14-01 2014
Res.  2-6-   Designating officials to administer the Non-Uniform Pension Plan
17-01 2017
Res.  2-6-   Designating officials to administer the Police Pension Plan
17-02 2017
Res.  2-6-   Designating officials authorized to act for the Firemen’s Pension Fund
17-03 2017
Res.  4-3-   Mead Park Master Plan Phase I Construction Project
17-05 2017
Res.  5-1-   Designating officials to act on behalf of the Firemen’s Pension Fund
17-07 2017
Res.  10-2-  Adoption of the Minority and Women’s Business Enterprise Plan (MBE/WBE)
17-14 2017
Res.  10-2-  Adopting a program income reutilization plan for the Community Development
17-15 2017   Block Grant Program
Res.  10-2-  Adopting a Section 3 Plan to comply with 24 C.F.R. Part 135, Section 3 of the
17-17 2017   United States Housing and Urban Development Act of 1968
Res.  3-5-   Adoption of the 2018 Hazard Mitigation Plan
18-07 2018
Res.  4-16-  Authorizing budget revisions for the 2009 and 2010 Community Development Block
18-08 2018   Grant Programs
Res.  1-7-   Designating officials to administer the Non-Uniform Pension Plan
19-01 2019
Res.  1-7-   Designating officials to administer the Police Pension Plan
19-02 2019
Res.  3-18-  Authorizing budget revisions for the 2015 Community Development Block Grant
19-04 2019   Program
Res.  6-17-  Authorizing budget revisions for the 2015 Community Development Block Grant
19-09 2019   Program
Res.  10-7-  Authorizing distribution of state aid pension funds to the Police, Fireman and
19-13 2019   Non-uniform Employee pension plans for 2019
Res.  10-21- Authorizing the preparation, execution and submission of a 2019 Community
19-14 2019   Development Block Grant Program application
Res.  10-21- Adopting a policy protecting individuals engaged in non-violent civil rights
19-15 2019   demonstration
Res.  10-21- Adoption of the Minority and Women’s Business Enterprise Plan (MBE/WBE)
19-16 2019
Res.  10-21- Adopting a Program Income Reutilization Plan for the Community Development
19-17 2019   Block Grant Program
Res.  10-21- Adopting a Community Development Block Grant Program Citizen Participation
19-18 2019   Plan
Res.  10-21- Adopting a Section 3 plan to comply with 24 CFR, Part 135, Section 3 of the
19-19 2019   United States Department of Housing and Urban Development Act of 1968, as
             amended
Res.  10-21- Appointing a Section 504 Officer and adopting Section 504 Grievance Procedures
19-21 2019   for the city to implement Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973
Res.  11-4-  Authorizing budget revisions for the 2016 Community Development Block Grant
19-23 2019   Program
Res.  - -    Designating officials authorized to act for the Firemen’s Pension Fund
20-01
Res.  5-18-  Adopting modification to the Community Development Block Grant Program citizen
20-04 2020   participation plan
Res.  6-15-  Authorizing budget revisions for the city’s 2017 Community Development Block
20-06 2020   Grant Program
Res.  8-17-  Appointing a Section 504 Officer and Adopting Section 504 grievance procedures
20-11 2020   for the city
Res.  10-5-  Adopting a program income reutilization plan for the Community Development
20-17 2020   Block Grant Program
Res.  10-5-  Adopting a Section 3 plan to comply with 24 CFR, Part 135, Section 3 of the
20-18 2020   United States Department of Housing and Urban Development Act of 1968
Res.  4-8-   Authorizing the adoption of an Active Transportation Plan
21-05 2021
Res.  11-15- Authorizing budget revisions for the city’s 2020 Community Development Block
21-18 2021   Grant CV Program
Res.  3-21-  Authorizing a budget modification for the city’s 2020 Community Development
22-09 2022   Block Grant CV Program
Res.  9-19-  Adopting a Section 3 plan to comply with 24 CFR, Part 75, Section 3 of the
22-25 2022   United States Department of Housing and Urban Development Act of 1968
Res.  5-15-  Adopting the Erie County 2023 Hazard Vulnerability Assessment and Mitigation
23-07 2023   Plan as the official Hazard Mitigation Plan of the city.
Res.  9-18-  Adopting a fair housing resolution of the city.
23-09 2023
Res.  9-18-  Authorizing submission of an application to the Pennsylvania Department of
23-11 2023   Community and Economic Development for funding through the Community
             Development Block Grant Program.
Res.  9-18-  Adopting a Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) Program Citizen
23-12 2023   Participation Plan for the city.
Res.  6-17-  Adopting a comprehensive Act 537 Sewage facilities plan update revision
24-20 2024
Res.  10-21- Authorizing submission of an application to the Pennsylvania Department of
24-34 2024   Community and Economic Development for funding through the Community
             Development Block Grant Program
            
 
TABLE VI: MISCELLANEOUS
Ord./Res. Date Passed Description
Ord./Res.  Date Passed Description
Res.       5-19-1969   Agreeing that a study will accomplish the requirements
                       of Act 241
Res.       9-18-1972   Designating property as “Salvation Army Square”
Res.       12-4-1978   Approving the sewering of a subdivision
Res.       12-4-1978   City to provide water service to a neighborhood
Res.       3-3-1980    Changing the addresses of specific properties
Ord. 1387  5-12-1995   Placement of commemorative signs
Res. 97-16 9-15-1997   Authorizing construction of a sewer on a portion of
                       South Shady Avenue
Res. 98-16 7-20-1998   Tax exemption in a specific area of the city
Res. 00-17 12-18-2000  Tax exemption in a specific area of the city
Res. 02-06 10-21-2002  Designating a section of Route 77 as a state byway
Res. 03-03 4-21-2003   Removing tax exemptions from a specific area of the city
Res. 03-04 4-21-2003   Tax exemption in a specific area of the city
Res. 04-05 7-5-2004    Designating a section of Route 77 as a state byway
Ord. 1494  4-6-2009    Authorizing taxes in a specific area of the city
Res. 19-03 2-18-2019   Tax exemption in a specific area of the city
Res._19-24 11-18-2019  Recognizing the Corry Regional Volunteer Fire Company as
                       the official volunteer fire company of the city
Res._20-02 1-20-2020   Recognizing EmergyCare as the ambulance provider to the
                       city
Res._20-05 5-18-2020   Authorizing the extension of the face payment date for
                       2020 real estate taxes.
                       Authorizing exoneration of taxes against mobile homes
Res._23-18 11-20-2023  deemed to have removed or damaged to an extent rendering
                       them worthless.
Res. 24-08 2-19-2024   Authorizing the exoneration of outstanding property tax,
                       penalties, interest and fees for tax year 2022
Res. 24-09 2-19-2024   Authorizing the exoneration of outstanding property tax,
                       penalties, interest and fees for tax year 2023
Res. 24-17 5-20-2024   Authorizing the exoneration of outstanding property tax,
                       penalties, interest and fees for tax year 2023
Res. 24-18 5-20-2024   Authorizing the exoneration of outstanding property tax,
                       penalties, interest and fees for tax year 2020
Res. 24-19 5-20-2024   Authorizing the exoneration of outstanding property tax,
                       penalties, interest and fees for tax years 2022 and 2023
                      
 
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Pennsylvania Statutes
References to Pennsylvania Consolidated Statutes
References to Pennsylvania Consolidated Statutes Annotated
References to Pennsylvania Code
References to Resolutions
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO PENNSYLVANIA STATUTES
References to Pennsylvania Statutes Code Section
References to Pennsylvania Statutes Code Section
                                    152.004,
32 P.S. §§ 680.1 et seq.          152.009,
                                    152.024,
                                    Ch 152 App. E
32 P.S. § 693.1 et seq.            153.022
                                    52.001,
                                    52.004,
                                    Ch. 52 App. A,
35 P.S. §§ 691.1 et seq.          152.009,
                                    152.020,
                                    153.022,
                                    154.002
35 P.S. §§ 750.1 et seq.          153.022
35 P.S. §§ 4001 et seq.           52.002
35 P.S. §§ 7210                   151.27
35 P.S. §§ 7210.101 et seq.       151.15
35 P.S. § 7210.501(C)              151.25
53 P.S. § 503(1.1)                 152.009
53 P.S. § 6913                     113.01
                                    152.004,
                                    152.009,
                                    152.068,
                                    152.100,
                                    Ch 152 App. D,
53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.            154.002,
                                    154.003,
                                    154.115,
                                    154.171,
                                    154.999,
                                    156.005
53 P.S. § 10609                    156.165
53 P.S. § 10609.1                  156.169
53 P.S. § 10609.2                  156.169
53 P.S. § 10614                    156.130
53 P.S. § 10616.1                  156.135
53 P.S. § 10617                    93.99,
                                    156.136
53 P.S. § 10903                    156.150
53 P.S. § 10905                    156.150
53 P.S. § 10906                    156.150
53 P.S. § 10907                    156.150
53 P.S. § 10908                    156.151,
                                    156.152
53 P.S. § 10909.1                  156.152
53 P.S. § 10910                    156.151
53 P.S. § 10910.2                  156.151
53 P.S. § 10912                    156.151
53 P.S. § 10914                    156.151
53 P.S. § 10919                    156.151
72 P.S. § 5511.10                  32.20
                                    
 
REFERENCES TO PENNSYLVANIA CONSOLIDATED STATUTES
References to Pennsylvania Consolidated Statutes Code Section
References to Pennsylvania Consolidated Statutes Code Section
                                                 30.01,
11 Pa.C.S. §§ 10101 et seq.                    92.02,
                                                 152.004
11 Pa.C.S. § 11018.15                           10.10
11 Pa.C.S. § 11018.17                           10.99
11 Pa.C.S. §§ 112A00 et seq.                   30.01
11 Pa.C.S. § 11402.1                            30.05
11 Pa.C.S. § 12101.1                            35.21
18 Pa.C.S. § 4903                               92.07
18 Pa.C.S. § 4904                               92.07
18 Pa.C.S. § 5503                               34.02
18 Pa.C.S. § 5505                               34.02
18 Pa.C.S. § 5507                               34.02
18 Pa.C.S. § 6308                               34.02
53 Pa.C.S., Chapter 85, Subch. F                 113.02
53 Pa.C.S. §§ 2301                             33.003
53 Pa.C.S. §§ 5301                             33.005
53 Pa.C.S. §§ 8421                             30.03
53 Pa.C.S. §§ 8801                             32.26
 
 
REFERENCES TO PENNSYLVANIA CONSOLIDATED STATUTES ANNOTATED
 
References to Pennsylvania Consolidated Statutes Annotated Code Section
42 Pa.C.S.A. § 933                                        Ch. 52 App A
42 Pa.C.S.A. § 5571(b)                                    Ch. 52 App A
42 Pa.C.S.A. § 8902                                       34.02
42 Pa.C.S.A. § 8953                                       33.003
 
 
REFERENCES TO PENNSYLVANIA CODE
References to Pa. Code Code Section
References to Pa. Code                Code Section
25 Pa. Code                           152.009
25 Pa. Code § 73.64                  52.015
25 Pa. Code, Chapter 92a              152.009,
                                      152.035
25 Pa. Code § 92a.1                  152.009
25 Pa. Code, Chapter 93               152.003,
                                      152.009
25 Pa. Code, Chapter 95               52.001
                                      152.009,
25 Pa. Code, Chapter 102              152.021,
                                      152.035
25 Pa. Code, Chapter 105              152.020,
                                      152.035
                                      153.022,
34 Pa. Code                           153.023,
                                      153.091
                                      153.056,
34 Pa. Code, Chapters 401 through 405 153.057,
                                      153.060
34 Pa. Code § 401.1                  151.29
34 Pa. Code §§ 401.1 et seq.        151.15,
                                      151.20
34 Pa. Code § 403.21                 151.15
34 Pa. Code §§ 403.81 through 403.84151.26,
                                      151.29
 
 
REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS
Res. No. Date Passed Code Section
Res. No. Date Passed Code Section
-        - -         TSO Table V
-        - -         TSO Table IV
-        - -         TSO Table V
-        - -         32.25
-        2-1-1960    TSO Table III
-        5-15-1961   TSO Table IV
-        7-6-1964    Ch. 74 Schd. II
-        1-28-1965   32.04
-        11-4-1968   TSO Table III
-        12-31-1968  TSO Table V
-        5-19-1969   TSO Table VI
-        2-2-1970    72.15
-        11-16-1970  TSO Table V
-        9-7-1971    TSO Table V
-        9-18-1972   TSO Table VI
-        7-16-1973   33.026
-        11-5-1973   33.028
-        12-22-1973  TSO Table III
-        8-20-1974   TSO Table III
-        2-3-1975    31.02
-        3-10-1975   TSO Table V
-        5-19-1975   TSO Table III
-        7-7-1975    TSO Table III
-        4-5-1976    TSO Table II
-        2-7-1977    32.20
-        4-18-1977   33.007
-        10-3-1977   31.05
-        11-7-1977   TSO Table II
-        12-4-1978   TSO Table VI
-        12-17-1979  TSO Table V
-        2-18-1980   33.025
-        3-3-1980    TSO Table VI
-        5-19-1980   33.027
-        12-15-1980  TSO Table V
-        10-19-1981  111.02
-        12-7-1981   TSO Table III
-        3-1-1982    Ch. 75 Schd. II
-        5-17-1982   TSO Table V
-        6-1-1982    TSO Table V
-        7-19-1982   TSO Table III
-        9-7-1982    TSO Table V
-        3-7-1983    TSO Table V
-        10-15-1984  33.006
-        6-3-1985    TSO Table III
-        5-5-1986    34.03
-        7-5-1988    TSO Table III
-        8- -1988    150.15 -
                     150.22
-        3-6-1989    TSO Table V
-        3-4-1991    TSO Table V
-        3-6-1992    TSO Table III
-        9-6-1994    TSO Table III
-        12-5-1994   TSO Table V
-        1-3-1995    TSO Table III
-        2-14-1995   TSO Table III
95-11    8-7-1995    TSO Table II
96-03    1-15-1996   TSO Table V
96-07    4-15-1996   31.01
96-08    5-20-1996   34.02
96-11    5-20-1996   TSO Table III
97-07    3-17-1997   10.17
97-16    9-15-1997   TSO Table VI
97-17    9-15-1997   TSO Table III
98-16    7-20-1998   TSO Table VI
00-01    1-11-2000   TSO Table III
00-07    4-17-2000   TSO Table V
00-08    4-17-2000   TSO Table V
00-14    9-18-2000   TSO Table III
00-15    10-2-2000   TSO Table V
00-17    12-18-2000  TSO Table VI
01-12    12-17-2001  TSO Table V
02-06    10-21-2002  TSO Table VI
03-03    4-21-2003   TSO Table VI
03-04    4-21-2003   TSO Table VI
03-06    5-5-2003    33.024
03-07    6-2-2003    TSO Table III
03-10    9-15-2003   TSO Table II
03-13    11-3-2003   TSO Table III
04-05    7-5-2004    TSO Table VI
-        7-18-2005   TSO Table III
06-06    4-3-2006    TSO Table V
06-08    5-1-2006    TSO Table III
07-04    2-19-2007   TSO Table III
07-05    5-7-2007    TSO Table V
09-05    4-6-2009    TSO Table III
09-06    5-4-2009    TSO Table III
09-07    5-18-2009   TSO Table V
09-15    11-2-2009   TSO Table III
                     51.07,
10-02    1-18-2010   51.09,
                     51.10,
                     51.19
10-08    6-7-2010    TSO Table V
10-09    9-24-2010   TSO Table III
11-02    2-21-2011   TSO Table III
11-04    6-6-2011    TSO Table III
12-05    5-7-2012    33.023
12-07    8-20-2012   33.002
12-09    9-4-2012    TSO Table V
13-01    3-18-2013   TSO Table III
13-02    3-18-2013   30.04
13-03    3-18-2013   30.03
13-04    3-18-2013   32.23
13-09    8-19-2013   TSO Table V
13-15    11-4-2013   33.021
13-16    11-18-2013  TSO Table V
14-01    2-3-2014    TSO Table V
14-04    4-7-2014    TSO Table III
14-03(S) 4-21-2014   TSO Table III
14-08    8-4-2014    TSO Table III
14-18    12-15-2014  TSO Table III
15-05    8-3-2015    155.13
16-07    6-20-2016   33.065 - 33.076
16-08    8-15-2016   33.020
16-11    10-3-2016   33.001
16-12    10-3-2016   90.01
16-13    10-3-2016   33.022
16-14    10-3-2016   33.029
16-15    10-3-2016   33.029
16-16    10-3-2016   33.021
17-01    2-6-2017    TSO Table V
17-02    2-6-2017    TSO Table V
17-03    2-6-2017    TSO Table V
17-04    2-6-2017    52.195
17-05    4-3-2017    TSO Table V
17-06    4-17-2017   TSO Table III
17-07    5-1-2017    TSO Table V
17-10    7-17-2017   52.195
17-12    10-2-2017   33.001
17-14    10-2-2017   TSO Table V
17-15    10-2-2017   TSO Table V
17-16    10-2-2017   33.029
17-17    10-2-2017   TSO Table V
17-20    10-16-2017  90.01
17-21    10-16-2017  33.006
17-22    11-6-2017   TSO Table III
18-01    1-2-2018    33.006
18-05    1-15-2018   33.009
18-06    3-5-2018    155.01 -
                     155.13
18-07    3-5-2018    TSO Table V
18-08    4-16-2018   TSO Table V
19-01    1-7-2019    TSO Table V
19-02    1-7-2019    TSO Table V
19-03    2-18-2019   TSO Table VI
19-04    3-18-2019   TSO Table V
19-06    6-17-2019   TSO Table IV
19-09    6-17-2019   TSO Table V
19-10    6-17-2019   TSO Table III
19-13    10-7-2019   TSO Table V
19-14    10-21-2019  TSO Table V
19-15    10-21-2019  TSO Table V
19-16    10-21-2019  TSO Table V
19-17    10-21-2019  TSO Table V
19-18    10-21-2019  TSO Table V
19-19    10-21-2019  TSO Table V
19-20    10-21-2019  90.01
19-21    10-21-2019  TSO Table V
19-23    11-4-2019   TSO Table V
19-24    11-18-2019  TSO Table VI
20-01    - -         TSO Table V
20-02    1-20-2020   TSO Table VI
20-04    5-18-2020   TSO Table V
20-05    5-18-2020   TSO Table VI
20-06    6-15-2020   TSO Table V
20-08    8-17-2020   TSO Table III
20-10    8-17-2020   90.01
20-11    8-17-2020   TSO Table V
20-15    10-5-2020   33.001
20-16    10-5-2020   33.022
20-17    10-5-2020   TSO Table V
20-18    10-5-2020   TSO Table V
20-23    11-2-2020   30.05
20-24    11-2-2020   155.01 -
                     155.13
20-27    12-7-2020   33.065 -
                     33.075
21-05    4-8-2021    TSO Table V
21-06    5-27-2021   TSO Table III
21-18    11-15-2021  TSO Table V
21-19    12-9-2021   155.01 -
                     155.13
21-20    12-20-2021  33.010
22-09    3-21-2022   TSO Table V
22-18    9-19-2022   90.01
22-19    9-19-2022   33.006
22-21    9-19-2022   33.001
22-22    9-19-2022   33.022
22-23    9-19-2022   33.029
22-24    9-19-2022   33.029
22-25    9-19-2022   TSO Table V
22-27    10-17-2022  31.07
22-28    11-21-2022  32.29
22-31    12-19-2022  52.195
23-07    5-15-2023   TSO Table V
23-08    6-19-2023   TSO Table III
23-09    9-18-2023   TSO Table V
23-11    9-18-2023   TSO Table V
23-12    9-18-2023   TSO Table V
23-18    11-20-2023  TSO Table VI
24-06    1-15-2024   TSO Table III
24-07    2-19-2024   30.30
24-08    2-19-2024   TSO Table VI
24-09    2-19-2024   TSO Table VI
24-11    3-18-2024   33.011
24-13    4-15-2024   33.012
24-17    5-20-2024   TSO Table VI
24-18    5-20-2024   TSO Table VI
24-19    5-20-2024   TSO Table VI
24-20    6-17-2024   TSO Table V
24-23    7-15-2024   TSO Table III
24-24    7-15-2024   TSO Table III
24-27    9-16-2024   TSO Table III
24-32    10-21-2024  90.01
24-33    10-21-2024  33.006
24-34    10-21-2024  TSO Table V
                     155.01 -
24-42    12-16-2024  155.11,
                     155.13,
                     155.14
                    
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No.   Date Passed Code Section
134        1-21-1901   150.04,
                       150.99
                       95.01,
748        8-18-1947   95.02,
                       95.99
                       70.03 -
                       70.05,
                       71.04 -
                       71.07,
929        2-2-1959    73.01 -
                       73.13,
                       73.99,
                       Ch. 74 Schd. I,
                       Ch. 75 Schd. II
951        9-6-1960    TSO Table I
952        10-3-1960   70.01
960        12-30-1960  TSO Table I
965        3-20-1961   130.01
968        4-24-1961   31.04
964        6-5-1961    TSO Table I
973        8-7-1961    150.02
974        8-21-1961   150.03,
                       150.99
                       115.15 -
981        2-5-1962    115.19,
                       115.99
                       113.25 -
985        7-2-1962    113.27,
                       113.99
1000       4-15-1963   73.12
                       91.15 -
1002       7-1-1963    91.19,
                       91.99
1014       6-5-1964    TSO Table II
                       150.35 -
1019       9-14-1964   150.42,
                       150.99
1023       12-7-1964   33.008,
                       33.999
                       73.11,
1033       2-1-1965    73.13,
                       73.99
1038       6-21-1965   TSO Table II
1040       6-21-1965   91.99
1044       8-4-1965    TSO Table II
1056       12-30-1965  32.27
1057       4-18-1966   TSO Table I
1058       4-18-1966   TSO Table I
                       150.55 -
                       150.58,
1060       5-16-1966   150.60,
                       150.62 -
                       150.67,
                       150.99
1062       8-8-1966    TSO Table I
1063       8-8-1966    TSO Table I
                       150.55,
                       150.57,
1066       9-19-1966   150.58,
                       150.65,
                       150.66
1080       2-20-1967   32.03
1081       3-6-1967    32.02
1088       11-13-1967  32.22
1097       2-19-1968   150.60,
                       150.62
1099       4-1-1968    31.03
1100       4-1-1968    30.02
1101       4-1-1968    30.02
1102       4-1-1968    30.02
1103       4-1-1968    30.02
1105       5-6-1968    TSO Table II
1106       5-20-1968   35.04
1118       6-2-1969    TSO Table I
1119       6-2-1969    TSO Table I
1121       6-2-1969    TSO Table I
                       93.40 -
1142       7-20-1970   93.43,
                       93.99
1259       4- -1980    TSO Table I
1143       9-8-1981    TSO Table I
                       30.15 -
                       30.19,
1144       10-19-1970  30.21,
                       30.23 -
                       30.28
                       71.01 -
1150       2-1-1971    71.03,
                       71.99
1152       6-7-1971    TSO Table I
1153       6-7-1971    TSO Table I
1157       7-10-1971   TSO Table II
1154       8-2-1971    TSO Table I
1164       4-17-1972   TSO Table I
1165       4-17-1972   35.04
1169       8-21-1972   TSO Table I
1170       8-21-1972   TSO Table I
1178       1-29-1973   TSO Table III
                       51.01,
                       51.02,
1179       2-5-1973    51.05 -
                       51.18,
                       51.99
1186       9-17-1973   TSO Table I
1191       1-14-1974   30.02
1193       4-1-1974    TSO Table I
1197       7-1-1974    TSO Table I
1198       - -         TSO Table I
1199       - -         TSO Table I
1203       10-7-1974   TSO Table I
1204       10-7-1974   TSO Table I
1211       7-21-1975   TSO Table I
1217       5-17-1976   93.01,
                       93.99
1220       11-15-1976  73.99
                       50.20 -
                       50.25,
1224       2-7-1977    50.27,
                       50.28,
                       50.99
                       52.165 -
                       52.168,
                       52.170 -
                       52.173,
1225       3-21-1977   52.176,
                       52.177,
                       52.179 -
                       52.184,
                       52.999
                       114.01 -
1238       4-17-1978   114.03,
                       114.99
1240       6-19-1978   30.18,
                       30.29
1242       8-7-1978    Ch. 74 Schd. III
1249       9-17-1979   TSO Table IV
                       115.01 -
1250       11-5-1979   115.04,
                       115.99
1251       12-3-1979   32.01
                       51.07,
1256       5-5-1980    51.09 -
                       51.11
1255       5-19-1980   TSO Table I
1257       5-19-1980   TSO Table II
1259       4- -1980    TSO Table I
1261       8-18-1980   150.35
1265       11-3-1980   TSO Table I
1266       11-3-1980   TSO Table I
1271       2-2-1981    112.01,
                       112.02
1272       5-4-1981    TSO Table I
                       150.55,
                       150.57,
                       150.59 -
1273       5-4-1981    150.61,
                       150.63,
                       150.65,
                       150.66
1274       7-20-1981   32.26
1143       9-8-1981    TSO Table I
                       111.01 -
1278       10-19-1981  111.08,
                       111.99
1283       3-1-1982    51.05
                       154.001,
                       154.008,
                       154.020 -
                       154.025,
                       154.040 -
                       154.043,
                       154.055,
                       154.056,
                       154.070,
                       154.080 -
                       154.082,
1286       6-7-1982    154.095 -
                       154.103,
                       154.115,
                       154.116,
                       154.130 -
                       154.142,
                       154.155 -
                       154.159,
                       154.170 -
                       154.174,
                       154.999,
                       Ch. 154 App. A,
                       Ch. 154 App. B
1287       8-2-1982    70.02
1289       10-18-1982  TSO Table I
1290       10-4-1982   73.99
1293       12-20-1982  TSO Table IV
1294       8-15-1983   150.01,
                       150.99
1308       7-1-1985    TSO Table I
1309       7-1-1985    TSO Table III
1315       7- -1986    50.21
1322       9-8-1987    32.28
1341       2- -1990    52.174,
                       52.175
1346       2-18-1991   73.99
                       156.001 -
                       156.005,
                       156.021 -
                       156.023,
                       156.035,
                       156.037 -
                       156.044,
                       156.055 -
                       156.063,
1347       3-18-1991   156.075 -
                       156.078,
                       156.090 -
                       156.116,
                       156.130 -
                       156.137,
                       156.150 -
                       156.153,
                       156.165 -
                       156.169,
                       156.999
1348       5-20-1991   51.04
                       50.01 -
1349       6-17-1991   50.05,
                       50.99
1357       6-9-1992    TSO Table V
1359       8-3-1992    TSO Table I
1361       8-3-1992    150.04,
                       150.99
1363       11-16-1992  TSO Table IV
1371A      9-7-1993    33.003
1375       12-20-1993  95.02,
                       95.99
1378       3-23-1994   TSO Table V
1379       10-17-1994  33.005
1383       12-19-1994  33.005
1385       2-22-1995   TSO Table III
1387       5-12-1995   TSO Table VI
97-06      3-3-1997    Ch. 74 Schd. III
                       92.20 -
1408       7-20-1998   92.23,
                       92.99
1409       12-7-1998   TSO Table V
1426-1-01  8-6-2001    TSO Table V
1427       11-19-2001  35.03
1431       3-4-2002    73.99
1432       6-17-2002   TSO Table I
                       52.001 -
                       52.004,
                       52.015 -
                       52.022,
                       52.035 -
                       52.045,
                       52.060 -
                       52.073,
1433       7-1-2002    52.085 -
                       52.097,
                       52.110 -
                       52.117,
                       52.130 -
                       52.134,
                       52.145 -
                       52.149,
                       52.999
                       91.01 -
1437       10-21-2002  91.04,
                       91.99
1442-03-02 4-21-2003   TSO Table V
1445-03-05 12-1-2003   TSO Table V
1449       6-7-2004    TSO Table IV
1450       6-21-2004   151.15 -
                       151.35
                       93.15 -
1451       10-18-2004  93.26,
                       93.99
1461       7-18-2005   156.036
                       72.01 -
1463       10-3-2005   72.04,
                       72.99,
                       Ch. 74 Schd. I
                       131.01 -
1470       2-6-2006    131.04,
                       131.99
1478       4-16-2007   TSO Table III
1479       8-6-2007    TSO Table V
                       32.21,
1480       12-3-2007   113.01 -
                       113.12,
                       113.99
1494       4-6-2009    TSO Table VI
1495       4-6-2009    51.06
1496       4-6-2009    52.178
1497       5-4-2009    34.01
                       152.001 -
                       152.009,
                       152.020 -
                       152.024,
                       152.035,
                       152.050,
                       152.051,
                       152.065 -
                       152.072,
                       152.085,
                       152.100 -
1508       12-20-2010  152.102,
                       152.115,
                       152.116,
                       152.130 -
                       152.134,
                       152.145 -
                       152.147,
                       152.160 -
                       152.162,
                       152.999,
                       Ch. 152 App A -
                       F
-          3-14-2011   TSO Table II
1517       5-7-2012    156.020,
                       156.064
                       92.01,
1518       8-20-2012   92.03 -
                       92.08,
                       92.99
1520       9-4-2012    31.06
1521       10-15-2012  30.01
1526       1-21-2013   TSO Table I
1528       8-19-2013   TSO Table I
                       153.001 -
                       153.005,
                       153.020 -
                       153.029,
                       153.040 -
                       153.044,
                       153.055 -
1534       3-3-2014    153.061,
                       153.075 -
                       153.078,
                       153.090,
                       153.091,
                       153.105,
                       153.106,
                       153.999
1535       9-15-2014   35.01
1544       5-18-2015   35.01
1547       8-3-2015    Ch. 75 Schd. I
1548       9-21-2015   Ch. 75 Schd. I
1550       10-5-2015   Ch. 75 Schd. I
1553       11-2-2015   Ch. 75 Schd. I
1558       12-21-2015  50.26
                       52.016,
1562       5-2-2016    52.150,
                       52.999
1564       12-19-2016  32.20
1565       12-19-2016  51.03,
                       51.13
1566       12-19-2016  52.169
                       110.01 -
1568       12-19-2016  110.12,
                       110.99
1571       8-21-2017   73.99
1574       12-18-2017  51.03,
                       51.04
1577       12-18-2017  32.20
                       92.35 -
1580       6-4-2018    92.44,
                       92.99
                       92.01 -
1581       7-2-2018    92.08,
                       92.99
                       94.01,
1582       9-4-2018    94.02,
                       94.99
1583       12-3-2018   Ch. 75, Schd. III
1585       12-17-2018  32.20
1587       12-17-2018  51.03,
                       51.13
1588       12-17-2018  52.132,
                       52.169
1589       12-17-2018  50.26
1590       1-21-2019   Adopting Ordinance
1591       3-18-2019   35.20 -
                       35.29
1592       3-18-2019   Adopting Ordinance
1593       5-6-2019    93.55 -
                       93.64
1594       10-21-2019  TSO Table III
1595       10-21-2019  TSO Table III
1596       11-18-2019  151.01
1598       12-16-2019  32.20
1599       12-2-2019   51.03,
                       51.13
1600       12-2-2019   52.132,
                       52.169
1602       12-16-2019  TSO Table III
1603       2-3-2020    50.26
1606       12-7-2020   51.03,
                       51.13
1607       12-7-2020   52.132,
                       52.169
1608       12-7-2020   50.26
1613       12-20-2021  51.03,
                       51.13
1614       12-20-2021  52.132,
                       52.169
1615       12-20-2021  50.26
1617       2-1-2022    30.19
1621       2-21-2022   32.28
                       32.20,
                       51.01,
1626       12-19-2022  51.02,
                       51.05 -
                       51.18,
                       51.99
1627       12-19-2022  51.03,
                       51.13
1628       12-19-2022  52.132,
                       52.169
1630       12-19-2022  93.02
                       50.03,
                       50.24 -
1631       12-19-2022  50.27,
                       50.97,
                       50.98
1632       1-16-2023   TSO Table III
                       93.15 -
1633       3-20-2023   93.26,
                       93.99
1634       3-20-2023   93.55 -
                       93.64
1635       3-20-2023   50.26
                       30.15 -
                       30.19,
1638       7-17-2023   30.21,
                       30.23 -
                       30.29
1641       12-18-2023  35.20 -
                       35.29
1647       12-18-2023  51.03,
                       51.13
1648       12-18-2023  52.169,
                       52.179
1649       12-18-2023  50.26
1655       12-16-2024  51.03,
                       51.13
1656       12-16-2024  52.132,
                       52.169
1657       12-16-2024  50.26
1661       12-16-2024  TSO Table III
1663       3-17-2025   30.15 -
                       30.29
1664       3-17-2025   TSO Table I
                      
 
 
 
Comprehensive Ordinance List
Publisher's Note: The following table lists all ordinances passed by the City
of Corry beginning after the recodification was completed in August 2018. The
table includes links to the ordinances (as maintained in PDF format) and to the
code sections affected (where applicable). For other legislation, including
ordinances passed prior to September 2018, please contact the City of Corry.
 
Ordinances that amend the Municipal Code and are not yet effective have their
identifiying information highlighted in yellow. Changes made by those
ordinances are not incorporated into the text of the Code until the amending
ordinances are effective. Ordinances that do not affect the code have been
grayed out and are not available in a PDF format for viewing.
 
Jump to:
2018 Ordinances
2019 Ordinances
2020 Ordinances
2021 Ordinances
2022 Ordinances
2023 Ordinances

2024 Ordinances
2025 Ordinances
2018 Ordinances
Ord. No. Adopted Date Short Title and Code Sections Affected
Ord. No. Adopted Date Short Title and Code Sections Affected
1583     12/3/18      Addressing parking on city streets and municipal parking
                      lots.
1584     12/17/18     2019 Appropriation Ordinance.
1585     12/17/18     2019 Tax Levy Ordinance.
1586     12/17/18     Salary Ordinance.
                      Amending the Water Rate and Regulation Ordinance.
1587     12/17/18      
                      Sections Affected:
                      Chapter 51
                      Amending the Sewer Rate Ordinance.
1588     12/17/18      
                      Sections Affected:
                      Chapter 52
                      Amending the Refuse Ordinance.
1589     12/17/18      
                      Sections Affected:
                      Chapter 50
 
 
2019 Ordinances
Ord. No. Adopted Date Short Title and Code Sections Affected
Ord. No. Adopted Date Short Title and Code Sections Affected
R-19-01  1/7/19       Resolution regarding Non-Uniform Pension Plan and
                      Investment Manager
R-19-02  1/7/19       Resolution regarding Corry Police Pension Plan and
                      Investment Manager
                      Adopting Code Book
1590     1/21/19       
                      Sections Affected:
                      ADO
                      Repealing ordinance No. 1576, adopting and reissuing
                      these and regulations for the governance of and
1591     3/18/19      instruction to the Corry Fire Department.
                       
                      Sections Affected:
                      35.20 - 35.29
                      Adopting the 2019 S-1 supplement.
1592     3/18/19       
                      Sections Affected:
                      ADO
R-19-04  3/18/19      Authorizing Budget Revisions for the 2015 Community
                      Development Block Grant Program.
                      Establishing a Quality of Life violation Ticket program
                      used in conjunction with the International Property
1593     5/6/19       Maintenance Code adopted by the City.
                       
                      Sections Affected:
                      93.55 - 93.64
                      Authorizing distribution of state aid pension funds to
R-19-13  10/7/19      the police, fireman, and non-uniform employee pension
                      plans for 2019
                      Authorizing the incurrence of lease rental debt through
                      the issuance and sale of a guaranteed debt obligation not
1594     10/21/19     to exceed $6,589,000.00.
                       
                      Sections Affected:
                      TSO III
                      Authorizing the incurrence of lease rental debt through
                      the issuance and sale of a guaranteed revenue notes in a
1595     10/21/19     maximum principal amount not to exceed $900,000.00.
                       
                      Sections Affected:
                      TSO III
R-19-14  10/21/19     2019 Community Development Block Grant Program
                      Application
R-19-15  10/21/19     Adopting a policy protecting individuals engaged in non-
                      violent civil rights demonstration
R-19-16  10/21/19     Minority and Women's Business Enterprise Plan
R-19-17  10/21/19     Adopting a Program Income Reutilization Plan for the
                      Community Development Block Grant program
R-19-18  10/21/19     Adopting a Community Development Block Grant Program
                      Citizen Participation Plan
R-19-19  10/21/19     Adopting a Section 3 Plan to comply with 24 CFR, Part
                      135, Section 3 of the U.S. Dept. H.U.D. Act of 1968
R-19-20  10/21/19     Fair Housing Resolution
R-19-21  10/21/19     Appointing a Section 504 Officer and adopting Section 504
                      Grievance Procedures
                      Adopting the 2018 International Property Maintenance Code
1596     11/18/19      
                      Sections Affected:
                      151.01
R-19-24  11/18/19     Recognizing the Volunteer Fire Company as the official
                      volunteer fire company for the City
1597     12/16/19     2020 Appropriation Ordinance
                      2020 tax levy ordinance.
1598     12/16/19      
                      Sections Affected:
                      32.20
                      Amending the Water Rate and Regulation Ordinance by
                      providing a base charge for each water meter and
1599     12/2/19      modifying the rates charged for water service.
                       
                      Sections Affected:
                      51.03; 51.13
                      Amending the Sewer Rate Ordinance providing for a sewer
                      service rental or charge for operation, maintenance,
                      repair alteration, design, and inspection or other
1600     12/2/19      expenses connected with the sewer system.
                       
                      Sections Affected:
                      52.132; 52.169
1601     12/16/19     Fixing the salary and wages of City Officials, Officers,
                      and Employees for the year 2020.
                      Authorizing the incurrence of lease rental debt through
                      the issuance and sale of a guaranteed revenue note series
                      of 2020 in a maximum principal amount not to exceed
1602     12/16/19     $500,000.00.
                       
                      Sections Affected:
                      TSO III
 
 
2020 Ordinances
Ord. No. Adopted Date Short Title and Code Sections Affected
Ord. No. Adopted Date Short Title and Code Sections Affected
                      Amending Refuse Ordinance by increasing the charges for
                      residential and commercial refuse service
1603     2/3/20        
                      Sections Affected:
                      50.26
R-20-01  --           Schedule of Authorized Individuals for Corry Firemen's
                      Pension Agency Fund
R-20-02  1/20/20      Designating EmergyCare as ambulance provider to City
                      residents and visitors
R-20-03  4/20/20      Temporarily eliminating water turn off fees
R-20-04  5/18/20      Adopting a modification to the Community Development
                      Block Grant program
R-20-05  5/18/20      Authorizing extension of the face payement date for 2020
                      real estate taxes
                      Approving Taxing District Agreement
R-20-08  8/17/20       
                      Sections Affected:
                      TSO III
R-20-09  8/17/20      Applying for funding through Community Development Block
                      Grant-Coronavirus Program
R-20-10  8/17/20      Fair Housing Resolution
R-20-11  8/17/20      Appointing a section 504 officer and adopting 504
                      grievance procedures
R-20-14  10/5/20      Applying for 2020 Community Development Block Grant
R-20-15  10/5/20      Adopting policy protecting individuals engaged in non-
                      violent civil rights demonstrations
R-20-16  10/5/20      Adopting Minority and Women's Business Enterprise Plans
R-20-17  10/5/20      Adopting Income Reutilization Plan for the Community
                      Development Block Grant Program
                      Adopting Section 3 in compliance with 24 CFR, Part 135 of
R-20-18  10/5/20      the US Department of Housing and Urban Development Act of
                      1968
                      Authorizing distribution of state aid pension funds to
R-20-19  10/19/20     the Police, Fireman and Non-Uniform Employee Pension
                      Plans for 2020
R-20-20  11/2/20      Board of Director meeting regarding administration of
                      Police Pension Plan
R-20-21  11/2/20      Board of Director meeting regarding administration of
                      Non-Uniform Pension Plan
R-20-22  11/2/20      Schedule of authorized individuals between City, PNC Bank
                      and Fireman's Pension Agency Fund
                      City Treasurer Duties
R-20-23  11/2/20       
                      Sections Affected:
                      Chapter 30
                      Amending and Revising Schedule of Fees
R-20-24  11/2/20       
                      Sections Affected:
                      Chapter 155
R-20-25  11/12/20     Approving Erie County CARES Municipale Reimbursement
                      Program
R-20-26  11/16/20     Fire Response Fee Schedule
                      Cash Handling Policy
R-20-27  12/7/20       
                      Sections Affected:
                      Chapter 33
1604     12/21/20     2021 Appropriation
1605     12/21/20     2021 Tax Levy
                      Water rates
1606     12/7/20       
                      Sections Affected:
                      51.03; 155.13
                      Sewer rates
1607     12/7/20       
                      Sections Affected:
                      52.131
                      Residential and commercial refuse services
1608     12/7/20       
                      Sections Affected:
                      50.26
1609     12/7/20      Salaries for City Officials, Officers and Employees
 
 
2021 Ordinances
Ord. No. Adopted Date Short Title and Code Sections Affected
Ord. No. Adopted Date Short Title and Code Sections Affected
R-21-01  1/4/21       Approving appointment of delegates to the Erie County Tax
                      Collection Committee
R-21-02  1/18/21      Waiving penalty on city real estate taxes due in 2021
R-21-03  3/15/21      Paper Street - Corry Junction Greenway Trail Extension
R-21-04  4/8/2021     Strategic Management Planning Program project
R-21-05  4/8/2021     Adopting Active Transportation Plan
R-21-06  5/27/2021    Improve & Link Our Green Spaces
R-21-18  11/15/2021   Budget revisions for 2020 CDBG-CV Program
R-21-19  12/9/2021    Amending schedule of fees
R-21-20  12/20/2021   Enacting smoke free properties and events
1611     12/20/2021   2022 Appropriations
1612     12/20/2021   2022 Tax Levy
                      Amending water rates and regulations
1613     12/20/2021    
                      Sections Affected:
                      51.03, 51.13
                      Amending sewer rates
1614     12/20/2021    
                      Sections Affected:
                      52.132, 52.169
                      Amending refuse regulations
1615     12/20/2021    
                      Sections Affected:
                      50.26
1616     12/20/2021   Amending annual salaries
                      Amending payment of pension benefits
1617     12/20/2021    
                      Sections Affected:
                      30.20
1618     12/20/2021   Amending firefighter pension benefit payments
1619     12/20/2021   Amending police pension benefit payments
 
 
2022 Ordinances
 
Ord. No. Adopted Date Short Title and Code Sections Affected
Ord. No. Adopted Date Short Title and Code Sections Affected
R-22-01  1/4/2022     Approving appointment of delegates to Erie County Tax
                      Collection Committee
R-22-02  2/10/2022    Authorized employees for Northwest Savings Bank and
                      administration of Corry Police Pension Plan
R-22-03  2/10/2022    Authorized employees for Northwest Savings Bank and
                      administration of Corry Non-Uniform Pension Plan
R-22-04  2/10/2022    Authorized employees for Northwest Savings Bank and
                      administration of Corry Firemen's Pension Agency Fund
R-22-05  2/10/2022    Creating Airport Authority
R-22-06  2/21/2022    Application for County Aid
R-22-07  2/21/2022    Creating golf commission
                      Local Economic Revitalization Tax Assistance (LERTA)
1621     2/21/2022     
                      Sections Affected:
                      32.28
R-22-09  3/21/2022    Authorizing budget modification for 2020 CDBG-CV program
1622     5-16-2022    City officials, officers and employees salary ordinance
1623     5-19-2022    Organzing an Airport Authority
R-22-13  5-16-2022    City Police Pension Plan individual authorization list
R-22-14  5-19-2022    City Non-Uniform Pension Plan individual authorization
                      list
R-22-15  5-19-2022    City Firemen's Pension Agency Plan individual
                      authorization list
R-22-16  6-9-2022     Redevelopment Assistance Capital Project - Corry Fire
                      Station to use 26 East Washington Street
                      Appointing Benjamin Kafferlin to Airport Authority to
R-22-17  7-18-2022    serve unexpired term of Brody Howard, expiring December
                      21, 2025
                      Authorizing distribution of state and pension funds to
R-22-26  10-17-2022   the Police, Fireman and Non-Uniform Employee Pension
                      Plans for 2022
R-22-27  10-17-2022   Creating Corry Golf Commission
1624     10-21-2022   Amending police pension benefit payments
R-22-28  11-21-2022   Implementing Act 57 of 2022.
R-22-29  11-21-2022   Requesting a PA Small Water and Sewer Program Grant.
                      Setting rates for dumping and disposal of septic waste.
R-22-31  12/19/2022    
                      Sections Affected:
                      52.195
1625     12/19/2022   2023 Appropriation ordinance.
1626     12/19/2022   2023 Tax Levy ordinance.
                      Setting the 2023 water rate.
1627     12/19/2022    
                      Sections Affected:
                      51.03, 51.13
                      Setting the 2023 sewer rate.
1628     12/19/2022    
                      Sections Affected:
                      52.132, 52.169
1629     12/19/2022   2023 salary ordinance.
                      Repealing and replacing Ord. 1032 regarding snow and ice
                      removal.
1630     12/19/2022    
                      Sections Affected:
                      93.02
                      Amending Ch. 50, Refuse.
1631     12/19/2022    
                      Sections Affected:
                      50.26
 
 
2023 Ordinances
Ord. No. Adopted Date Short Title and Code Sections Affected
Ord. Adopted Short Title and Code Sections Affected
No.  Date
R-   1/3/    Approving the appointment of delegates to represent the City of Corry on the
23-  2023    Erie County Tax Collection Committee.
01
R-   1/16/
23-  2023    Resolution to become a member in the Erie Area Council of Governments.
02
R-   1/16/
23-  2023    Reclassifying monies owed to the City by the Airport Authority.
03
1632 1/16/   Authorizing the incurrence of lease rental debt through the issuance and sale
     2023    of a guaranteed revenue note series.
R-   2/20/
23-  2023    Application for County Aid
04
             Amending Ord. 1451: Trees
1633 3/20/    
     2023    Sections Affected:
             93.15 - 93.27, 93.99
             Amending Ord. 1593: Property Maintenance
1634 3/20/    
     2023    Sections Affected:
             93.55 - 93.64
             Amending Ord. 1224: Collection and disposal of refuse
1635 3/20/    
     2023    Sections Affected:
             50.20 - 50.25, 50.27, 50.28, 50.99
R-   4/17/   Authorizing the filing of the Enterprise Zone Application to the Pennsylvania
23-  2023    Department of Community and Economic Development.
05
R-   4/17/
23-  2023    Application for $500,000 loan from the Erie County Redevelopment Authority.
06
R-   5/15/
23-  2023    Erie County 2023 Hazard Vulnerability Assessment and Mitigation Plan Update.
07
1637 5/15/   Authorizing the incurrence of nonelectoral debt by the City through the
     2023    issuance and sale of a general obligation note.
             Repealing Ord. 1458 regarding per capita tax.
1636 6/19/    
     2023    Sections Affected:
             32.24
R-   6/19/   Authorizing entering into the update Intergovernmental Cooperation Agreement
23-  2023    2023 for the Conelway Regional Emergency Management Agency.
08
             Amending and restating Ords. 1144, 1181, 1240, and 1617 establishing an
     7/17/   employee pension fund.
1638 2023     
             Sections Affected:
             30.15 - 30.31
1639 9/18/   Amending and restating Ords. 770, 1122, 1320, 1331, 1335, 1356, 1369, 1370,
     2023    1391, 1435, 1459, and 1618 to bring the Fireman Pension into compliance.
R-   9/18/
23-  2023    Fair Housing resolution.
09
R-   9/18/
23-  2023    Appointing a §504 Officer and adopting §504 grievance procedures.
10
R-   9/18/   Authorizing the submission of an application to the Pennsylvania Department of
23-  2023    Community and Economic Development for funding through the CDBG program.
11
R-   9/18/   Adopting a Community Development Block Grand (CDBG) Program Citizen
23-  2023    Participation Plan.
12
R-   9/18/   Approving the filing of the petition pertaining to the Corry Lawrence Airport
23-  2023    with the Erie County Court of Common Pleas.
13
R-   10/16/
23-  2023    Resolution for plan revision for new land development.
14
R-   10/16/  Authorizing the distribution of state aid pension funds to the police, fireman,
23-  2023    and non-uniform employee pension plans for 2023.
15
R-   11/20/
23-  2023    Approving the annual budget of the Erie Area Council of Governments for 2024.
16
R-   11/20/  Acknowledging the financial statements and independent auditor’s report of the
23-  2023    Erie Area Council of Governments for 2022.
17
R-   11/20/  Authorizing the exoneration of taxes assessed against mobile homes deemed by
23-  2023    the Erie County Bureau of Assessment to have been removed or damaged to an
18           extend rendering them worthless.
             Repealing Ord. 1591, adopting and reissuing rules and regulations for the
     12/18/  governance of and instruction to the Corry Fire Department.
1641 2023     
             Sections Affected:
             Chapter 35
1642 12/18/  Restating Ord. 1624 to bring the police pension into compliance with
     2023    Pennsylvania Third Class City Code.
1643 12/18/  Signifying the City of Corry’s approval of the Airport Authority’s proposed
     2023    amendments to its articles of incorporation.
1644 12/18/  2024 appropriation ordinance.
     2023
1645 12/18/  2024 tax levy ordinance.
     2023
1646 12/18/  Fixing the salaries and wages of City officials, officers, and employees for
     2023    the year 2024.
             Amending Ord. 1179 regarding water rates and regulations.
1647 12/18/   
     2023    Sections Affected:
             51.03, 51.13
             Amending Ord. 1225 and 1433 regarding sewer rates.
1648 12/18/   
     2023    Sections Affected:
             52.132, 52.169
             Amending Ord. 1224 regarding refuse.
1649 12/18/   
     2023    Sections Affected:
             50.26
R-   12/18/  Authorizing the submission of an application for funding to the Commonwealth of
23-  2023    Pennsylvania for the redevelopment assistance capital program grant.
19
 
 
2024 Ordinances
 
Ord. No. Adopted Date Short Title and Code Sections Affected
Ord. Adopted Short Title and Code Sections Affected
No.  Date
R-   1/8/    Approving the appointment of delegates to represent the City on the Erie
24-  2024    County Tax Collection Committee.
01
R-   1/8/    Excerpts from the minutes of the Board of Directors meeting regarding the
24-  2024    Fireman’s Pension Plan.
02
R-   1/8/    Excerpts from the minutes of the Board of Directors meeting regarding the
24-  2024    Police Pension Plan.
03
R-   1/8/    Excerpts from the minutes of the Board of Directors meeting regarding the
24-  2024    Non-Uniform Pension Plan.
04
R-   1/15/
24-  2024    Application for 2024 County Aid for street lighting.
05
R-   1/15/
24-  2024    Authorizing the Public Works Manager to sign an agility agreement.
06
R-   2/19/
24-  2024    Requiring employees to make any updates to their pension in person.
07
R-   2/19/   Authorizing the exoneration of outstanding property tax penalties, interest,
24-  2024    and fees for the tax year 2022 for 24 West Park Place, Corry, PA.
08
R-   2/19/   Authorizing the exoneration of outstanding property tax, penalties,
24-  2024    interest, and fees for the tax year 2023 for 64 Pleasant St., Corry, PA.
09
R-   3/18/   Approving the application for Erie County Municipal Infrastructure Gap
24-  2024    Funding Program.
10
R-   3/18/
24-  2024    Non-discrimination policy and procedures.
11
1650 3/18/   Ordinance to allow certain firemen the option to buyback military time.
     2024
1651 3/18/   Ordinance to allow certain police officers the option to buyback military
     2024    time.
R-   4/8/
24-  2024    Authorizing the sale of City personal property valued at more than $2,000.
12
R-   4/15/
24-  2024    Non-Discrimination Policy.
13
R-   5/20/   Authorizing City personnel to provide instructions regarding the City of
24-  2024    Corry Fireman’s Pension Plan.
15
R-   5/20/   Authorizing City personnel to provide instructions regarding the City of
24-  2024    Corry Non-Uniform Pension Plan.
16
R-   5/20/   Authorizing the exoneration of outstanding property tax, penalties,
24-  2024    interests, and fees for the tax year 2023 for 124 Lemon St.
17
R-   5/20/   Authorizing the exoneration of outstanding property tax, penalties,
24-  2024    interest, and fees for the tax year 2020 for 503 Euclid St.
18
R-   5/20/   Authorizing the exoneration of outstanding property tax penalties, interest,
24-  2024    and fees for the tax year 2022 and 2023 for 363 S. Center St.
19
R-   6/17/
24-  2024    Adopting a comprehensive Act 537 Sewage Facilities Plan update revision.
20
R-   6/17/
24-  2024    Authorizing the City Manager to apply for a STMP grant.
21
R-   6/17/   Allocating up to $225,000 of SLRF for use in completing the sewer GIS
24-  2024    mapping.
22
R-   7/15/   Establishing an intermunicipal agreement with the Corry Area School
24-  2024    District.
23
R-   7/15/   Rescinding Res. 21-06 and cancelling the Corry Junction Greenway Trail
24-  2024    Extension - Phase 1A.2.
24
1652 7/15/   Amending and restating Ord. 1639 regarding the Fireman Pension.
     2024
R-   8/19/
24-  2024    Authorizing Broadband Ready Communities Program application
25
R-   8/16/   Allocating up to $25,000 of State and Local Fiscal Recovery Funds for use in
24-  2024    completing the Corry Lawrence Airport Credit Card Upgrade and Fuel Tank
26           Conversion Project.
1653 8/19/   Repeal of Northwest Pennsylvania Tri-County Council of Governments Ordinance
     2024    No. 1414-99-2.
Res. 9/16/   Authorizing the modification of existing lease rental debt through the
24-  2024    issuance and sale of a guaranteed revenue note, Series of 2019, in the
27           principal amount of $900,000.
Res. 9/16/   Acknowledging the Financial Statements and Independent Auditor’s Report of
24-  2024    the Erie Area Council of Governments for the Calendar Year Ending December
28           31,2023.
Res. 9/16/
24-  2024    Supporting the development of an Erie County Comprehensive Housing Plan.
29
Res. 9/16/   Allocating up to $50,000 of State and Local Fiscal Recovery Funds for us
24-  2024    purchasing a police vehicle.
30
Res. 10/21/  Authorizing the distribution of state aid pension funds to the police,
24-  2024    fireman, and non-uniform employee pension plans for 2024.
31
Res. 10/21/
24-  2024    Fair housing resolution.
32
Res. 10/21/
24-  2024    Appointing a §504 Officer and adopting §504 grievance procedures.
33
Res. 10/21/  Authorizing the submission of an application for funding through the
24-  2024    community development block grant program.
34
Res. 10/21/  Requesting a Statewide Local Share Assessment grant of $328,440 to be used
24-  2024    for a truck, snow plow, and accessories.
35
Res. 11/18/
24-  2024    Approving the annual budged of the Erie Area Council of Governments.
36
Res. 11/18/  Requesting a Statewide Local Share Assessment grant to be used for upgrading
24-  2024    the current Community Center kitchen to a full commercial kitchen.
37
Res. 11/18/  Allocating up to $54,700.38 of SLFRF funds for window replacement at the
24-  2024    City Building.
38
Res. 11/18/  Allocating up to $23,375 of SLFRF for the City Building East South Steet
24-  2024    Sidewalk Project.
39
Res. 11/18/  Allocating up to $19,750 of SLFRF funds for the Fire Station East South
24-  2024    Street Concrete Apron Project.
40
Res. 12/16/  Authorizing and approving the execution and implementation of USEPA
24-  2024    Administrative Order on consent relating to the Corry public sewer system.
41
Res. 12/16/
24-  2024    Amending and revising the fee schedule.
42
Res. 12/16/  Allocating up to $254,025.54 of state and local recovery funds for the
24-  2024    personnel cos of the Fire Department employees.
44
             Water rate ordinance.
1655 12/16/   
     2024    Sections Affected:
             51.03
             Sewer rate ordinance.
1656 12/16/   
     2024    Sections Affected:
             52.132, 52.169
             Increasing the charges for residential and commercial refuse service.
1657 12/16/   
     2024    Sections Affected:
             50.26
1658 12/16/  Fixing the salaries and wages of City officials, officers, and employees for
     2024    the year 2025.
1659 12/16/  2025 tax levy ordinance.
     2024
1660 12/16/  2025 appropriation ordinance.
     2024
     12/16/  Authorizing the incurrence of lease rental debt through the issuance and
1661 2024    sale of a guaranteed debt obligation in a maximum principal amount not to
             exceed $2,000,000.
 
 
2025 Ordinances
 
Ord. No. Adopted Date Short Title and Code Section Affected
Ord. Adopted Short Title and Code Section Affected
No.  Date
Res.         Approving the appointment of delegates to represent the City on the Erie
25-  1/6/25  County Tax Collection Committee.
01
Res.         Application to the County for an allocation of County Liquid Fuels Tax
25-  1/6/25  Funds.
02
Res.
25-  3/17/25 Authorizing the application for the WalkWorks Grant.
03
Res.
25-  3/17/25 Authorizing the sale of City Personal Property.
04
             Amending and restating Ord. 1642 to bring the police pension into
1662 3/17/25 compliance with the Pennsylvania Third Class City Code and the Collective
             Bargaining Agreement between the Corry Police Force and the City of Corry.
             Amending and restating Ord. 1638 establishing an Employees Pension Fund.
1663 3/17/25  
             Sections Affected:
             30.15 - 30.31
1664 3/17/25 Vacating a portion of Second Ave.
Res.         Approving the annual road and street material and general materials bid
25-  4/21/25 for 2025.
05
Res.         Authorizing the termination of the sewer maintenance agreement with the
25-  4/21/25 Columbus Township General Authority effective June 30, 2025.
06
Res.
25-  4/21/25 Authorizing the sale of City property.
07
Res.         Authorizing and approving the execution and implementation of an agreement
25-  5/19/25 with the Corry Redevelopment Authority.
08
             Establishing a statutory maximum speed limit of 25MPH for motor vehicles
             traveling on certain roadways in the City.
1665 6/16/25  
             Sections Affected:
             Chapter 74
Res.         Authorizing the exoneration of outstanding property tax penalties,
25-  6/16/25 interest, and fees for tax year 2024 for 146 Mott St.
09
Res.         Authorizing the exoneration of outstanding property tax penalties,
25-  6/16/25 interest, and fees for tax year 2024 for 516 South 2nd Ave.
10
Res.         Authorizing the exoneration of outstanding property tax, penalties,
25-  6/16/25 interest, and fees for tax year 2024 for 10 West Park Pl.
11
Res.         Authorizing revisions for the City of Corry’s 2023 Community Development
25-  6/16/25 Block Grant Program.
12
Res.         Authorizing the City Administrator to sign the Winter Maintenance Services
25-  8/18/25 Agreement.
14
Res.
25-  8/18/25 Excerpts from the minutes of the Board of Directors meeting.
15
Res.
25-  8/18/25 Excerpts from the minutes of the Board of Directors meeting.
16
Res.
25-  8/18/25 Excerpts from the minutes of the Board of Directors meeting.
17
Res.         Authorizing the execution and implementation of an agreement with the
25-  8/18/25 Corry Redevelopment Authority and repealing Res. 25-08.
18
Res.
25-  9/15/25 Authorizing exoneration of taxes assessed against mobile homes.
19
Res.         Authorizing the City Administrator to sign the Drainage Facilities
25-  9/15/25 Maintenance Agreement.
20
Res.
25-  9/15/25 Granting a utility easement to the Corry Municipal Authority.
21
Res.         Authorizing the submission of an application for funding to the state for
25-  9/15/25 the RACP grant.
22
1666 9/15/25 Vacating a portion of Industrial Drive.
1667 10/20/  Repealing Ord. 1570 regarding fire and emergency services billing.
     25
Res. 10/20/  Authorizing distribution of state aid and pension funds to the police,
25-  25      firefighters, and non-uniform employee pension plans for 2025.
23
Res. 10/20/
25-  25      Fair housing resolution.
24
Res. 10/20/
25-  25      Appointing a § 504 officer and adopting § 504 grievance procedures.
25
Res. 10/20/  Authorizing the submission of an application to the State Department of
25-  25      Community and Economic Development for funding through the community
26           development block grant program.
Res. 10/20/
25-  25      Authorizing revisions for the city’s 2022 CDBG Program.
27
Res. 10/20/  Authorizing the forgiveness of any unpaid invoices issued by the city
25-  25      pursuant to Ord. 1570 regarding fire and emergency services billing.
28
1668 11/17/  Amending code regarding burning of leaves and disposal
     25
R-   11/17/
25-  25      Approving annual budget
29
R-   11/17/  Approving Financial Independent Auditor's Report for year ending December
25-  25      31, 2024
30
R-   11/17/
25-  25      Requesting Statewide Local Share Assessment
31
            
 
 
