BOROUGH OF DILLSBURG, PENNSYLVANIA
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2025 S-1 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ord. 2025-1, passed 9-9-2025
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
CHAPTER 1: ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT
      Part
         
1.   FISCAL AFFAIRS
         
2.   BOROUGH MANAGER
         
3.   RESERVED
         
4.   PLANNING COMMISSION
         
5.   FIRE INSURANCE ESCROW
         
6.   OPEN RECORDS POLICY
PART 1: FISCAL AFFAIRS
Section
   
1-101   Compensation of Mayor
   
1-102   Compensation of Borough Council
§ 1-101 COMPENSATION OF MAYOR.
   Compensation to be paid to the Mayor shall be set by Borough Council in the
amount of $l,200 per year, to be paid in quarterly installments at the end of
each quarter for performance of the duties imposed by the Borough Code. Any
Mayor who shall not serve in such capacity for a full calendar quarter shall be
paid on a pro-rated basis of one-third of the quarterly salary for each month
he or she has served in the capacity of Mayor.
(Ord. 2000-4, passed 8-8-2000, § 1; Ord. 2007-1, passed 1-9-2007)
§ 1-102 COMPENSATION OF BOROUGH COUNCIL.
   Compensation to be paid to members of the Borough Council shall be set by
Borough Council in the amount of $1,200 per year, to be paid in quarterly
installments for performance of the duties imposed by the Borough Code. Any
Council member who shall not serve in such capacity for a full calendar quarter
shall be paid on a pro-rated basis of one-third of the quarterly salary for
each month he or she has served in the capacity of Council member.
(Ord. 2000-4, passed 8-8-2000, § 2; Ord. 2007-1, passed 1-9-2007)
PART 2: BOROUGH MANAGER
Section
   
1-201   Creation of office of Borough Manager
   
1-202   Duties and responsibilities
   
1-203   General Purchasing Agent
   
1-204   Budget
   
1-205   Municipal records
   
1-206   Execution of contracts
   
1-207   Appointment of Borough Manager
   
1-208   Absence of Borough Manager
§ 1-201 CREATION OF OFFICE OF BOROUGH MANAGER.
   There is hereby created in the borough the office of the Borough Manager of
the Borough of Dillsburg.
(Ord. 1988-4, passed 11-15-1988, § 8001; Ord. 2003-2, passed 10-8-2003; Ord.
2005-1, passed 2-8-2005)
§ 1-202 DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES.
   The job description may be updated by Council and revised from time to time
as duties and responsibilities of the position change, as skills and abilities
of the Borough Manager change or as new duties and responsibilities of the
Borough Manager are identified. The job description shall be referred to and
maintained in the Employee Handbook.
(Ord. 1988-4, passed 11-15-1988, § 8002; Ord. 2003-2, passed 10-8-2003; Ord.
2005-1, passed 2-8-2005)
§ 1-203 GENERAL PURCHASING AGENT.
   The Borough Manager shall be the general purchasing agent for the borough,
and, except where specific provision to the contrary is made by law or by
Council, he or she shall make all purchases of supplies, materials and
equipment required to facilitate operation of the borough, including the water
system, and sewage system, subject to limitations imposed by law, provided that
he or she secure prior approval of Council for purchases of products or
materials at a cost in excess of $500.
(Ord. 1988-4, passed 11-15-1988, § 8003 Ord. 2003-2, passed 10-8-2003; Ord.
2005-1, passed 2-8-2005)
§ 1-204 BUDGET.
   The Borough Manager shall assist the Finance Committee in the preparation of
the budget for the ensuing year and in the preparation of the annual
appropriation ordinance. The Borough Manager shall also review the accounts of
the Borough Treasurer and report upon the fiscal condition, including current
and anticipated expenses, appropriations, cash on hand and anticipated revenues
from all funds and accounts, and provide a report at each Borough Council
meeting, as required by Council.
(Ord. 1988-4, passed 11-15-1988, § 8004 Ord. 2003-2, passed 10-8-2003; Ord.
2005-1, passed 2-8-2005)
§ 1-205 MUNICIPAL RECORDS.
   The Borough Manager shall maintain the custody and safeguarding of all
municipal records which are maintained as required by law, or by mandate of
Council.
(Ord. 1988-4, passed 11-15-1988, § 8005 Ord. 2003-2, passed 10-8-2003; Ord.
2005-1, passed 2-8-2005)
§ 1-206 EXECUTION OF CONTRACTS.
   The Borough Manager shall not be authorized to execute contracts obligating
the borough at any time unless execution of those contracts is authorized by
ordinance or resolution of the Borough Council.
(Ord. 1988-4, passed 11-15-1988, § 8009 Ord. 2003-2, passed 10-8-2003; Ord.
2005-1, passed 2-8-2005)
§ 1-207 APPOINTMENT OF BOROUGH MANAGER.
   The Borough Manager shall be appointed by resolution of Council.
(Ord. 1988-4, passed 11-15-1988, § 8010 Ord. 2003-2, passed 10-8-2003; Ord.
2005-1, passed 2-8-2005)
§ 1-208 ABSENCE OF BOROUGH MANAGER.
   If at any time the Borough Manager shall be absent from the borough, or
incapacitated and prevented from performing duties of the position, the
President of Council shall perform such duties until such time as a special
meeting of the Council can be held, at which time Council shall determine
whether another qualified person shall operate as Borough Manager during the
absence or incapacity.
(Ord. 1988-4, passed 11-15-1988, § 8011 Ord. 2003-2, passed 10-8-2003; by Ord.
2005-1, passed 2-8-2005)
PART 3: RESERVED
Editor’s note:
   Chapter 1, Part 3 previously contained provisions for the Borough Secretary
Treasurer. In Ordinance 2011-7, passed December 13, 2011, the Borough Council
created two distinct and separate positions, one for the Secretary and one for
the Treasurer, as allowed by state statute.
    Complete job descriptions of each position were created and are maintained
in the Employee Handbook.
PART 4: PLANNING COMMISSION
Section
   
1-401   Establishment of Planning Commission
   
1-402   Meetings
   
1-403   Duties of Planning Commission
   
1-404   Powers of Planning Commission
§ 1-401 ESTABLISHMENT OF PLANNING COMMISSION.
   (A)   There is hereby established for the borough a Planning Commission to
consist of five members to be appointed by Council. All members shall be
residents of the borough and at least three members shall not hold office or be
employees of the borough.
   (B)   Council shall appoint original members to the Planning Commission for
terms effective January 1, 1986, as follows:
      (1)   Two members shall be appointed for terms of two years;
      (2)   Two members shall be appointed for terms of three years; and
      (3)   One member shall be appointed for a term of four years.
   (C)   As each of the original terms shall expire, members shall be appointed
for terms of four years.
   (D)   Whenever a vacancy occurs on the Commission, the Chairperson of the
Planning Commission shall promptly notify Council who will then appoint another
member to fill the unexpired term of the vacant officer.
(Ord. 1985-5, passed 12-17-1985, § 1)
§ 1-402 MEETINGS.
   (A)   The Planning Commission shall meet monthly and hold such other
meetings as may be necessary to fulfill its duties and obligations imposed in
the following sections.
   (B)   The Commission shall conduct its business in accordance with § 207 of
the Municipalities Planning Code, being 53 P.S. §§ 10101 et seq.
   (C)   A quorum for any meeting shall be a majority of members appointed then
holding office, and action shall be taken on the vote of a majority of the
members present at the meeting.
(Ord. 1985-5, passed 12-17-1985, § 2)
§ 1-403 DUTIES OF PLANNING COMMISSION.
   The Planning Commission shall have the following duties:
   (A)   To develop and maintain the comprehensive plan for the development of
the borough in accordance with the requirements of §§ 301 through 306 of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as may be amended from time to time;
   (B)   The Planning Commission shall maintain and keep on file records of all
its actions;
   (C)   The Planning Commission shall, from time to time, as it deems
advisable, recommend amendments to the subdivision and land development
ordinance (
Chapter 22 of this code of ordinances) as well as the zoning ordinance (
Chapter 27 of this code of ordinances);
   (D)   The Planning Commission shall review all plans submitted for any
subdivision, land development or planned residential development and make
recommendations to Council for their approval or disapproval within an
appropriate time for Council to take action in accordance with the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code;
   (E)   At the request of Council, the Planning Commission shall review and
make recommendations for the following:
      (1)   Any recommendations concerning amendment of the official map;
      (2)   Recommendations for the development and adoption of a building and
housing code including recommendations for proposed amendments thereto if
adopted;
      (3)   Preparation and presentation to Council of an environmental study
with respect to actions contemplated by Council or developers; and
      (4)   Recommendations with respect to any governmental, civic and private
agencies and individuals as to effectiveness of the proposals of such agencies
and individuals.
(Ord. 1985-5, passed 12-17-1985, § 3)
§ 1-404 POWERS OF PLANNING COMMISSION.
   The Planning Commission shall have the following powers:
   (A)   To promote interest and understanding of the comprehensive plan and
planning;
   (B)   To hold public hearings and meetings in furtherance of its obligations
and responsibilities;
   (C)   Require from any department or agency of the borough or the Dillsburg
Area Authority to make available such information as may relate to the work of
the Planning Commission;
   (D)   Enter upon any land with the consent of the owner to make examinations
and surveys in the performance of its duties;
   (E)   Do such other act or make such other studies as may be necessary to
fulfill the duties and obligations of the Planning Commission in accordance
with this Part and other governmental regulations; and
   (F)   With approval of Council, to make expenditures for expert assistance
as may be required including, but not limited to, expertise in engineering,
legal advice, financial advice or such other expertise as may be required to
fulfill the functions of the Planning Commission.
(Ord. 1985-5, passed 12-17-1985, § 3)
PART 5: FIRE INSURANCE ESCROW
Section
   
1-501   Designated officer
   
1-502   Payment of claim
   
1-503   Insurance proceeds
   
1-504   Procedures and regulations
   
1-505   Penalty
§ 1-501 DESIGNATED OFFICER.
   The Manager of the borough or such official’s designee is hereby appointed
as the designated officer who is authorized to carry out all responsibilities
and duties stated herein.
(Ord. 1999-07, passed 9-14-1999, § 1)
§ 1-502 PAYMENT OF CLAIM.
   No insurance company, association or exchange (hereinafter the “insuring
agent”) doing business in the Commonwealth shall pay a claim of a named insured
for fire damage to a structure located within the borough (hereinafter the
“municipality”) where the amount recoverable for the fire loss to the structure
under all policies exceeds $7,500, unless the insuring agent is, upon request
of the insuring agent, furnished by the Borough Treasurer with a municipal
certificate pursuant to Act 98 of 1992, as amended, and unless there is
compliance with § 508(b), (c) and (d) of said Act, as amended, and the
provisions of this Part.
(Ord. 1999-07, passed 9-14-1999, § 2)
§ 1-503 INSURANCE PROCEEDS.
   Where, pursuant to § 508(b)(1)(I) and other provisions of Act 98 of 1992, as
amended, the Borough Treasurer issues a certificate indicating that there are
no delinquent taxes, assessments, penalties or user charges against real
property or costs incurred or estimated by the borough for the removal, repair
or securing of a building or other structure on the property, the insuring
agent shall pay the claim of the named insured, provided however, that if the
loss agreed upon by the named insured and the insuring agent equals or exceeds
60% of the aggregate limits of liability on all fire policies covering the
building restructure, the following procedures must be followed.
   (A)   The insuring agent shall transfer from the insurance proceeds to the
designated officer of the borough in the aggregate of $2,000 for each $15,000
of a claim and for each fraction of that amount of a claim, this section to be
applied such that if the claim is $15,000 or less, the maximum amount
transferred to the borough shall be $2,000.
   (B)   If at the time of a proof of loss agreed to between the named insured
and the insuring agent, the named insured has submitted a contractor’s signed
estimate of the costs of removing, repairing or securing the building or other
structure in an amount less than the amount calculated under the foregoing
transfer formula set forth in subsection (A) above, the insuring agent shall
transfer to the borough from the insurance proceeds the amount specified in the
estimate.
   (C)   The transfer of proceeds shall be on pro rata basis by all insuring
agents insuring the building or other structure.
   (D)   After the transfer, the named insured may submit a contractor’s signed
estimate of the costs of removing, repairing or securing the building or other
structure, and the designated officer shall return the amount of the funds
transferred to the borough in excess of the estimate and in excess of the
amount of delinquent taxes, assessments, penalties or user charges, to the
named insured, if the borough has not commenced to remove, repair or secure the
building or other structure.
   (E)   Upon receipt of proceeds under this section, the borough shall do the
following:
      (1)   The designated officer shall place the proceeds in a separate fund
to be used solely as security against the total costs of removing, repairing or
securing the building or structure which are incurred by the borough as well as
payment of the amount of delinquent taxes, assessments, penalties or user
charges. Such costs shall include, without limitation, any engineering, legal
or administrative costs incurred by the borough in connection with such
removal, repair or securing of the building or any proceedings related thereto;
      (2)   It is the obligation of the insuring agent when transferring the
proceeds to provide the borough with the name and address of the named insured.
Upon receipt of the transferred funds and the name and address of the named
insured, the designated officer shall contact the named insured, certify that
the proceeds have been received by the borough and notify the named insured
that the procedures under this subsection (E) shall be followed;
      (3)   When repairs, removal or securing of the building or other
structure have been corrected in accordance with all applicable regulations and
orders of the borough and the required proof of such completion received by the
designated officer, and if the borough has not incurred any costs for repairs,
removal or securing and if there are no outstanding delinquent taxes,
assessments, penalties or user charges, the fund shall be returned to the named
insured. If the borough has incurred costs for repairs, removal or securing of
the building or other structure, the costs shall be paid from the fund and if
excess funds remain after payment of outstanding delinquent taxes, assessments,
penalties or user charges, the borough shall transfer the remaining funds to
the named insured; and
      (4)   To the extent interest is earned on proceeds held by the borough
pursuant to this section, and not returned to the named insured, such interest
shall belong to the borough. To the extent that proceeds are returned to the
named insured, interest earned on such proceeds shall be distributed to the
named insured at the time that the proceeds are returned.
   (F)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the ability of the
borough to recover any deficiency. Furthermore, nothing in this section shall
be construed to prohibit the borough and the named insured from entering into
an agreement that permits the transfer of funds to the named insured of some
other reasonable disposition of the damaged property has been negotiated.
(Ord. 1999-07, passed 9-14-1999, § 3)
§ 1-504 PROCEDURES AND REGULATIONS.
   The Borough Council may, by resolution, adopt procedures and regulations to
implement Act 98 of 1992, as amended, and to fix reasonable fees to be charged
for municipal activities or services provided pursuant to Act 98 of 1992, as
amended, and by this Part; including but not limited to, issuance of
certificates and bills, performance of inspections and opening separate fund
accounts.
(Ord. 1999-07, passed 9-14-1999, § 4)
§ 1-505 PENALTY.
   Any owner of property, any named insured or any insurance agent, or any
person, firm, corporation or other entity, who shall violate any provision of
this part shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not
more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs
to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation of
this part continues or each section of this Part which shall be found to have
been violated shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 1999-07, passed 9-14-1999, § 5)
PART 6: OPEN RECORDS POLICY
Section
   
1-601   General rule
   
1-602   Request for access to public records
   
1-603   Borough’s response to requests for access
   
1-604   Redaction
   
1-605   Final borough determination
   
1-606   Judicial appeal
   
1-607   Fees
   
1-608   Borough contact
   
1-609   Regular business hours
   
1-610   Person designated to accept exceptions filed when a record is denied
   
1-611   Miscellaneous
§ 1-601 GENERAL RULE.
   (A)   Unless otherwise prohibited by law, the borough shall make all public
records, as defined by the Pennsylvania Open Records Law, accessible for
inspection and duplication by a requestor in accordance with 65 P.S. §§ 67.101
et seq.
   (B)   A public record shall be provided to a requestor in the medium
requested if the public record exists in that medium; otherwise, it shall be
provided in the medium in which it exists, except for the provision in §
1-611(B).
   (C)   Public records shall be available for access during the regular
business hours of the borough. Nothing in this Part shall provide for access to
a record which is not a public record.
§ 1-602 REQUEST FOR ACCESS TO PUBLIC RECORDS.
   (A)   (1)   All requests for public records shall be in writing and shall be
set forth on the borough request form.
      (2)   The form shall include, among other things, the requestor’s contact
information, date received and specific records requested. Requests may be
submitted in person or by mail or fax.
   (B)   Requests must be specific enough for the borough to determine what
records are needed.
§ 1-603 BOROUGH’S RESPONSE TO REQUESTS FOR ACCESS.
   (A)   General rule. Upon receipt of a written request for access to a
record, the borough shall make a good faith effort to determine if the record
requested is a public record and to respond as promptly as possible under the
circumstances existing at the time of the request, but shall not exceed five
business days from the date the written request is received by the borough.
Except as set forth in subsection (B) below, if the borough fails to send the
response within five business days of receipt of the written request for
access, the written request for access shall be deemed denied.
   (B)   Exception.
      (1)   Upon receipt of a written request for access, if the borough
determines that one of the following applies:
         (a)   The request for access request requires redaction of a public
record;
         (b)   The request for access requires the retrieval of a record stored
in a remote location.
         (c)   A timely response to the request for access cannot be
accomplished due to bona fide and specific staffing limitations;
         (d)   A legal review is necessary to determine whether the record is a
public record subject to access under 65 P.S. §§ 67.101 et seq.;
         (e)   The requestor has not complied with the borough’s policy
regarding access to public records;
         (f)   The requestor refuses to pay applicable fee set forth in this
Part.
      (2)   Then the borough shall send written notice to the requestor within
five business days of the borough’s receipt of the request notifying the
requestor that the request for access is being reviewed, the reason for the
review and a reasonable date that a response is expected to be provided. If the
date that a response is expected to be provided is in excess of 30 days,
following the five business days allowed under subsection (A) above, the
request for access shall be deemed denied.
   (C)   Denial. If the borough’s response is a denial of a written request for
access, whether in whole or in part, a written response shall be issued and
include:
      (1)   A description of the record requested;
      (2)   The specific reasons for the denial, including a citation of
supporting legal authority. If the denial is the result of a determination that
the record requested is not a public record, the specific reasons for the
borough’s determination that the record is not a public record shall be
included;
      (3)   The typed or printed name, title, business address, business
telephone number and signature of the public official or public employee on
whose authority the denial is issued;
      (4)   Date of the response; and
      (5)   The procedure to appeal the denial of access under 65 P.S. §§ 66.1
et seq.
§ 1-604 REDACTION.
   If the borough determines that a public record contains information which is
subject to access, as well as information which is not subject to access, the
borough’s response shall grant access to the information which is subject to
access and deny access to the information which is not subject to access. If
the information which is not subject to access is an integral part of the
public record and cannot be separated, the borough shall redact from the public
record the information which is not subject to access and the response shall
grant access to the information which is subject to access. The borough may not
deny access to the public record if the information which is not subject to
public access is able to be redacted. Information which the borough redacts in
accordance with this section shall be deemed a denial under §
1-603(C) of this Part.
§ 1-605 FINAL BOROUGH DETERMINATION.
   (A)   Filing of exceptions. If a written request for access is denied or
deemed denied, the requestor may file exceptions with the Borough Manager/
Secretary of the borough within 15 business days of the mailing date of the
borough’s response or within 15 days of a deemed denial. The exceptions shall
state grounds upon which the requestor asserts that the record is a public
record and shall address any grounds stated by the borough for delaying or
denying the request.
   (B)   Determination. Unless the requestor agrees otherwise, the Borough
Manager/Secretary or his or her designee shall make a final determination
regarding the exceptions within 30 days of the mailing date of the exceptions.
Prior to issuing the final determination regarding the exceptions, the Borough
Manager/Secretary or his or her designee may conduct a hearing. The
determination shall be the final order of the borough. If the Borough Manager/
Secretary or his or her designee determines that the borough correctly denied
the request for access, the Manager/Secretary or his or her designee shall
provide a written explanation to the requestor of the reason for the denial.
§ 1-606 JUDICIAL APPEAL.
   (A)   Filing a petition. Within 30 days of the denial by the borough
pursuant to §
1-603(C) of this Part, or of the mailing date of a final determination of the
borough affirming the denial of access, a requestor may file a petition for
review or other document as might be required by Rule of Court with the Court
of Common Pleas of York County or bring an action in the local magisterial
district. A requestor is entitled to a reasoned decision containing findings of
fact and conclusions of law based upon the evidence as a whole which clearly
and concisely states and explains the rationale for the decisions so that all
can determine why and how a particular result was reached.
   (B)   Notice. The borough shall be served notice of actions commenced in
accordance with subsection (A) above and shall have an opportunity to respond
in accordance with applicable court rules.
§ 1-607 FEES.
   (A)   Fees generally. The borough may charge the following fees for requests
made for access to public records:
      (1)   Postage. Fees for postage shall be the actual cost of mailing;
      (2)   Copying. Fees for duplication by photocopying, printing from
electronic media or microfilm, copying onto electronic media, transmission by
facsimile or other electronic means and other means of duplication shall be the
same as the per copy fee set forth in the borough’s fee schedule, as amended,
from time to time, by resolution of the Borough Council;
      (3)   Certification. The fee for official certification of copies, if an
official certification is requested by the requestor for the purpose of legally
verifying the public record, shall be in an amount as established, from time to
time, by resolution of Borough Council; and
      (4)   Conversion to paper. If a public record is only maintained
electronically or in other non-paper media, duplication fees shall be those
imposed by subsection (A)(2) above.
   (B)   Waiver of fees. The borough may waive the fees for duplication of a
public record including, but not limited to, when:
      (1)   The requestor duplicates the public record; and
      (2)   The borough deems it is in the public interest to do so.
   (C)   Prepayment. Prior to granting a request for access in accordance with
this Part, the borough may require a requestor to prepay an estimate of the
fees authorized under this section if the fees required to fulfill the request
are expected to exceed $100.
   (D)   Limitations. Except as otherwise provided by statute, no other fees
may be imposed unless the borough necessarily incurs costs for complying with
the request and such fees must be reasonable. No fee may be imposed for the
borough’s review of a record to determine whether the record is a public record
subject to access in accordance with 65 P.S. §§ 67.101 et seq.
   (E)   Setting fees. The fees shall be set from time to time by resolution of
the borough.
§ 1-608 BOROUGH CONTACT.
   The person at the borough to whom all record requests should be addressed
shall be:
 
Borough Manager
Borough of Dillsburg
151 S. Baltimore St.
Dillsburg, Pa. 17019
(717)432-9969
 
§ 1-609 REGULAR BUSINESS HOURS.
   The regular business hours of the borough shall be Monday through Friday 8:
00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m.
§ 1-610 PERSON DESIGNATED TO ACCEPT EXCEPTIONS FILED WHEN A RECORD IS DENIED.
   The individual at the borough who shall receive and respond to exceptions
filed when a record is denied and the requestor disagrees with the denial shall
be the Borough Manager.
§ 1-611 MISCELLANEOUS.
   (A)   The borough shall not ask for or require a purpose or motive for
requesting a particular record and shall not limit the number of public records
that may be requested.
   (B)   If the record is only kept in electronic form, the borough shall make
it available in paper on request.
   (C)   The borough will not create a record that does not exist or put a
document into a format that does not exist, except for subsection (B) above.
   (D)   This Part shall be posted prominently at the borough municipal
building.
CHAPTER 2: ANIMALS
      Part
         
1.   CUSTODY AND KEEPING OF ANIMALS AND FOWL
         
2.   FREE ROAMING CATS
PART 1: CUSTODY AND KEEPING OF ANIMALS
AND FOWL
Section
   
2-101   Permit required
   
2-102   Limitation on number of dogs and cats
   
2-103   Running at large
   
2-104   Noise or disturbance to be controlled
   
2-105   Befouling sidewalks or property
   
2-106   Public events
   
2-107   Penalty
§ 2-101 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or other entity
to engage in the keeping or housing of poultry, pigs, cattle, horses or other
undomesticated animals in the borough without first obtaining a permit from the
Secretary or Borough Manager for which there shall be no charge. All permits
are subject to the approval of Council, and shall be valid only until the
second regular Council meeting after originally issued. Council shall consider
the effect of keeping or housing such animals may have on the health, safety
and welfare of residents, the type of housing to be provided and the methods of
retention or fencing proposed or required. Council may require from the
applicant any additional information bearing on said health, safety and welfare
and may require specified standards of care from the applicant to overcome
reasonable objections.
   (B)   Council may extend the expiration date of the original permit for a
specified period of time prior to making a final determination. Upon approval,
the applicant shall be notified thereof, and his or her permit shall forthwith
become valid for an indefinite period; if disapproved, Council shall notify the
applicant of the reasons for disapproval, and the applicant shall remove such
animals within 30 days. Council may withdraw any permit issued for the keeping
or housing of poultry, pigs, cattle, horses or other undomesticated animals at
any time whenever such keeping or housing shall have a detrimental effect upon
the health, safety or welfare of the borough or its residents.
   (C)   If any permit be withdrawn, the person, firm or corporation affected
shall be notified in writing of the reasons therefor, and be ordered to remove
such poultry or other animals within a specified time not less than 30 days
from receipt of such notice.
(Ord. 144, passed 3-1-1979, Art. LX, § 6030)
§ 2-102 LIMITATION ON NUMBER OF DOGS AND CATS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation having a right of
property in any dog or cat, or custody thereof, to keep more than four dogs and
cats, in aggregate number, more than six months of age, or older, on any
premises, regardless of the number of owners, except by permit.
   (A)   Application for permit. An application for a permit to keep more than
four dogs and cats in aggregate number over six months of age shall provide the
following information, and shall be accompanied by a verified veterinarian’s
health certificate for each dog or cat to be covered by the permit:
      (1)   Type and number of dogs and cats to be covered by the permit;
      (2)   The purpose for keeping such dogs or cats;
      (3)   The period for which the permit is requested;
      (4)   A description of the quarters in which the dogs or cats will be
maintained, including plans and specifications thereof, where appropriate, and
the facilities for sanitation and disposal of animal wastes;
      (5)   The circumstances under which the dogs or cats will be removed from
their quarters;
      (6)   Information about the applicant and any other person responsible
for the animals, with particular emphasis on the knowledge of such person about
the animals in question, and the experience of each person to serve in such
position of responsibility; and
      (7)   Such additional information as Council may require.
   (B)   Scope of information considered by borough. The foregoing information
shall be provided to Council at the next regular Council meeting held at least
ten days after the information is provided and Council shall determine whether
the permit shall be issued considering, among other things, the following:
      (1)   The odor likely to emanate from the premises to neighboring
premises;
      (2)   The noise likely to emanate from the premises to neighboring
premises;
      (3)   The attitude of the applicant’s neighbors in response to the
proposed permit; and
      (4)   The security with which the animals will be restrained.
   (C)   Council consideration. Council shall consider the issuance of a permit
for such housing at the meeting in which the information is provided, or
determine that additional information shall be required, and consider issuance
of the permit at the next regularly scheduled meeting of Council.
   (D)   Revocation. Any permit so issued may be revoked in accordance with
subsection (A) above.
   (E)   Permit fee. The fee for each permit issued shall be in an amount to be
established; from time to time, by resolution of Borough Council for each
calendar year, or part thereof; the application, with the appropriate
information, shall be accompanied by the appropriate fee which shall be the fee
due for the balance of the calendar year then remaining. Fees for successive
calendar years shall be paid on or before January 15 of each succeeding
calendar year.
(Ord. 144, passed 3-1-1979; Ord. 1988-3, passed 5-17-1988)
§ 2-103 RUNNING AT LARGE.
   (A)   Generally. It shall be unlawful for the owner, or custodian, of any
fowl or animal to permit such fowl or animal to run at large within the
borough. Running at large shall include an animal being upon any public
highway, street, alley, park or other public land, or upon the property of a
person other than the owner, or custodian, of the animal, without restraint or
control. The terms FOWL and ANIMAL shall include any domesticated fowl or
animal, regardless of whether the species is normally considered domesticated,
and shall specifically include dogs and cats, regardless of whether they are
licensed. If it be shown that any such fowl or animal was running at large, it
shall be presumed, for the purposes of this section, that such was permitted by
the owner, or custodian.
   (B)   Detention of animal running at large. Any police officer or designated
animal control service of the borough shall seize and detain any such fowl or
animal found running at large, whether upon the streets, alleys or highways of
the borough, or upon property other than that of the owner or custodian. Such
officer is hereby authorized and empowered to enter upon such premises, or into
any building to so seize and detain whenever he or she is in pursuit of such
fowl or animal.
(Ord. 144, passed 3-1-1979, Art. LX, § 6040; Ord. 1988-3, passed 5-17-1988)
§ 2-104 NOISE OR DISTURBANCE TO BE CONTROLLED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person who is the owner or custodian of any
fowl or animal to permit such fowl or animal to make any noise continuously
and/or incessantly for a period in excess of ten minutes, or to permit the
making of such noise intermittently for one-half hour or more which noise for
such a period or periods shall be considered a disturbance of other persons
within the borough, regardless of whether the fowl or animal is physically
situated upon private property; provided, however, that no person is
trespassing or threatening to trespass upon such private property upon which
the fowl or animal is situated, and there is no other legitimate cause which
justifiably provokes the fowl or animal.
(Ord. 2015-3, passed 10-13-2015)
§ 2-105 BEFOULING SIDEWALKS OR PROPERTY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person owning or having custody of any animal
or fowl to knowingly, or negligently, permit such animal or fowl to defecate or
urinate upon any public or private way, upon any structure situated in, or
adjacent to, a private way, or upon the ground of any public or private
property other than that of the owner of custodian of said animal or fowl. This
section shall not be effective if the owner or custodian shall within five
minutes of the animal’s or fowl’s defecation dispose of any feces in a toilet
or in a non-leaking container for deposit in a trash or litter receptacle.
(Ord. 2015-3, passed 10-13-2015)
§ 2-106 PUBLIC EVENTS.
   All animals are restricted and prohibited from public events. No person
shall bring, carry, accompany, covey or transport pets, animals or reptiles,
other than those actually participating in the event or which are certified
service and/or police dogs, within 100 feet of the route or site of such
function.
(Ord. 2015-3, passed 10-13-2015)
§ 2-107 PENALTY.
   Any person, firm, corporation or other entity who shall violate any
provision of this Part shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a
fine of not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine
and costs to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a
violation of this Part continues or each section of this Part which shall be
found to have been violated shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 2015-3, passed 10-13-2015)
PART 2: FREE ROAMING CATS
Section
   
2-201   Definitions
   
2-202   Nuisance
   
2-203   Penalty
   
2-204   Trapping and removing
§ 2-201 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this Part, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   FREE ROAMING CAT.
      (1)   A cat born in the wild or that is the offspring of an owned or free
roaming cat that runs free without supervision; or
      (2)   A formerly owned cat that has been abandoned and runs free without
supervision.
   OWNER. The individual responsible for the animal, for both its wellbeing and
any destruction or damage which the animal may cause to any other person or
property.
(Ord. 2012-1, passed 6-12-2012)
§ 2-202 NUISANCE.
   Free roaming cats shall be considered a nuisance and it shall, therefore, be
unlawful for any person to cause or permit feeding of any free roaming cat
within the borough. Feeding of a cat not owned by the individual, or not having
knowledge of the specific owner by the individual, taking action to feed shall
be assumed to be the intention of the individual as to feed a free roaming cat
in violation of this Part. The exception to the Part is the placing of food
within a trap for the purpose of trapping a free roaming cat for removal or
other disposition in accordance with this Part.
(Ord. 2012-1, passed 6-12-2012)
§ 2-203 PENALTY.
   Anyone found in violation of any provisions of this Part shall, upon
conviction at a District Justice, be ordered to pay a penalty in an amount not
less than $500 for each separate act of feeding in violation of any provision
of this Part shall constitute a separate violation and be separate and distinct
penalties.
(Ord. 2012-1, passed 6-12-2012)
§ 2-204 TRAPPING AND REMOVING.
   Borough Council, in its discretion, may choose to trap and remove any free
roaming cat which the borough determines, in its sole discretion, to constitute
a nuisance or threat to the health, safety or welfare of a citizen or citizens
of the borough.
(Ord. 2012-1, passed 6-12-2012)
CHAPTER 3: RESERVED
CHAPTER 4: BUILDINGS
      Part
         
1.   NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS
         
2.   PLACEMENT OF CONSTRUCTION AND BAG DUMPSTERS AND PORTABLE ON DEMAND STORAGE
UNITS
PART 1: NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS
Section
   
4-101   Numbering of buildings required
§ 4-101 NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS REQUIRED.
   Every owner of property in the borough whereon is erected any building,
whether a dwelling, commercial building or industrial building, or a building
used for any other purpose, is hereby required to affix or provide for the
affixing of the applicable number or numbers designated by the Borough Manager
thereon in compliance with the Uniform Construction Code.
   (A)   The following general plan for numbering of buildings is hereby
approved, as well as a certain plan of existing buildings prepared for Council
by the Dillsburg Jaycees dated January, 1960. Such plan is and shall be lodged
with the Borough Manager, and shall be revised from time to time as necessary.
Copies thereof shall be available to anyone upon payment of reproduction costs.
      (1)   The focal and starting point for numbers shall be the intersection
of Baltimore Street with Harrisburg Street.
      (2)   Proceeding either north or south from said focal point, numbers to
the right shall be even numbers starting with number 2 and continuing
consecutively; numbers to the left shall be odd numbers starting with number 1
and continuing consecutively.
      (3)   Proceeding either east or west from said focal point, numbers to
the right shall be even numbers starting with number 2 and continuing
consecutively; numbers to the left shall be odd numbers starting with number 1
and continuing consecutively.
   (B)   Owners shall affix or provide for the affixing of the proper number or
numbers in accordance with the general numbering plan in a conspicuous and
recognizable place and manner, and shall maintain or replace such numbers so
that they always be recognizable.
   (C)   Whenever any owner shall fail to affix or cause to be affixed proper
numbers, or shall fail to keep such numbers recognizable, the Borough Manager
shall notify him or her to affix or replace such number or numbers within ten
days from receipt of such notice.
   (D)   If any owner shall fail or refuse to affix numbers within ten days
after notice, Council may cause such numbers to be affixed, and shall collect
the sum in an amount to be established by resolution of Borough Council as the
charge therefor, as municipal assessments are collected.
   (E)   Failure or refusal to affix or replace numbers after notice shall be
considered a violation of this Part, and the responsible person, firm,
corporation or other entity shall upon conviction thereof shall be sentenced to
pay a fine of not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of
said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day
the violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 144, passed 3-1-1979, Art. LX, § 6000)
PART 2: PLACEMENT OF CONSTRUCTION AND BAG DUMPSTERS AND PORTABLE ON DEMAND
STORAGE UNITS
Section
   
4-201   Definitions
   
4-202   Dumpsters and portable on demand storage units permitted; regulated
   
4-203   Permit required
   
4-204   Abatement
   
4-205   Violations; penalties
   
4-206   Relationship of Part to other borough codes
§ 4-201 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this Part, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DUMPSTER. A container designed to receive and transport and dump waste which
exceeds 96 gallons in size. A DUMPSTER includes waste disposal bags that are
designed to hold in excess of 96 gallons of waste.
   PORTABLE ON-DEMAND STORAGE UNITS or PODS. Portable containers that are
placed on or in front of a property for the purpose of storing, loading or
unloading furniture, clothing or other personal or household belongings as part
of the process of renovation or moving, the relocation of belongings to an off-
site commercial storage location, or on-site storage in the aftermath of the
property being affected by a natural disaster.
(Ord. 2013-1, passed 11-12-2013)
§ 4-202 DUMPSTERS AND PORTABLE ON DEMAND STORAGE UNITS PERMITTED; REGULATED.
   Dumpsters and portable on-demand storage units are permitted and are hereby
regulated according to the provisions below.
   (A)   Dumpsters regulated.
      (1)   Location and size. Dumpsters shall be placed on the property being
serviced and not on the street in front of the property unless prior approval
is received by Borough Council. No dumpsters shall be located within ten feet
of an abutting building or an adjacent property and may not exceed 30 cubic
yards in volume without the express written consent of the borough after
providing evidence that all location and setback requirements can be met.
      (2)   Time limit.
         (a)   A construction or “bag” dumpster may remain on a property for 30
days, with up to two 30-day extensions pursuant to the permitting provision
below. Absent an emergency condition, in no event shall one of these dumpsters
remain on a property in excess of 90 days in one 12-month period.
         (b)   When the need for the dumpster is the result of an emergency
condition at the property to be served (e.g., water or fire damage; hurricane
damage) then in such instance the dumpster may remain for the length of time
necessary to remove the debris as determined by the borough. In such instances,
the use of the dumpster is not counted towards the limit of three times per 12-
month period.
      (3)   Sanitation. The following requirements shall be maintained while
the dumpster is on or at the site:
         (a)   The area around the dumpster shall be kept free of debris and
litter;
         (b)   Any dumpster into which animal or vegetable waste or material
has been dumped or deposited shall be removed or emptied within 24 hours;
         (c)   Any dumpster producing or causing noxious, foul or offensive
odors shall be immediately removed or cleaned to eliminate the odor; and
         (d)   A full dumpster shall be removed from the property within two
days.
      (4)   Usage. A dumpster shall only be used to contain and remove debris
and material generated at the location where the dumpster is placed.
      (5)   Identification. The name and telephone number of the owner of the
dumpster and/or the company that is responsible for the dumpster shall be
displayed in a weather proof manner on the dumpster.
   (B)   Portable on-demand storage units regulated.
      (1)   Location and size. Portable on-demand storage units are prohibited
from being placed on an unpaved area in the front yard of a property. Portable
storage units kept on-site must be kept in the driveway or paved, off-street
surface on the property at the furthest accessible point from the street. Where
possible, the unit shall be placed on a paved surface to the rear or side of
the principal structure. When placed on the driveway or paved area in the side
or rear yard, portable storage units shall be located at least ten feet from
any property line, space permitting. The portable on demand storage unit may be
no larger than eight feet by eight feet by 16 feet in size without the express
written consent of the borough after providing evidence that all location and
setback requirements can be met.
      (2)   Time limit. A portable on-demand storage unit may remain on a
property for 30 days, with up to two 30-day extensions pursuant to the
permitting provision below. Absent an emergency condition, in no event shall a
portable on-demand storage unit remain on a property in excess of 90 days in
one 12-month period.
      (3)   Use during natural disaster. The above restrictions
notwithstanding, when the principal structure on the property has been made
uninhabitable as a result of a natural disaster for which a local state of
emergency declaration has been issued, or a fire or other damaging event beyond
the control of the owner, one or more portable storage units may be used for
on-site storage. The authorization for such use shall be dependent on issuance
of a building permit for the reconstruction/repair of the principal structure
(s) on the property and shall expire upon issuance of a certificate of
occupancy for the principal structure(s) or 12 months from the date of the
event that damaged the structure, whichever occurs first. For good cause shown
and to recognize extenuating circumstances, the borough may extend the
authorization for as much as an additional 12-month period or until a
certificate of occupancy is issued, whichever occurs first.
      (4)   Advertising. Advertising is prohibited on a portable storage unit,
with the exception of the name and phone number of the unit’s supplier, which
is required.
      (5)   Hazardous materials. The use of portable storage units for storage
of hazardous materials is prohibited. The Code Enforcement Officer may inspect
the portable storage unit to ensure no such materials are being stored inside.
      (6)   Condition of portable storage unit. A portable storage unit with
holes, breaks, tears or large areas of rust, in the opinion of the Code
Enforcement Officer, may not be placed on or in front of any property.
(Ord. 2013-1, passed 11-12-2013)
§ 4-203 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   A 30-day permit shall be required for a construction and/or “bag” dumpster
and a portable on-demand storage unit. The permit shall be obtained from the
borough and the fee shall $10 and may be changed by the Council by resolution.
The permit shall be displayed in a weather-proof fashion on the dumpster or a
portable on-demand storage unit. Extensions are permitted pursuant to §
4-202(A)(2)(a) and (B)(2).
(Ord. 2013-1, passed 11-12-2013)
§ 4-204 ABATEMENT.
   Any dumpster or portable on-demand storage unit not in compliance with this
Part is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and may be abated by the
borough at the owner’s or responsible person’s expense. Abatement shall, at the
borough’s option, include the removal and/or the emptying of the dumpster and/
or portable on-demand storage unit as the case may be.
(Ord. 2013-1, passed 11-12-2013)
§ 4-205 VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES.
   (A)   Violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punishable by a
fine in an amount of not more than $1,000 plus $50 per day the violation
continues.
   (B)   In addition, a person found guilty of a violation of this chapter
shall be ordered to abate the problem and pay the cost incurred by the borough
if the borough abated the problem.
(Ord. 2013-1, passed 11-12-2013)
§ 4-206 RELATIONSHIP OF PART TO OTHER BOROUGH CODES.
   If the provisions of this Part are found to be inconsistent with any portion
of other codes of the borough, the provisions of this Part shall control.
(Ord. 2013-1, passed 11-12-2013)
CHAPTER 5: CODE ENFORCEMENT
      Part
         
1.   INTERNATIONAL PLUMBING CODE
         
2.   INTERNATIONAL MECHANICAL CODE
         
3.   INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE
         
4.   INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE
         
5.   NFPA 101 LIFE SAFETY CODE
         
6.   INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
         
7.   UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE
PART 1: INTERNATIONAL PLUMBING CODE
Section
   
5-101   Adoption of Plumbing Code
   
5-102   Additions, insertions and changes
   
5-103   Definitions
   
5-104   Amendments made to the International Plumbing Code
§ 5-101 ADOPTION OF PLUMBING CODE.
   A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the
Secretary of the Council of Dillsburg Borough, being marked and designated as
“The International Plumbing Code, 2021 Edition” and subsequent editions, be and
is hereby adopted as the Plumbing Code of the Borough of Dillsburg, York
County, in the State of Pennsylvania for the control of buildings and
structures; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties,
conditions and terms of the International Plumbing Code, 2021 Edition, are
hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this
Part, with the additions, insertions and changes, if any, prescribed in §
5-102 of this Part.
(Ord. 2001-5, passed 2-13-2001, § 1)
§ 5-102 ADDITIONS, INSERTIONS AND CHANGES.
   The following sections are hereby revised as follows:
   Cooperation of Other Officials. The code official (as later defined in the
Plumbing Code) may request and shall receive, so far as may be necessary in the
discharge is his or her duties, the assistance and cooperation of other
officials of the borough.
(Ord. 2001-5, passed 2-13-2001, § 2)
§ 5-103 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   Wherever the word MUNICIPALITY or term NAME OF MUNICIPALITY is used in
the Plumbing Code, it shall be held to mean Dillsburg Borough.
   (B)   Wherever the term LEGAL REPRESENTATIVE or LEGAL OFFICIAL is used in
the Plumbing Code, it shall be held to mean the Solicitor of Dillsburg Borough.
   (C)   Wherever the term BUILDING or STRUCTURE is used in the Plumbing Code,
it shall be held to mean all buildings and structures within the Borough of
Dillsburg.
   (D)   Wherever the term APPOINTING AUTHORITY is used in the Plumbing Code as
adopted, it shall be held to mean the Council of Dillsburg Borough, York
County, Pennsylvania.
(Ord. 2001-5, passed 2-13-2001, § 3)
§ 5-104 AMENDMENTS MADE TO THE INTERNATIONAL PLUMBING CODE.
   The Plumbing Code hereby adopted is hereby amended and changed in the
following respects.
   (A)   Title. These regulations shall be known as the Plumbing Code of the
Borough of Dillsburg, also referred to herein as “this code”.
   (B)   Code Official - Duties and Power; General. The Code Official shall
enforce the provisions of this Code. The person appointed as Building Code
Officer by the Council of Dillsburg Borough shall function as and is herein
referred to as the “Code Official”.
   (C)   Violations; Violation Penalties. Any person, firm, corporation or
other entity who shall violate a provision of this Code or shall erect,
construct, alter, repair or maintain a building or structure in violation of an
approved plan or directive of the code official, or of a permit or certificate
issued under the provisions of this Code, shall be guilty of a violation of
this Code, and, upon conviction thereof before any magisterial district judge
of the borough or other court having jurisdiction over same, shall be sentenced
to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 and costs of prosecution for each
offense, and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, to imprisonment in
the county jail for not more than 30 days. The owner, tenant, lessee or
occupant of a building or structure or portion thereof, of the premises where
anything in violation of this Code shall be erected, constructed, altered,
repaired or maintained, and any architect, engineer, builder, contractor,
agent, person, partnership or corporation employed in connection therewith and
who may have participated or assisted in the commission of any such violation
shall each be guilty of a separate offense and, upon conviction thereof before
any magisterial district judge of the borough or other court having
jurisdiction over same, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than
$1,000 and costs of prosecution for each offense, and, in default of payment of
such fine and costs, to imprisonment in the county jail for not more than 30
days. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
   (D)   Application for Appeal.
      (1)   Appeals may be taken by any person aggrieved by any decision of
interpretation by the Code Official or other authorized official to act
pursuant to this Code to the Board of Appeals. The members of the Council of
Dillsburg Borough shall act as the Board of Appeals. All appeals under this
section shall be filed within 15 days after notice of the decision of the Code
Official or other authorized official. The appeal shall be filed in duplicate
and shall be filed with the Code Official. One copy of the appeal shall be
given by the Code Official to any other official involved in the case. Parties
to the appeal shall be the person filing the appeal, the owner of any property
involved and the Code Official in his or her official capacity. The Code
Official shall not give less than ten days’ written notice of the hearing to
the parties.
      (2)   The Board of Appeals shall hold a public hearing within 30 days
after the appeal was filed. Unless the parties request a stenographically
recorded hearing, the testimony will be tape-recorded. If a stenographically
recorded hearing is requested, the party making the request shall pay the costs
thereof.
      (3)   The Board of Appeals shall not be bound by technical rules of
evidence, and all relevant evidence of reasonable probative value may be
permitted. Reasonable examination and cross examination shall be permitted.
      (4)   The Board of Appeals shall reach a written decision within 30 days
after the hearing, or if such a hearing is continued, within 30 days after the
continued hearing. Every decision shall be in writing and shall contain
findings and the reasons for the adjudication. Every decision shall be filed in
the office of the Code Official and shall be open to public inspection. A
certified copy of the decision shall be served upon all parties or their
counsel personally, or by mail, not later than five days following issuance of
the decision.
   (E)   Lead Pipes. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth in said
Code the use of lead pipe and lead fittings shall not be permitted.
   (F)   Plastic Drain, Vent and Waste Piping. Where plastic drain, vent and
waste piping is permitted under said Code all plastic drain, vent and waste
piping shall be Schedule 40 minimum.
   (G)   Date of Effect. That this Part shall take effect on the first day of
the month after its date of enactment.
(Ord. 2001-5, passed 2-13-2001, § 4)
PART 2: INTERNATIONAL MECHANICAL CODE
Section
   
5-201   Adoption of Mechanical Code
   
5-202   Cooperation of other officials
   
5-203   Definitions
   
5-204   Amendments made to the International Mechanical Code
§ 5-201 ADOPTION OF MECHANICAL CODE.
   A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the
Secretary of the Council of Dillsburg Borough at the Municipal Building, 151
South Baltimore Street, Dillsburg, York County, Pennsylvania, being marked and
designated as “The International Mechanical Code, 2021 Edition” and subsequent
editions, be and is hereby adopted as the Mechanical Code of the Borough of
Dillsburg, York County, Pennsylvania (hereinafter sometimes referred to as the
“Mechanical Code”); for the control of buildings and structures as herein
provided; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties,
conditions and terms of said International Mechanical Code are hereby referred
to, adopted and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this Part, with the
additions, insertions, deletions and changes, as applicable, prescribed in §
5-204 of this Part.
(Ord. 2001-6, passed 2-13-2001, § 1)
§ 5-202 COOPERATION OF OTHER OFFICIALS.
   The Code Official (as later defined in the Mechanical Code) may request and
shall receive, so far as may be necessary in the discharge is his or her
duties, the assistance and cooperation of other officials of the borough.
(Ord. 2001-6, passed 2-13-2001, § 2)
§ 5-203 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   Wherever the word MUNICIPALITY or term NAME OF MUNICIPALITY is used in
the Mechanical Code, it shall be held to mean Dillsburg Borough.
   (B)   Wherever the term LEGAL REPRESENTATIVE or LEGAL OFFICIAL is used in
the Mechanical Code, it shall be held to mean the Solicitor of Dillsburg
Borough.
   (C)   Wherever the term BUILDING or STRUCTURE is used in the Mechanical
Code, it shall be held to mean all buildings and structures within the Borough
of Dillsburg.
   (D)   Wherever the term APPOINTING AUTHORITY is used in the Mechanical Code
as adopted, it shall be held to mean the Council of Dillsburg Borough, York
County, Pennsylvania.
(Ord. 2001-6, passed 2-13-2001, § 3)
§ 5-204 AMENDMENTS MADE TO THE INTERNATIONAL MECHANICAL CODE.
   The Mechanical Code hereby adopted is hereby amended and changed in the
following respects.
   (A)   Title. These regulations shall be known as the Mechanical Code of the
Borough of Dillsburg, also referred to herein as “this code”.
   (B)   Scope. These regulations shall apply, in general, to all matters
concerning the design, installation, maintenance, alteration and inspection of
mechanical systems, including heating systems, ventilating systems, cooling
systems, steam and hot water heating systems, water heaters, process piping,
boilers and pressure vessels, appliances utilizing gas, liquid or solid fuel,
chimneys and vents, mechanical refrigeration systems, fireplaces, barbecues,
incinerators, crematories and air pollution systems as herein defined.
   (C)   Other Regulations. When the provisions herein specified are more
restrictive in regard to specifications or requirements than other regulations
or ordinances, this Code shall control; but in any case, the strictest
requirements of either this Code or other regulation or ordinance shall apply
whenever a difference exists. Violation of such other regulation or ordinance
shall be considered a violation of this Code and, at the option of the borough,
the enforcement provisions (including penalties and fines) of this Code shall
be applied in lieu of enforcement provisions, if any, provided for in such
other regulation or ordinance. Notwithstanding the above, this Code shall not
control if this Code is identified by name and its application is expressly
restricted by such other ordinance or regulation, by provisions referenced in
such other ordinance or regulation or by provisions of this Code or ordinance.
   (D)   Code Official Duties. The creation and existence of the Department of
Mechanical Inspection of Dillsburg Borough is hereby reaffirmed and the
executive official in charge thereof shall be referred to herein as the “Code
Official”. Unless otherwise provided by resolution duly adopted of the Council
of Dillsburg Borough, the person appointed as Building Code Officer of
Dillsburg Borough by the Council shall function as the Code Official.
   (E)   Periodic Inspections. Fees for all periodic inspections shall be
included in permit fees applicable to the construction work.
   (F)   Penalties. Any person, firm, corporation or other entity who shall
violate a provision of this Code or shall fail to comply with any of the
requirements thereof or who shall erect, construct, alter or repair a building
or structure in violation of an approved plan or directive of the Code
Official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this
Code, shall be guilty of a violation of this code, and, upon conviction thereof
before any magisterial district judge of the borough or other court having
jurisdiction over same, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than
$1,000 and costs of prosecution for each offense, and, in default of payment of
such fine and costs, to imprisonment in the county jail for not more than 30
days. The owner, tenant, lessee or occupant of a building or structure of
portion thereof, or of the premises where anything in violation of this Code
shall be placed or shall exist, and any architect, engineer, builder,
contractor, agent, person, partnership or corporation employed in connection
therewith and who may have participated or assisted in the commission of any
such violation shall each be guilty of a separate offense and, upon conviction
thereof, before any magisterial district judge of the borough or other court
having jurisdiction of same, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than
$1,000 and costs of prosecution, for each offense, and, in default of payment
thereof, to imprisonment in the county jail for not more than 30 days. Each day
that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
   (G)   Corrections. Should the owner, tenant, lessee or occupant fail to
remove or correct a condition in violation of this Code, then and in that
event, the Borough of Dillsburg may cause the same to be done and collect the
cost thereof, together with an administrative cost of 10% of such cost, in the
manner provided by law for the collection of municipal claims or by action of
assumpsit without the filing of a claim and/or may seek such other relief as
deemed appropriate.
   (H)   Unlawful Continuance. Any person, firm, corporation or other entity
who shall continue any work in or about the structure after having been served
with a stop-work order, except such work as that person, firm, corporation or
other entity is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition,
shall be subject to a fine of not more than $1,000, plus costs, in addition to
any other fines or penalties imposed by this Code or other ordinance. Each day
that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
   (I)   Application for Appeal. Appeals may be taken by any person aggrieved
by any decision of interpretation by the Code Official or other authorized
official to act pursuant to this Code to the Board of Appeals. The members of
the Council of Dillsburg Borough shall act as the Board of Appeals. All appeals
under this section shall be filed within 15 days after notice of the decision
of the Code Official or other authorized official. The appeal shall be filed in
duplicate and shall be filed with the Code Official. One copy of the appeal
shall be given by the Code Official to any other Official involved in the case.
Parties to the appeal shall be the person filing the appeal, the owner of any
property involved and the Code Official in his or her official capacity. The
Code Official shall not give less than ten days’ written notice of the hearing
to the parties.
      (1)   The Board of Appeals shall hold a public hearing within 30 days
after the appeal was filed. Unless the parties request a stenographically
recorded hearing, the testimony will be tape-recorded. If a stenographically
recorded hearing is requested, the party making the request shall pay the costs
thereof.
      (2)   The Board of Appeals shall not be bound by technical rules of
evidence, and all relevant evidence of reasonable probative value may be
permitted. Reasonable examination and cross examination shall be permitted.
      (3)   The Board of Appeals shall reach a written decision within 30 days
after the hearing, or if such a hearing is continued, within 30 days after the
continued hearing. Every decision shall be in writing and shall contain
findings and the reasons for the adjudication. Every decision shall be filed in
the office of the Code Official and shall be open to public inspection. A
certified copy of the decision shall be served upon all parties or their
counsel personally, or by mail, not later than five days following issuance of
the decision.
(Ord. 2001-6, passed 2-13-2001, § 4)
PART 3: INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE
Section
   
5-301   Adoption of Building Code
   
5-302   Cooperation of other officials
   
5-303   Definitions
   
5-304   Amendments made to the International Building Code
§ 5-301 ADOPTION OF BUILDING CODE.
   Certain documents, three copies of which are on file in the office of the
Secretary of the Borough of Dillsburg, at the Municipal Building, 151 South
Baltimore Street, Dillsburg, Pennsylvania, being marked and designated as “The
International Building Code, 2021 Edition” and subsequent editions, and “The
International Residential Code, 2021 Edition” and subsequent editions as
published, be and are hereby adopted as the Building Code of the Borough of
Dillsburg, York County, Pennsylvania (hereinafter sometimes referred to as the
“Building Code”), for the control of buildings and structures as herein
provided; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties,
conditions and terms of said International Codes are hereby referred to,
adopted and made a part thereof, as if fully set out in this Part, with the
additions, insertions, deletions and changes, as applicable, prescribed in §
5-304 of this Part. Section 113 regulates violations; §§ 114 and 115 regulates
abatement and continuance of violations; and § 112 regulates appeals.
(Ord. 2001-6, passed 2-13-2001, § 1; Ord. 2002-1, passed 2-12-2002, § 1)
§ 5-302 COOPERATION OF OTHER OFFICIALS.
   The Code Official (as later defined in the Building Code) may request and
shall receive, so far as may be necessary in the discharge of his or her
duties, the assistance and cooperation of other officials of the borough.
(Ord. 2001-6, passed 2-13-2001, § 2)
§ 5-303 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   Wherever the word MUNICIPALITY or term NAME OF MUNICIPALITY is used in
the Building Code, it shall be held to mean the Borough of Dillsburg.
   (B)   Wherever the term LEGAL REPRESENTATIVE or LEGAL OFFICIAL is used in
the Building Code, it shall be held to mean the Solicitor of the Borough of
Dillsburg.
   (C)   Wherever the term BUILDING or STRUCTURE is used in the Building Code,
it shall be held to mean all buildings and structures within the Borough of
Dillsburg.
   (D)   Whenever the term DATE OF ADOPTION OF THIS CODE is used in the
Building Code, it shall be held to mean the date of enactment of this Part.
   (E)   Wherever the term APPOINTING AUTHORITY is used in the Building Code as
adopted, it shall be held to mean the Borough Council of the Borough of
Dillsburg, York County, Pennsylvania.
(Ord. 2001-6, passed 2-13-2001, § 3)
§ 5-304 AMENDMENTS MADE TO THE INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE.
   The Building Code hereby adopted is hereby amended and changed in the
following respects.
   (A)   Section 101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Building
Code of the Borough of Dillsburg, also referred to herein as “this Code”.
   (B)   Section 104.1 Building Code Officer/Code Official. It shall be the
duty and responsibility of the Building Code Officer to enforce the provisions
of this Code. The Building Code Officer shall function as the Code Official and
shall be referred to herein as the “Code Official”.
   (C)   Section 113 Penalty for Violations. Any person, firm, corporation or
other entity who shall violate a provision of this Code or shall fail to comply
with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect, construct, alter,
repair or maintain a building or structure in violation of an approved plan or
directive of the Code Official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the
provisions of this Code, shall be guilty of a violation of this Code, and, upon
conviction thereof before any magisterial district judge of the borough or
other court having jurisdiction over same, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of
not more than $1,000 and costs of prosecution for each offense, and, in default
of payment of such fine and costs, to imprisonment in the county jail for not
more than 30 days. The owner, tenant, lessee or occupant of a building or
structure or portion thereof, or of the premises where anything in violation of
this Code shall be erected, constructed, altered, repaired or maintained, and
any architect, engineer, builder, contractor, agent, person, partnership or
corporation employed in connection therewith and who may have assisted in the
commission of any such violation shall each be guilty of a separate offense
and, upon conviction thereof before any magisterial district judge of the
borough or other court having jurisdiction over same, shall be sentenced to pay
a fine of not more than $1,000 and costs of prosecution for each offense, and,
in default of payment thereof, to imprisonment in the county jail for not more
than 30 days. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate
offense.
   (D)   Sections 114 and 115 Abatement/Continuance of Violation. Should the
owner, agent or occupier fail to remove or repair a dangerous building or
structure, then and in that event, the borough may cause the same to be done
and collect the cost thereof, together with administrative fee of an additional
10% of such cost, in the manner provided by law for the collection of municipal
claims or by action of assumpsit without the filing of a claim and/or may seek
such other relief as deemed appropriate.
   (E)   Section 112 Application for Appeal. Appeals may be taken by any person
aggrieved by any decision or interpretation by the Code Official or other
authorized official to act pursuant to this Code to the Board of Appeals. The
members of the Council of the Borough of Dillsburg shall act as the Board of
Appeals. Sections 121.2 through 121.6 (including all subsections thereof) of
this Code are deleted and replaced by a new § 121.2, which shall read as
follows: “All appeals under this section shall be filed within 15 days after
notice of the decision of the Code Official or other authorized official. The
written appeal, in duplicate, shall be filed with the Code Official. One copy
of the appeal shall be given by the Code Official to any other official
involved in the case. Parties to the appeal shall be the person filing the
appeal, the owner of any property involved and the Code Official in his or her
official capacity. The Code Official shall give not less than ten days’ written
notice of the hearing to the parties”.
      (1)   The Board of Appeals shall hold a public hearing within 30 days
after the appeal was filed. Unless the parties request a stenographically
recorded hearing, the testimony will be tape-recorded. If a stenographically
recorded hearing is requested, the party making the request shall pay the costs
thereof.
      (2)   The Board of Appeals shall not be bound by technical rules of
evidence, and all relevant evidence of reasonable probative value may be
permitted. Reasonable examination and cross examination shall be permitted.
      (3)   The Board of Appeals shall, reach a written decision within 30 days
after a hearing, or if such a hearing is continued, within 30 days after the
continued hearing. Every decision shall be in writing and shall contain
findings and the reasons for the adjudication. Every decision shall be filed in
the office of the Code Official and shall be open to public inspection. A
certified copy of the decision shall be served upon all parties or their
counsel personally, or by mail, not later than five days following issuance of
the decision.
(Ord. 2001-6, passed 2-13-2001, § 4)
PART 4: INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE
Section
   
5-401   Adoption of Fire Prevention Code
   
5-402   Cooperation of other officials
   
5-403   Definitions
   
5-404   Amendments made to the International Fire Code
§ 5-401 ADOPTION OF FIRE PREVENTION CODE.
   A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the
Secretary of the Borough of Dillsburg, at the Municipal Building, 151 South
Baltimore Street, Dillsburg, Pennsylvania, being marked and designated as “The
International Fire Code, 2021 Edition” and subsequent editions as published, be
and is hereby adopted as the Fire Prevention Code of the Borough of Dillsburg,
York County, Pennsylvania (hereinafter sometimes referred to as the “Fire
Prevention Code”), for the control of buildings and structures as herein
provided; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties,
conditions and terms of said Fire Prevention Code are hereby referred to,
adopted and made a part thereof, as if fully set out in this Part, with the
additions, insertions, deletions and changes, as applicable, prescribed in §
5-404 of this Part.
(Ord. 2001-1, passed 2-13-2002, § 1)
§ 5-402 COOPERATION OF OTHER OFFICIALS.
   The Code Official (as later defined in the Fire Prevention Code) may request
and shall receive, so far as may be necessary in the discharge of his or her
duties, the assistance and cooperation of other officials of the borough.
(Ord. 2001-1, passed 2-13-2002, § 2)
§ 5-403 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   Wherever the word MUNICIPALITY or term NAME OF MUNICIPALITY is used in
the Fire Prevention Code, it shall be held to mean the Borough of Dillsburg.
   (B)   Wherever the term LEGAL REPRESENTATIVE or LEGAL OFFICIAL is used in
the Fire Prevention Code, it shall be held to mean the Solicitor of the Borough
of Dillsburg.
   (C)   Wherever the term BUILDING or STRUCTURE is used in the Fire Prevention
Code, it shall be held to mean all buildings and structures within the Borough
of Dillsburg.
   (D)   Wherever the term DATE OF ADOPTION OF THIS CODE is used in the Fire
Prevention Code, it shall be held to mean the date of enactment of this Part.
   (E)   Wherever the term APPOINTING AUTHORITY is used in the Fire Prevention
Code as adopted, it shall be held to mean the Council of the Borough of
Dillsburg, York County, Pennsylvania.
(Ord. 2001-1, passed 2-13-2002, § 3)
§ 5-404 AMENDMENTS MADE TO THE INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE.
   The Fire Prevention Code hereby adopted is hereby amended and changed in the
following respects.
   (A)   Section F-101.1. Section F-101.1 of said Code is amended and shall
read as follows: F-101.1 Title: These regulations shall be known as the Fire
Prevention Code of the Borough of Dillsburg, also referred to herein as “this
code”.
   (B)   Section F-105.1 Enforcement Officer/Code Official. It shall be the
duty and responsibility of the Building Code Officer to enforce the provisions
of this Code.
   (C)   Section F-112.3 Penalty For Violations. Any person, firm, corporation
or other entity who shall violate a provision of this Code or shall fail to
comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect, construct,
alter, repair or maintain a building or structure in violation of an approved
plan or directive of the Code Official (including any notice to correct), or of
a permit or certificate issued under provisions of this Code, shall be guilty
of a violation of this Code, and, upon conviction thereof before any
magisterial district judge of the borough or other court having jurisdiction
over same, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 and costs
of prosecution for each offense, and, in default of payment of such fine and
costs, to imprisonment in the county jail for not more than 30 days. The owner,
tenant, lessee or occupant of a building or structure or portion thereof, of
the premises where anything in violation of this Code shall be erected,
constructed, altered, repaired, or maintained, and any architect, engineer
builder, contractor, agent, person, partnership or corporation employed in
connection therewith and who have participated or assisted in the commission of
any such violation shall each be guilty of a separate offense and upon
conviction thereof before any magisterial district judge of the borough or
other court having jurisdiction over same, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of
not more than $1,000 and costs of prosecution for each offense, and, in default
of payment thereof, to imprisonment in the county jail for not more than 30
days. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
   (D)   Section F-113.1 Application for Appeal. Appeals may be taken by any
person aggrieved by any decision or interpretation by the Code Official or
other authorized official to act pursuant to this Code to the Board of Appeals.
The members of the Council of the Borough of Dillsburg shall act as the Board
of Appeals. Sections F-113.2 through F-113.6. (including all subsections
thereof) of this Code are deleted and replaced by a new Section 113.2, which
shall read as follows: “All appeals under this section shall be filed within 15
days after notice of the decision of the Code Official or other authorized
official. The written appeal, in duplicate, shall be filed with the Code
Official. One copy of the appeal shall be given by the Code Official to any
other official involved in the case. Parties to the appeal shall be the person
filing the appeal, the owner of any property involved and the Code Official in
his or her official capacity. The Code Official shall not give less than ten
days’ written notice of the hearing to the parties”.
      (1)   The Board of Appeals shall hold a public hearing within 30 days
after the appeal was filed. Unless the parties request a stenographically
recorded hearing, the testimony will be tape- recorded. If a stenographically
recorded hearing is requested, the party making the request shall pay the costs
thereof.
      (2)   The Board of Appeals shall not be bound by technical rules of
evidence, and all relevant evidence of reasonable probative value may be
permitted. Reasonable examination and cross examination shall be permitted.
      (3)   The Board of Appeals shall reach a written decision within 30 days
after the hearing, or if such hearing is continued, within 30 days after the
continued hearing. Every decision shall be in writing and shall contain
findings and the reasons for the adjudication. Every decision shall be filed in
the office of the Code Official and shall be open to public inspection. A
certified copy of the decision shall be served upon all parties or their
counsel personally, or by mail, not later than five days following issuance of
the decision.
   (E)   Section F-403.3 through F-403.4. Section F-403.3 through F-403.4
(including all subsections thereof) of this Code are deleted and replaced by a
new Section F-403.3 commonly referred to as the open burning ordinance of the
Borough of Dillsburg which provides for open burning on Saturdays.
(Ord. 2001-1, passed 2-13-2002, § 4)
PART 5: NFPA 101 LIFE SAFETY CODE
Section
   
5-501   Adoption of Codes
   
5-502   Cooperation of other officials
   
5-503   Definitions
   
5-504   Amendments made to the NFPA Life Safety Code
§ 5-501 ADOPTION OF CODES.
   A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the
Secretary of the borough, at 151 South Baltimore Street, Dillsburg,
Pennsylvania, being marked and designated as “The NFPA 101 Life Safety Code,
2000 Edition” and “The NFPA 80A Recommended Practice for Protection of
Buildings From Exterior Fire Exposures, 2001 Edition” as published by the
National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) be and it hereby is adopted as the
Life Safety Code of the Borough of Dillsburg, York County, Pennsylvania; the
purpose of this Code is to provide minimum requirements, with due regard to
function, for the design, operation and maintenance of buildings and structures
for safety to life from fire, as well as provide a reasonable level of
protection for combustibles within, and on the exterior of a building exposed
to an external building fire, while contemplating effective firefighting
activity.
(Ord. 2002-3, passed 6-11-2002, § 1)
§ 5-502 COOPERATION OF OTHER OFFICIALS.
   The Code Official (as later defined in the Life Safety Code) may request and
shall receive, so far as may be necessary in the discharge of his or her
duties, the assistance and cooperation of other officials of the borough.
(Ord. 2002-3, passed 6-11-2002, § 2)
§ 5-503 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   Wherever the work MUNICIPALITY or term NAME OF MUNICIPALITY is used in
the Life Safety Code, it shall be held to mean the Borough of Dillsburg.
   (B)   Wherever the term LEGAL REPRESENTATIVE or LEGAL OFFICIAL is used in
the Life Safety Code, it shall be held to mean the Solicitor of the Borough of
Dillsburg.
   (C)   Wherever the term BUILDING or STRUCTURE is used in the Life Safety
Code, it shall be held to mean all buildings and/or structures within the
Borough of Dillsburg.
   (D)   Wherever the term DATE OF ADOPTION OF THIS CODE is used in the Life
Safety Code, it shall be held to mean the first day of the month after its date
of enactment.
   (E)   Wherever the term APPOINTING AUTHORITY is used in the Life Safety Code
as adopted, it shall be held to mean the Council of the Borough of Dillsburg,
York County, Pennsylvania.
(Ord. 2002-3, passed 6-11-2002, § 3)
§ 5-504 AMENDMENTS MADE TO THE NFPA LIFE SAFETY CODE.
   The Life Safety Code hereby adopted is hereby amended and changed in the
following respects.
   (A)   Title. These regulations shall be known as the Life Safety Code of the
Borough of Dillsburg, also referred to herein as “this Code”.
   (B)   Other Regulations. When the provisions herein specified are more
restrictive in regard to specifications or requirements than other regulations
or ordinances, this Code shall control; but in any case, the strictest
requirements of either this Code or other regulation or ordinance shall apply
whenever a difference exists. Violation of such other regulation or ordinance
shall be considered a violation of this Code, and at the option of the borough,
enforcement provisions (including penalties and fines) of this Code shall be
applied in lieu of enforcement provisions, if any, provided for in such other
regulation or ordinance. Notwithstanding the above, this Code shall not control
if this Code is identified by name and its application is expressly restricted
by such other ordinance or regulation, by provisions referenced in such other
ordinance or regulation or by provisions of this Code or Ordinance.
   (C)   Code Official/Duties. It shall be the duty and responsibility of the
Building Code Officer to enforce the provisions of this Code. The Building Code
Officer shall function as the Code Official and shall be referred to herein as
the “Code Official”.
   (D)   Inspections/Fees. Inspections or investigations conducted in
conjunction with this Part shall be subject to fees as determined by the
borough.
   (E)   Penalties. Any person, firm, corporation or other entity who shall
violate a provision of this Code or shall fail to comply with any of the
requirements thereof or who shall erect, construct, alter repair or maintain a
building or structure in violation of an approved plan or directive of the Code
Official (including any notice to cease or desist) or a permit or certificate
issued under the provisions of this Code, shall be guilty of a violation of
this Code, and upon conviction thereof before any magisterial district judge of
the borough or other court having jurisdiction over same, shall be sentenced to
pay a fine of not more than $1,000 and costs of prosecution for each offense,
and in default of payment of such fines and costs, to imprisonment in the
county jail for not more than 30 days. The owner, tenant, lessee or occupant of
a building or structure or portion thereof, of the premises where anything in
violation of this Code shall be erected, constructed, altered, repaired or
maintained, and any architect, engineer, builder, contractor, agent, person,
partnership or corporation employed in connection therewith who have
participated or assisted in the commission of any such violation shall each be
guilty of a separate offense, and upon conviction thereof before any
magisterial district judge of the borough or other court having jurisdiction
over same, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 and costs
of prosecution for each offense, and in default of payment thereof, to
imprisonment in the county jail for not more than 30 days. Each day that a
violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
   (F)   Corrections. Should the owner, tenant, lessee or occupant fail to
remove or correct a condition in violation of this Code, then in that event,
the borough may cause the same to be done and collect the cost thereof,
together with an administrative cost of 10% of such cost, in the manner
provided by law for the collection of municipal claims or by action of
assumpsit without the filing of a claim and/or may seek such other relief as
deemed appropriate.
   (G)   Unlawful Continuance. Any person, firm, corporation or other entity
who shall continue any work in or about the building or structure after having
been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed
to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be subject to a
fine of not more than $500, plus costs, in addition to any other fines or
penalties imposed by this Code or other ordinance. Each day that a violation
continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
   (H)   Application for Appeal. Appeals may be taken by any person aggrieved
by any decision or interpretation by the Code Official or other official
authorized to act pursuant to this Code to the Board of Appeals. The members of
the Council shall act as the Board of Appeals. All appeals under this section
shall be filed within 15 days after notice of the decision of the Code Official
or other authorized official. The appeal shall be filed in duplicate and shall
be filed with the Code Official. The Code Official shall provide a copy of the
appeal to any other official involved in the case. Parties to the appeal shall
be the person filing the appeal, the owner of any property involved and the
Code Official in his or her official capacity.
   (I)   Notice. The Code Official shall give not less than ten days’ written
notice of the hearing to the parties. The Board of Appeals shall hold a public
hearing within 30 days after the appeal was filed. Unless the parties request a
stenographically recorded hearing, the testimony will be tape-recorded. If a
stenographically recorded hearing is requested, the party making the request
shall pay the costs thereof. The Board of Appeals shall not be bound by
technical rules of evidence, and all relevant evidence of reasonable probative
value may be permitted. Reasonable examination and cross-examination shall be
permitted.
   (J)   Written Decision.
      (1)   The Board of Appeals shall reach a written decision within 30 days
after the hearing, or if such a hearing is continued, within 30 days after the
continued hearing. Every decision shall be in writing and shall contain
findings and the reasons for the adjudication. Every decision shall be filed in
the office of the Code Official and shall be open to public inspection.
      (2)   A certified copy of the decision shall be served upon all parties
or their counsel personally, or by mail, not later than five days following
issuance of the decision.
(Ord. 2002-3, passed 6-11-2002, § 4)
PART 6: INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
Section
   
5-601   Adoption of Property Maintenance Code
   
5-602   Cooperation of other officials
   
5-603   Definitions
   
5-604   Amendments made to the International Property Maintenance Code
   
5-605   Inconsistent ordinances repealed
§ 5-601 ADOPTION OF PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE.
   A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the
Secretary of Dillsburg Borough at the Municipal Building, 151 South Baltimore
Street, Dillsburg, York County, Pennsylvania, being marked and designated as
“The International Property Maintenance, Code 2021 Edition” and subsequent
editions as published, be and is hereby adopted as the Property Maintenance
Code of the Borough of Dillsburg, York County, Pennsylvania (hereinafter
sometimes referred to as the “Property Maintenance Code”), for the control of
buildings and structures as herein provided; and each and all of the
regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said International
Property Maintenance Code 2021 are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part
hereof, as if fully set out in this Part, with the additions, insertions,
deletions and changes, as applicable, prescribed in §
5-604 of this Part.
(Ord. 2001-4, passed 2-13-2001, § 1)
§ 5-602 COOPERATION OF OTHER OFFICIALS.
   The Code Official (as later defined in the Property Maintenance Code) may
request and shall receive, so far as may be necessary in the discharge of his
or her duties, the assistance and cooperation of other officials of the
borough.
(Ord. 2001-4, passed 2-13-2001, § 2)
§ 5-603 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   Wherever the work MUNICIPALITY or term NAME OF MUNICIPALITY is used in
the Property Maintenance Code, it shall be held to mean Dillsburg Borough.
   (B)   Wherever the term LEGAL REPRESENTATIVE or LEGAL OFFICIAL is used in
the Property Maintenance Code, it shall be held to mean the Solicitor of
Dillsburg Borough.
   (C)   Wherever the term BUILDING or STRUCTURE is used in the Property
Maintenance Code, it shall be held to mean all buildings and structures within
Dillsburg Borough.
   (D)   Wherever the term APPOINTING AUTHORITY is used in the Property
Maintenance Code as adopted, it shall be held to mean the Council of Dillsburg
Borough, York County, Pennsylvania.
(Ord. 2001-4, passed 2-13-2001, § 3)
§ 5-604 AMENDMENTS MADE TO THE INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE.
   The Property Maintenance Code is hereby amended and shall read as follows.
   (A)   Title. These regulations shall be known as the Property Maintenance
Code of Dillsburg Borough, also referred to herein as “this Code”.
   (B)   General. The Code Official shall enforce the provisions of this Code.
The person appointed as Building Code Officer by the Council of Dillsburg
Borough shall function as and is herein referred to as the “Code Official”.
   (C)   Violation Penalties. Any person, firm, corporation or other entity who
shall violate a provision of this Code or shall erect, construct, alter, repair
or maintain a building or structure in violation of an approved plan or
directive of the Code Official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the
provisions of this Code, shall be guilty of a violation of this Code, and, upon
conviction thereof before any magisterial district judge of the borough or
other court having jurisdiction over same, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of
not more than $1,000 and costs of prosecution for each offense, and, in default
of payment of such fine and costs, to imprisonment in the county jail for not
more than 30 days. The owner, tenant, lessee or occupant of a building or
structure or portion thereof, of the premises where anything in violation of
this Code shall be erected, constructed, altered, repaired or maintained, and
any architect, engineer, builder, contractor, agent, person, partnership or
corporation employed in connection therewith and who may have participated or
assisted in the commission of any such violation shall each be guilty of a
separate offense and, upon conviction thereof before any magisterial district
judge of the borough or other court having jurisdiction over same, shall be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 and costs of prosecution for
each offense, and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, to
imprisonment in the county jail for not more than 30 days. Each day that a
violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
   (D)   Application for Appeal. Appeals may be taken by any person aggrieved
by any decision of interpretation by the Code Official or other authorized
official to act pursuant to this Code to the Board of Appeals. The members of
the Council of Dillsburg Borough shall act as the Board of Appeals. All appeals
under this section shall be filed within 15 days after notice of the decision
of the Code Official or other authorized official. The appeal shall be filed in
duplicate and shall be filed with the Code Official. One copy of the appeal
shall be given by the Code Official to any other official involved in the case.
Parties to the appeal shall be the person filing the appeal, the owner of any
property involved and the Code Official in his or her official capacity. The
Code Official shall not give less than ten days’ written notice of the hearing
to the parties.
      (1)   The Board of Appeals shall hold a public hearing within 30 days
after the appeal was filed. Unless the parties request a stenographically
recorded hearing, the testimony will be tape-recorded. If a stenographically
recorded hearing is requested, the party making the request shall pay the costs
thereof.
      (2)   The Board of Appeals shall not be bound by technical rules of
evidence, and all relevant evidence of reasonable probative value may be
permitted. Reasonable examination and cross examination shall be permitted.
      (3)   The Board of Appeals shall reach a written decision within 30 days
after the hearing, or if such a hearing is continued, within 30 days after the
continued hearing. Every decision shall be in writing and shall contain
findings and the reasons for the adjudication. Every decision shall be filed in
the office of the Code Official and shall be open to public inspection. A
certified copy of the decision shall be served upon all parties or their
counsel personally, or by mail, not later than five days following issuance of
the decision.
   (E)   Insect screens.
      (1)   Generally. At all times, every door, window and other outside
opening used or required for ventilation purposes serving any building
containing habitable rooms, food preparation areas, food service areas, or any
areas where products used in food for human consumption are processed,
manufactured, packaged or stored, shall be supplied with approved tightly-
fitting screens of not less than 16 mesh per inch and every swinging door
serving such room or area shall have a self-closing device in good working
condition.
      (2)   Exception. Screen doors shall not be required for out-swinging
doors or other types of openings which make screening impracticable, providing
other approved means, such as air curtains or insect repellant fans are
employed.
   (F)   Residential buildings. Every dwelling shall be provided with heating
facilities capable of maintaining a room temperature of 65°F (18°C) at a level
of three feet (914 mm) above the floor and a distance of three feet (914 mm)
from the exterior walls in all habitable rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms
based on the outside design temperature required for the locality by the
Mechanical Code listed in Appendix A. Every owner and operator of any building
who rents, leases or lets one or more dwelling unit, rooming unit, dormitory or
guest room on terms, either express or implied, to furnish heat to the
occupants thereof shall supply sufficient heat during the period from October 1
to March 31 to maintain a room temperature of not less than 65°F (18°C) in all
habitable rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms during the hours between 6:30 a.m.
and 10:30 p.m. of each day and not less than 60°F (16°C) during other hours.
The temperature shall be measured at a point three feet (914 mm) above the
floor and three feet (914 mm) from the exterior walls. When the outdoor
temperature is below the outdoor design temperature required for the locality
by the Mechanical Code listed in Appendix A, the owner or operator shall not be
required to maintain the minimum room temperatures, provided the heating system
is operating at full capacity, with supply valves and dampers in a full open
position.
   (G)   Nonresidential Structures.
      (1)   Generally. Every enclosed occupied work space shall be supplied
with sufficient heat during the period from October 1 to March 31 to maintain a
temperature of not less that 65°F (18°C) during all working hours. The
temperature shall be measured at a point three feet (914 mm) from the exterior
walls.
      (2)   Exceptions.
         (a)   Processing, storage and operation area that require cooling or
special temperature conditions.
         (b)   Areas in which persons are primarily engaged in vigorous
physical activities.
(Ord. 2001-4, passed 2-13-2001, § 4)
§ 5-605 INCONSISTENT ORDINANCES REPEALED.
   All existing ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith be and
are hereby repealed; provided that ordinances or those parts of same not
expressly named in this section which impose property maintenance requirements
or specifications more restrictive than adopted hereby shall not be considered
in conflict with this Part.
(Ord. 2001-4, passed 2-13-2001, § 5)
PART 7: UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE
Section
   
5-701   Adoption
   
5-702   Administration and enforcement
   
5-703   Board of Appeals
   
5-704   Existing Building Codes
   
5-705   Fees
§ 5-701 ADOPTION.
   The Uniform Construction Code, contained in 34 Pa. Code Chapters 401 through
405, as amended from time to time, is hereby adopted and incorporated herein by
reference as the Municipal Building Code (Code) of the Borough of Dillsburg,
York County, Pennsylvania.
(Ord. 2004-1, passed 4-13-2004, § 1)
§ 5-702 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The Borough of Dillsburg hereby elects to administer and enforce the
provisions of the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act, Act 45 of 1999, 35 P.S.
§§ 7210.101 through 7210.1103, as amended from time to time, and its
regulations.
   (B)   Administration and enforcement of the Uniform Construction Code (Code)
within the Borough of Dillsburg shall be undertaken by the designated Building
Code Officer, who shall herein also be referred to, and known as, the “Code
Administrator”, to act on behalf of the borough.
(Ord. 2004-1, passed 4-13-2004, § 2)
§ 5-703 BOARD OF APPEALS.
   A Board of Appeals will be appointed by Council and established by separate
resolution in conformity with the requirements of the relevant provisions of
the Uniform Construction Code (Code), as amended from time to time, and for the
purposes set forth therein.
(Ord. 2004-1, passed 4-13-2004, § 3)
§ 5-704 EXISTING BUILDING CODES.
   (A)   All building code ordinances or portions of ordinances which were
adopted by this borough on or before July 1, 1999, and which equal or exceed
the requirements of the Uniform Construction Code shall continue in full force
and effect until such time as such provisions fail to equal or exceed the
minimum requirements of the Code, as amended from time to time.
   (B)   All relevant ordinances previously adopted by the Borough of Dillsburg
not governed by the Uniform Construction Code (Code) shall remain in full force
and effect, including, but not limited to, the smoke detector ordinance (2001-
3, Building Separation Standards Ordinance (2001-11) with NFPA 80A, MFPA Life
Safety Code).
   (C)   The following Codes are to be adopted as part of the Uniform
Construction Code:
      (1)   International Building Code (2021), Residential Code (2021),
Mechanical Code (2021), Plumbing Code (2021), Electrical Code (2023); and
      (2)   2002 International with NFPA 70, Fuel Gas Code (2021), Fire Code
(2021), Energy Conservation Code (2021), Existing Building Code (2021), Urban
Wildland Interface Code (2021) and International Property Maintenance Code.
(Ord. 2004-1, passed 4-13-2004, § 4)
§ 5-705 FEES.
   Fees assessable by the borough for the administration and enforcement
undertaken pursuant to the Uniform Construction Code (Code) shall be
established by the Council by resolution from time to time and included in the
annual fee schedule.
(Ord. 2004-1, passed 4-13-2004, § 5)
CHAPTER 6: CONDUCT
      Part
         
1.   DISORDERLY CONDUCT
         
2.   CURFEW
PART 1: DISORDERLY CONDUCT
Section
   
6-101   Disorderly conduct defined
§ 6-101 DISORDERLY CONDUCT DEFINED.
   Disorderly conduct is hereby declared to be an unlawful act, and the doing
or performing of any such act by any person or firm, whether as principal or
agent, within the limits of the borough is hereby prohibited.
   (A)   DISORDERLY CONDUCT is defined as any act, word or conduct causing or
tending to cause a disturbance of the peace and good order of the borough, or
any act causing or tending to cause any danger, discomfort or annoyance to the
inhabitants of the borough or to the users of the borough thoroughfares,
whether streets or sidewalks, and shall include, but not be limited to:
loitering; fighting; drunkenness; vagrancy; begging; the making, causing or
permitting of any unnecessary noise or profane or indecent language; the sale
of fireworks and/or their use; the firing or discharging of any pistol, gun,
rifle or air rifle; any other use of firearms which shall endanger the safety
or interfere with the comfort or convenience of persons in the borough; the
propelling of stones or other missiles, either by throwing, using sling shots
or other manner of propulsion; coasting with sleds or coasters in a manner as
to endanger public use of thoroughfares or sidewalks; careless driving by
owners or occupants of vehicles or by operators of bicycles in such manner as
to endanger or annoy persons in the borough; the riding of bicycles or roller
skating on sidewalks in such manner as to endanger other persons using same;
and loitering or prowling not otherwise made unlawful by statutes of the
Commonwealth that may interfere with the comfort, convenience or safety of
persons in the borough.
   (B)   Any person or firm, whether principal or agent, being convicted of
disorderly conduct before the magisterial district judge, shall be sentenced to
pay a fine of not more than $1,000 and costs of prosecution; in default of the
payment of such fine and costs, shall be sentenced to imprisonment for a period
not in excess of 30 days.
(Ord. 144, passed 3-1-1979, Art. LX, § 6010)
PART 2: CURFEW
Section
   
6-201   Purpose
   
6-202   Definitions and interpretation
   
6-203   Establishment of curfew and exceptions
   
6-204   Penalties
§ 6-201 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this Part is to repeal Dillsburg Borough Code Chapter 6, Part
2 and prescribe, in accordance with prevailing community standards, regulations
for the conduct of minors on streets or public places at night, for the
protection of said minors in this borough from each other and from other
persons on the streets during nighttime hours, for the enforcement of parental
control and responsibility for said minors, for the protections of the public
from nocturnal mischief by minors and for the reduction of the incidence of
juvenile criminal activity, for the furthermore of family responsibility, and
for the promotion of the public good, health, safety and welfare of the
residents of this borough.
(Ord. 2008-6, passed 6-9-2008)
§ 6-202 DEFINITIONS AND INTERPRETATION.
   (A)   For the purpose of this Part, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      ESTABLISHMENT. Any privately owned place of business carried on for a
profit, or any place of amusement or entertainment in which the public is
invited.
      MINOR. Any person under the age of 18 years of age.
      OPERATOR. Any individual, firm, association, partnership or corporation
operating, managing or conducting any establishment; and whenever used in any
clause prescribing a penalty, the term OPERATOR, as applied to associations or
partnerships shall include members or partners thereof and as applied to
corporations, shall include officers thereof.
      PARENT. Any natural parent of a minor, as herein defined, or a guardian,
or any adult person responsible for the care and custody of a minor. When used
in this Part PARENT shall mean all such persons so defined.
      PUBLIC PLACE. Any public or private street, alley, sidewalk, park,
playground, public building, vacant lot or other area generally open to the
public or in a parked vehicle at any said locations in this borough.
   (B)   In this Part, the singular shall include the plural, the plural shall
include the singular, and the masculine shall include the feminine and the
neuter.
(Ord. 2008-6, passed 6-9-2008)
§ 6-203 ESTABLISHMENT OF CURFEW AND EXCEPTIONS.
   Unless accompanied by a parent/guardian or competent adult with parental
permission, it shall be unlawful for any minor to be or remain in or upon any
public place and no operator of an establishment or his or her agents or
employees shall permit any minor to remain upon the premises of said
establishment within this borough between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
prevailing time, except as follows:
   (A)   Any minor or operator of an establishment in which the minor is
employed in lawful employment during curfew hours;
   (B)   Any minor traveling directly from his or her lawful place of
employment to his or her home after working past curfew hours, or traveling
from an activity described in subsection (C) below which occurred past curfew
hours;
   (C)   A minor attending an activity sponsored by school, religious, non-
profit, governmental or similar organization on which the activity is
supervised by adults;
   (D)   A minor may operate a vehicle during night time curfew hours, if they
possess a valid senior driver’s license;
   (E)   A minor on an emergency errand; and
   (F)   Minors possessing a written document, dated that same day and signed
by a parent/guardian, specifying the starting/ending times, place or places,
purpose, and necessity of the minor being in a public place.
(Ord. 2008-6, passed 6-9-2008)
§ 6-204 PENALTIES.
   (A)   A minor and a parent or guardian shall be cited if the minor is found
in violation of curfew. The fine shall be up to $25 for the first violation.
Upon a second violation of any curfew ordinance within the Commonwealth the
fine shall be $100. Upon third or subsequent violation of any curfew ordinance
within the Commonwealth the fine shall be $500.
   (B)   The court is encouraged to refer unpaid curfew fines and/or sentences
to Juvenile Probation as a delinquency referral.
   (C)   Any operator of an establishment found to be in violation of curfew,
as described in § 6-203 for allowing a juvenile to be in his or her
establishment in violation of curfew, shall pay a fine of up to $300 for each
minor found to be in violation of curfew upon his or her establishment.
(Ord. 2008-6, passed 6-9-2008)
CHAPTER 7: FIRE PREVENTION AND FIRE PROTECTION
      Part
         
1.   SMOKE DETECTORS
PART 1: SMOKE DETECTORS
Section
   
7-101   Smoke detectors required
   
7-102   Installation and placement
   
7-103   Capabilities of smoke detector
   
7-104   Replacement of smoke detector
   
7-105   Violation and penalty
   
7-106   Power supply
   
7-107   Alternative fire detection
   
7-108   Repealer
   
7-109   Effective date
§ 7-101 SMOKE DETECTORS REQUIRED.
   (A)   All buildings and structures used for residential occupancy,
including, but not limited to, single-family dwellings, multi-family dwellings,
multi-family apartment houses, boarding houses, lodging homes, rooming houses,
tourist homes, bed and breakfast homes, dormitories, hotels, motels, resident
buildings shall have hardwired with battery back-up smoke detectors installed
in each sleeping area of said building or structure and in the area outside the
sleeping area. A minimum of one smoke detector is required per floor of the
building or structure. Where bedrooms or rooms habitually used for sleeping are
separated by other use areas, such as kitchens, living rooms or dining rooms,
they shall be considered separate sleeping areas for the purpose of this
section. Additionally, in each multi-family dwelling or apartment house
containing three or more units and in each boarding house, lodging home,
rooming house, bed and breakfast home, tourist home, dormitory, hotel, motel
and resident building, smoke detectors shall be installed in the cellar and/or
basement and on every floor in common areas (e.g., basements, cellars,
hallways, corridors and the like) along with those placed in sleeping areas.
   (B)   It shall be the responsibility of the owner of each new residential
occupancy unit, and each existing residential occupancy unit in any structure
having at least one occupant, to install smoke detectors as heretofore
provided, except as provided in §
7-104. It shall be the responsibility of the tenants/residents in all occupied
units and of the owner in all other cases to maintain said smoke detectors.
Such maintenance shall include keeping the smoke detector units serviceable by
replacing batteries when necessary and/or by keeping them connected to an
electric source so that they remain capable of transmitting, an audible signal
in the presence of smoke.
(Ord. 2001-3, passed 2-13-2001, § 1; Ord. 2007-11, passed 12-11-2007)
§ 7-102 INSTALLATION AND PLACEMENT.
   (A)   In all other buildings and/or structures in the borough for which a
use and/or occupancy permit has been issued, smoke detectors shall be installed
and placed so as to provide adequate coverage for the structure in accordance
with standards set forth in the International Fire Code, 2006 Edition, and
subsequent editions as published, copies of which are on file in the office of
the Secretary of Dillsburg Borough at the Municipal Building, 151 South
Baltimore Street, Dillsburg, York County, Pennsylvania.
   (B)   It shall be the responsibility of the owner of each new structure, and
existing structure having at least one occupant, other than those structures
identified in §
7-101, to install hardwired with battery back-up smoke detectors as heretofore
provided (at least one on each floor). It shall be the responsibility of the
tenants/occupants in all such occupied units and of the owner in all such
unoccupied units, if any, to maintain said smoke detectors. Such maintenance
shall include keeping the smoke detector units serviceable by replacing
batteries when necessary and/or by keeping them connected to an electrical
source so that they remain capable of transmitting an audible signal in the
presence of smoke.
(Ord. 2001-3, passed 2-13-2001, § 2; Ord. 2007-11, passed 12-11-2007)
§ 7-103 CAPABILITIES OF SMOKE DETECTOR.
   Each smoke detector shall be capable of sensing visible or invisible
particles of combustion and shall be capable of producing an audible alarm
thereof. Each smoke detection device utilized shall be maintained in operable
condition and shall be of type certified by a nationally recognized inspection
agency, such as Underwriters Laboratory, as a properly operating fire detection
device for the protection of life/safety.
(Ord. 2001-3, passed 2-13-2001, § 3)
§ 7-104 REPLACEMENT OF SMOKE DETECTOR.
   In addition to any owner or tenant who fails to carry out the obligations
imposed hereby, any person or persons who remove or destroy any smoke detector
(except the owner or tenant for the purpose of immediate replacement) shall be
deemed in violation of this Part.
(Ord. 2001-3, passed 2-13-2001, § 4)
§ 7-105 VIOLATION AND PENALTY.
   Any person, firm, corporation or other entity who violates this Part shall,
upon conviction thereof before any magisterial district judge of the borough or
any other court having jurisdiction over same, be sentenced to pay a fine of
not more than $1,000 plus costs of prosecution for each offense and reasonable
legal (including attorney) fees, and in default of payment of such fine and
costs, to imprisonment in the county jail for not more than 30 days. Any
architect, engineer, builder, contractor, agent, person, partnership or
corporation employed in connection therewith, who may have participated or
assisted in the commission of any such violation shall each be guilty of a
separate offense, and, upon conviction thereof before any magisterial district
judge in the borough or other court having jurisdiction over same, shall be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more that $1,000 and costs of prosecution for
each offense, and, in default of payment thereof, to imprisonment in the county
jail for not more than 30 days. Each day that a violation continues shall be
deemed a separate offense.
(Ord. 2001-3, passed 2-13-2001, § 5; Ord. 2007-11, passed 12-11-2007)
§ 7-106 POWER SUPPLY.
   Smoke detectors shall be inner connected and hardwired directly to the
building’s power supply. In all existing structures, except residential single-
family, owner occupied existing structures, it is required that smoke detectors
be hardwired to the building’s power supply All existing structures under-going
structural improvements, remodeling or rehabilitation greater than 20% shall be
equipped with hard-wired smoke detectors as heretofore provided. All
nonresidential structures covered by this Part shall be protected by hardwired
smoke detectors.
(Ord. 2001-3, passed 2-13-2001, § 6; Ord. 2007-11, passed 12-11-2007)
§ 7-107 ALTERNATIVE FIRE DETECTION.
   Alternative fire detection and/or prevention systems may be installed as a
substitute for the smoke detectors required hereunder provided that such
alternative fire detection/ prevention system has been individually approved
and a permit therefor issued by the Code Official. Alternative fire detection/
prevention systems installed and in operation prior to and on the effective
date of this Part are hereby deemed acceptable provided such systems are in
conformance with the standards of applicable codes.
(Ord. 2001-3, passed 2-13-2001, § 7)
§ 7-108 REPEALER.
   All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby
repealed. This Part is intended to establish a minimum requirement for fire
detection devices in buildings and structures located within the borough. Other
ordinances and/or codes requiring more stringent fire detection/prevention
measures shall not be deemed in conflict herewith.
(Ord. 2001-3, passed 2-13-2001, § 8)
§ 7-109 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This Part shall take effect immediately upon its enactment; provided,
however, that existing buildings and structures on the date hereof which by
terms of this Part are required to install and maintain smoke detectors or
approved alternate fire detection/ prevention systems shall have a period of
120 days after enactment within which to comply with the requirements of this
Part.
(Ord. 2001-3, passed 2-13-2001, § 9)
CHAPTER 8: FLOODPLAINS
      Part
         
1.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
         
2.   ADMINISTRATION
         
3.   IDENTIFICATION OF FLOODPLAIN AREA
         
4.   TECHNICAL PROVISIONS
         
5.   GENERAL
         
6.   EXISTING STRUCTURES IN IDENTIFIED FLOODPLAIN AREAS
         
7.   VARIANCES
         
8.   DEFINITIONS
PART 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
8-101   Intent
   
8-102   Applicability
   
8-103   Abrogation and greater restrictions
   
8-104   Severability
   
8-105   Warning and disclaimer of liability
§ 8-101 INTENT.
   The intent of this chapter is to:
   (A)   Promote the general health, welfare and safety of the community;
   (B)   Encourage the utilization of appropriate construction practices in
order to prevent or minimize flood damage in the future;
   (C)   Minimize danger to public health by protecting water supply and
natural drainage;
   (D)   Reduce financial burdens imposed on the community, its governmental
units and its residents, by preventing excessive development in areas subject
to flooding; and
   (E)   Comply with federal and state floodplain management requirements.
(Ord. 1984-3, passed 2-21-1989, Art. I, § 1.00)
§ 8-102 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, business or
corporation to undertake, or cause to be undertaken, any construction or
development anywhere within the borough unless a building permit has been
obtained from the Building Code Official or other designated official.
   (B)   A building permit shall not be required for minor repairs to existing
buildings or structures if the total costs of repairs does not amount to
$1,000.
(Ord. 1984-3, passed 2-21-1989, Art. I, § 1.01)
§ 8-103 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
   This chapter supersedes any other conflicting provision which may be in
effect in identified floodplain area. However, any other ordinance provisions
shall remain in full force and effect to the extent that those provisions are
more restrictive. If there is any conflict between any of the provisions of
this chapter, the more restrictive shall apply.
(Ord. 1989-3, passed 2-21-1989, Art. I, § 1.02)
§ 8-104 SEVERABILITY.
   If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this
chapter shall be declared invalid for any reason whatsoever such decision shall
not affect the remaining portions of the chapter, which shall remain in full
force and effect, and for this purpose the provisions of this chapter are
hereby declared to be severable.
(Ord. 1989-3, passed 2-21-1989, Art. I, § 1.03)
§ 8-105 WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   (A)   The degree of flood protection sought by the provisions of this
chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on
acceptable engineering methods of study. Larger floods may occur. Flood heights
may be increased by human-made or natural causes such as ice jams and bridge
openings restricted by debris. This chapter does not imply that areas outside
any identified floodplain area, or that land uses permitted within such area
will be free from flooding or flood damages.
   (B)   This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the borough or
any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance
on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
(Ord. 1989-3, passed 2-21-1989, Art. I, § 1.04)
PART 2: ADMINISTRATION
Section
   
8-201   Building permits required
   
8-202   Issuance of building permit
   
8-203   Application procedures and requirements
   
8-204   Review by County Conservation District
   
8-205   Review of application by others
   
8-206   Changes
   
8-207   Placards
   
8-208   Start of construction
   
8-209   Inspection and revocation
   
8-210   Fees
   
8-211   Enforcement
   
8-212   Appeals
§ 8-201 BUILDING PERMITS REQUIRED.
   Building permits shall be required before any construction or development is
undertaken within any area of the borough.
(Ord. 1989-3, passed 2-21-1989, Art. II, § 2.00)
§ 8-202 ISSUANCE OF BUILDING PERMIT.
   (A)   The Building Code Official or other designated official shall issue a
building permit only after it has been determined that the proposed work to be
undertaken will be in conformance with the requirements of this and all other
applicable codes and ordinances.
   (B)   Prior to the issuance of any building permit, the Building Code
Official or other designated official shall review the application for permit
to determine if all other necessary government permits required by state and
federal laws have been obtained, such as those required by the Pennsylvania
Sewage Facilities Act (Act 1966-537, as amended), being 35 P.S. §§ 750.1 et
seq.; the Pennsylvania Dam Safety and Encroachments Act (Act 1978-325, as
amended), being 32 P.S. §§ 693.1 et seq.; the Pennsylvania Clean Streams Act
(Act 1937-394, as amended), being 35 P.S. §§ 691.1 et seq.; and the U.S. Clean
Water Act, § 404, 33 U.S.C. § 1344. No permit shall be issued until this
determination has been made.
   (C)   No encroachment, alteration or improvement of any kind shall be made
to any watercourse until all adjacent municipalities which may be affected by
such action have been notified by the borough, and until all required permits
or approvals have been first obtained from the Department of Environmental
Protection, Bureau of Dams and Waterway Management.
   (D)   In addition, the Federal Insurance Administrator and Pennsylvania
Department of Community and Economic Development, Bureau of Community Planning,
shall be notified by the borough prior to any alteration or relocation of any
watercourse.
(Ord. 1989-3, passed 2-21-1989, Art. II, § 2.01)
§ 8-203 APPLICATION PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Application for such a building permit shall be made, in writing, to
the Building Code Official or other designated official on forms supplied by
the borough. Such application shall contain the following:
      (1)   Name and address of applicant;
      (2)   Name and address of owner of land on which proposed construction is
to occur;
      (3)   Name and address of contractor;
      (4)   Site location;
      (5)   Listing of other permits required;
      (6)   Brief description of proposed work and estimated cost; and
      (7)   A plan of the site showing the exact size and location of the
proposed construction as well as any existing buildings or structures.
   (B)   If any proposed construction or development is located entirely or
partially within any identified floodplain area, applicants for building
permits shall provide all the necessary information in sufficient detail and
clarity to enable the Building Code Official or other designated official to
determine that:
      (1)   All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage and conform with the requirements of this and other applicable codes and
ordinances;
      (2)   All utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and
water systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood
damage; and
      (3)   Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood
hazards.
   (C)   Applicants shall file the following minimum information plus any other
pertinent information (e.g., any or all of the technical information contained
in §
8-502 as may be required by the Building Code Official or other designated
official to make the above determination):
      (1)   A completed building permit application form;
      (2)   A plan of the entire site, clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of
one inch being equal to 100 feet or less, showing the following:
         (a)   North arrow, scale and date;
         (b)   Topographic contour lines, if available;
         (c)   All property and lot lines including dimensions, and the size of
the site expressed in acres or square feet;
         (d)   The location of all existing and proposed buildings, structures
and other improvements, including the location of any existing or proposed
subdivision and land development;
         (e)   The location of all existing streets, drives and other
accessways; and
         (f)   The location of any existing bodies of water or watercourses,
identified floodplain areas, and, if available, information pertaining to the
floodway, and the flow of water including direction and velocities.
   (D)   Plans of all proposed buildings, structures and other improvements,
drawn at suitable scale showing the following:
      (1)   The proposed lowest floor elevation of any proposed building based
upon North American Vertical Datum of 1988;
      (2)   The elevation of the 100-year flood;
      (3)   If available, information concerning flood depth, pressures,
velocities, impact and uplift forces and other factors associated with 100-year
flood; and
      (4)   Detailed information concerning any proposed floodproofing
measures.
   (E)   The following data and documentation:
      (1)   Documentation, certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect, to show that the cumulative effect of any proposed development
within a FE (Special Floodplain Area), when combined with all other existing
and anticipated development, will not increase the elevation of the 100-year
flood more than one foot at any point;
      (2)   A document, certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect, which states that the proposed construction or development has been
adequately designed to withstand the pressures, velocities, impact and uplift
forces associated with the 100-year flood;
      (3)   Detailed information needed to determine compliance with §
8-404(F), Storage, and §
8-405, Development Which May Endanger Human Life, including:
         (a)   The amount, location and purpose of any material or substances
referred to in §§
8-404(F) and
8-405 which are intended to be otherwise maintained on site; and
         (b)   A description of the safeguards incorporated into the design of
the proposed structure to prevent leaks or spills of the dangerous materials or
substances listed in §
8-405 during a 100-year flood.
   (F)   The appropriate component of the Department of Environmental
Protection “Planning Module for Land Development”; and
   (G)   Where any excavation of grading is proposed, a plan meeting the
requirements of the Department of Environmental protection, to implement and
maintain erosion and sedimentation control.
(Ord. 1989-3, passed 2-21-1989, Art. II, § 2.02; Ord. 2015-5, passed 12-8-2015)
§ 8-204 REVIEW BY COUNTY CONSERVATION DISTRICT.
   (A)   A copy of all applications and plans for any proposed construction or
development in any identified floodplain area to be considered for approval
shall be submitted by the Building Code Official or other designated official
to the County Conservation District for review and comment prior to the
issuance of a building permit.
   (B)   The recommendations of the Conservation District shall be considered
by the Building Code Official or other designated official for possible
incorporation into the proposed plan.
(Ord. 1989-3, passed 2-21-1989, Art. II, § 2.03)
§ 8-205 REVIEW OF APPLICATION BY OTHERS.
   A copy of all plans and applications for any construction or development in
any identified floodplain are to be considered for approval may be submitted by
the Building Code Official or other designated official to any other
appropriate agencies and/or individuals (e.g., Planning Commission, Borough
Engineer and the like) for review and comment.
(Ord. 1989-3, passed 2-21-1989, Art. II, § 2.04)
§ 8-206 CHANGES.
   After the issuance of a building permit by the Building Code Official or
other designated official, for construction within a floodplain, no changes of
any kind shall be made to the application, permit or any of the plans,
specification or other documents submitted with the application without the
written consent or approval of the Building Code Official or other designated
official. Requests for any such change shall be in writing, and shall be
submitted by the applicant to Building Code Official or other designated
official for consideration.
(Ord. 1989-3, passed 2-21-1989, Art. II, § 2.05)
§ 8-207 PLACARDS.
   In addition to the building permit, the Building Code Official or other
designated official shall issue a placard which shall be displayed on the
premises during the time construction is in progress. This placard shall show
the number of the building permit, the date of its issuance and be signed by
the Building Code Official or other designated official.
(Ord. 1989-3, passed 2-21-1989, Art. II, § 2.06)
§ 8-208 START OF CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   Work on the proposed construction and/or development shall begin
within six months and be completed within 12 months after the date of issuance
of the building permit or the permit shall expire unless a time extension is
granted, in writing, by the Building Code Official or other designated
official. Construction and/or development shall be considered to have started
with the preparation of land, land clearing, grading, filling, excavation of
basement, floorings, piers or foundations, erection of temporary forms, the
installation of piling under proposed subsurface flooring, or the installation
of sewer, gas and water pipes, or electrical or other lines from the street.
   (B)   Time extensions shall be granted only if a written request is
submitted by the applicant, which sets forth sufficient and reasonable cause
for the Building Code Official or other designated official to approve such a
request.
(Ord. 1989-3, passed 2-21-1989, Art. II, § 2.07)
§ 8-209 INSPECTION AND REVOCATION.
   (A)   During the construction period, the Building Code Official or other
designated official or other authorized official shall inspect the premises to
determine that the work is progressing in compliance with the information
provided on the permit application and with all applicable municipal laws and
ordinances. He or she shall make as many inspections during and upon completion
of the work as are necessary.
   (B)   In the discharge of his or her duties, the Building Code Official or
other designated official shall have the authority to enter any building,
structure, premises or development in the identified floodplain areas, upon
presentation of proper credentials, at any reasonable hour to enforce the
provisions of this chapter.
   (C)   In the event the Building Code Official or other designated official
discovers that the work does not comply with the permit application or any
applicable laws and ordinances, or that there has been a false statement or
misrepresentation by any applicant, the Building Code Official or other
designated official shall revoke the building permit and report such fact to
the Council for whatever action it considers necessary.
   (D)   A record of all such inspections and violation of this chapter shall
be maintained.
(Ord. 1989-3, passed 2-21-1989, Art. II, § 2.08)
§ 8-210 FEES.
   Application for a building permit shall be accompanied by a fee, payable to
the borough, based upon the estimated cost of the proposed construction as
determined by the Building Code Official or other designated official. The fee
shall be in such amount as may, from time to time, be established by Borough
Council by resolution or other action.
(Ord. 1989-3, passed 2-21-1989, Art. II, § 2.09; Ord. 1999-05, passed 6-8-1999,
§ 1)
§ 8-211 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Generally.
      (1)   The Building Permit Officer and/or Borough Manager, or either of
them, are hereby appointed to administer and enforce the chapter and are
referred to herein as the Floodplain Administrator. The Floodplain
Administrator may:
         (a)   Fulfill the duties and responsibilities set forth in these
regulations;
         (b)   Delegate duties and responsibilities set forth in these
regulations to qualified technical personnel, plan examiners, inspectors and
other employees; or
         (c)   Enter into a written agreement or written contract with another
agency or private sector entity to administer specific provisions of these
regulations. Administration of any part of these regulations by another entity
shall not relieve the community of its responsibilities pursuant to the
participation requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program as set forth
in the Code of Federal Regulations at 44 C.F.R. § 59.22.
      (2)   In the absence of a designated Floodplain Administrator, the
Floodplain Administrator duties are to be fulfilled by the Chief Executive
Officer.
   (B)   Notices. Whenever the Building Code Official or other designated
official or other authorized municipal representative determines that there are
reasonable grounds to believe that there has been a violation of any provisions
of this chapter, or of any regulation adopted pursuant thereto, the Building
Code Official or other designated official shall give notice of such alleged
violation as hereinafter provided. Such notice shall be in writing; include a
statement of the reasons for its issuance; allow a reasonable time not to
exceed a period of 30 days for the performance of any act it requires; be
served upon the property owner or his or her agent as the case may require;
provided, however, that such notice or order shall be deemed to have been
properly served upon such owner or agent when a copy thereof has been served
with such notice by any other method authorized or required by the laws of this
state; contain an outline of remedial action which, if taken, will effect
compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
   (C)   Penalties. Any person, firm, corporation or other entity who fails to
comply with any or all the requirements or provisions of this chapter or who
fails or refuses to comply with any notice, order of direction of the Building
Code Official or other designated official or any other authorized employee of
the borough shall be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction, shall pay a
fine to the borough of not more that $1,000, plus costs of prosecution. In
default of such payment, such person shall be imprisoned in county prison for a
period not to exceed 30 days. Each day during which any violation of this
chapter continues shall constitute a separate offense. In addition to the above
penalties all other actions are hereby reserved, including an action in equity
for the proper enforcement of this chapter. The imposition of a fine or penalty
for any violation of, or noncompliance with, this chapter shall not excuse the
violation or noncompliance or permit it to continue and all such person shall
be required to correct or remedy such violations and noncompliances within a
reasonable time. Any development initiated or any structure or building
constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, altered or relocated, in noncompliance;
with this chapter may be declared by the Council to be a public nuisance and
abatable as such.
(Ord. 1989-3, passed 2-21-1989, Art. II, § 2.10; Ord. 2015-5, passed 12-8-2015)
§ 8-212 APPEALS.
   (A)   Any person aggrieved by any action or decision of the Building Code
Official or other designated official concerning the administration of the
provisions of this chapter may appeal to the Council. Such appeal must be
filed, in writing, within 30 days after the decision or action of the Building
Code Official or other designated official.
   (B)   Upon receipt of such appeal the Council shall be set a time and place,
within not less than ten nor more than 30 days, for the purpose of considering
the appeal. Notice of the time and place at which appeal will be considered
shall be given to all parties.
   (C)   Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Council may seek relief
therefrom by appeal to court, as provided by the laws of this Commonwealth
including the Pennsylvania Floodplain Management Act, being 35 P.S. §§ 679.101
et seq.
(Ord. 1989-3, passed 2-21-1989, Art. II, § 2.10)
PART 3: IDENTIFICATION OF FLOODPLAIN AREA
Section
   
8-301   Identification
   
8-302   Description of floodplain areas
   
8-303   Changes in identification of area
   
8-304   Boundary disputes
§ 8-301 IDENTIFICATION.
   The identified floodplain area shall be any areas of the borough, classified
as special flood hazard areas (SFHAs) in the flood insurance study (FIS) and
the accompanying flood insurance rate map (FIRMs) dated December 16, 2015 and
issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) or the most recent
revision thereof, including all digital data developed as part of the flood
insurance study.
(Ord. 1989-3, passed 2-21-1989, Art. III, § 3.00; Ord. 2009-5, passed 8-11-
2009; Ord. 2015-5, passed 12-8-2015)
§ 8-302 DESCRIPTION OF FLOODPLAIN AREAS.
   The identified floodplain area shall consist of the following specific
areas.
   (A)   FW (Floodway Area). The areas identified as “Floodway” in the AE Zone
in the flood insurance study prepared by the FEMA. The term shall also include
floodway areas which have been identified in other available studies or sources
of information for those floodplain areas where no floodway has been identified
in the flood insurance study. For the purposes of this chapter, the floodway is
based upon the criteria that a certain area within the floodplain would be
capable of carrying the waters of the 100-year flood more than one foot at any
point.
   (B)   FF (Flood-Fringe Area). The remaining portions of the 100-year
floodplain in those areas identified as an AE Zone in the flood insurance
study, where a floodway has been delineated. The basis for the outermost
boundary of this area shall be the 100-year flood elevations as shown in the
flood profiles contained in the flood insurance study.
   (C)   FE (Special Floodplain Area). The areas identified as Zone AE in the
flood insurance study, where 100-year flood elevations have been provided, but
no floodway has been delineated.
   (D)   FA (General Floodplain Area).
      (1)   The areas identified as Zone A in the FIS for which no 100-year
flood elevations have been provided. When available, information from other
federal, state and other acceptable sources shall be used to determine the 100-
year elevation shall be determined by using a point on the boundary of the
identified floodplain area which is nearest the construction site in question.
      (2)   In lieu of the above, the borough may require the applicants to
determine the elevation with hydrologic and hydraulic engineering techniques.
Hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be undertaken only by professional
engineers or others of demonstrated qualifications, who shall certify that the
technical concepts, studies, analyses, computation and the like shall be
submitted in sufficient detail to allow a thorough, technical review by the
borough.
   (E)   In Zone A, in the absence of FEMA BFE data and floodway data, consider
other available data as basis for elevating residential structures to or above
base flood level, and for floodproofing or elevating nonresidential structures
to or above base flood level.
(Ord. 1989-3, passed 2-21-1989, Art. III, § 3.01; Ord. 2015-5, passed 12-8-
2015)
§ 8-303 CHANGES IN IDENTIFICATION OF AREA.
   The identified floodplain area may be revised or modified by the Borough
Council when studies or other information provided by a qualified agency or
person documents the need for such revision. However, prior to any change to
the special flood hazard area, approval must be obtained from FEMA.
Additionally, as soon as practicable, but not later that six months after the
date such information becomes available, the borough shall notify FEMA of the
changes to the special flood hazard area by submitting technical or scientific
data.
(Ord. 1989-3, passed 2-21-1989, Art. III, § 3.02; Ord. 2015-5, passed 12-8-
2015)
§ 8-304 BOUNDARY DISPUTES.
   Should a dispute concerning any identified floodplain boundary arise, an
initial determination shall be made by the Borough Planning Commission and any
party aggrieved by this decision may appeal to the Council. The burden of proof
shall be on the appellant.
(Ord. 1989-3, passed 2-21-1989, Art. III, § 3.03)
PART 4: TECHNICAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
8-401   General
   
8-402   Special requirements for FW, FE and FA Areas
   
8-402A   Recreational vehicles in Zones A, A1-30, AH and AE
   
8-403   Elevation and floodproofing requirements
   
8-404   Design and construction standards
   
8-405   Development which may endanger human life
   
8-406   Special requirements for manufactured homes
§ 8-401 GENERAL.
   (A)   Any new construction, development, uses or activities allowed within
any identified floodplain area, shall be undertaken in strict compliance with
the provisions contained in this chapter and any other applicable codes,
ordinances and regulations.
   (B)   No encroachment, alteration or improvement of any kind shall be made
to any watercourse unless all adjacent municipalities which may be affected by
such action have been notified by the municipality, and until all required
permits or approvals have first been obtained from the Department of
Environmental Protection Regional Office. In addition, FEMA and the
Pennsylvania Department of Community and Economic Development, shall be
notified prior to any alteration or relocation of any watercourse.
   (C)   All subdivision proposals and development proposals containing at
least 50 lots or at least five acres, whichever is the lesser, in identified
floodplain areas where base flood elevation data are not available, shall be
supported by hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses that determine base
flood elevations and floodway information. The analyses shall be prepared by a
licensed professional engineer in a format required by FEMA for a conditional
letter of map revision and letter of map revision. Submittal requirements and
processing fees shall be the responsibility of the applicant.
   (D)   Any new construction, development, uses or activities allowed within
any identified floodplain area, shall be undertaken in strict compliance with
the provisions contained in this chapter and any other applicable codes,
ordinances and regulations.
   (E)   No encroachment, alteration or improvement of any kind shall be made
to any watercourse unless it can be shown that the activity will not reduce or
impede the flood carrying capacity of the watercourse in any way.
(Ord. 1989-3, passed 2-21-1989, Art. IV, § 4.00; Ord. 2015-5, passed 12-8-2015)
§ 8-402 SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS FOR FW, FE AND FA AREAS.
   (A)   Within any FW (Floodway Area), the following provisions apply.
      (1)   Any new construction, development, use, activity or encroachment
that would cause any increase in flood heights shall be prohibited.
      (2)   No new construction or development shall be allowed, unless a
permit is obtained from the Department of Environmental Protection Bureau of
Dams and Waterway Management.
   (B)   Within any FE (Special Floodplain Area), no new construction or
development shall be allowed unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative
effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and
anticipated development, will not increase the elevation of the 100-year flood
more that one foot at any point.
   (C)   Within any FE (Special Floodplain Area) or FA (General Floodplain
Area), the following provisions apply.
      (1)   No new construction or development shall be located within the area
measured 50 feet landward from the top-of-bank of any watercourse, unless a
permit is obtained from the Department of Environmental Protection, Bureau of
Dams and Waterway Management.
      (2)   No new construction or development shall be located within the area
measured 50 feet landward from the top-of-bank of any watercourse.
      (3)   Any new construction or development, which would cause any increase
in flood heights, shall be prohibited within any floodway area.
(Ord. 1989-3, passed 2-21-1989, Art. IV, § 4.01)
8-402A RECREATIONAL VEHICLES IN ZONES A, A1-30, AH AND AE.
   Recreational vehicles in Zones A, A1-30, AH and AE must either:
   (A)   Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; and
   (B)   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
   (C)   Meet the permit requirements for manufactured homes.
(Ord. 2015-5, passed 12-8-2015)
§ 8-403 ELEVATION AND FLOODPROOFING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Residential structures. Within any identified floodplain area, the
lowest floor (including basement) of any new residential structure, or any
substantial improvement to an existing residential structure, shall be at least
one and one and one-half feet above the 100-year flood elevation. Fully
enclosed spaces below the lowest floor shall be prohibited.
   (B)   Nonresidential structures.
      (1)   Within any identified floodplain are, the lowest floor (including
basement) of any new nonresidential structure, or any substantial improvement
to an existing nonresidential structure, shall be at least one and one and one-
half feet above the 100-year flood elevation, or be designed and constructed so
that the space enclosed by such structure shall remain either completely or
essentially dry during any flood up to that height. Fully enclosed spaces below
the lowest floor shall be prohibited.
      (2)   Any nonresidential structure, or part thereof, having a lowest
floor which is not elevated to at least one and one and one-half feet above the
100-year flood elevation, shall be floodproofed in a completely or essentially
dry manner in accordance with the W1 or W2 space classification standards
contained in the publication entitled Floodproofing Regulations published by
the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (June 1972), or with some other equivalent
standard. All plans and specifications for such floodproofing shall be
accompanied by a statement certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect which states that the proposed design and methods of construction are
in conformance with the above referenced standards.
      (3)   (a)   Partially enclosed space below the lowest floor (including
basement) which will be used solely for the parking of a vehicle, building
access or incidental storage in an area other than a basement, shall be
designed and constructed to allow for the automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters for the purpose of equalizing hydrostatic forces on exterior walls.
The term “partially enclosed space” also includes crawl spaces.
         (b)   Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by
a registered professional engineer or architect, or meet or exceed the
following minimum criteria:
            1.   A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed space;
            2.   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade; and
            3.   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers and the like or
other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and
exit of floodwaters.
(Ord. 1989-3, passed 2-21-1989, Art. IV, § 4.02; Ord. 2009-5, passed 8-11-2009)
§ 8-404 DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.
   The following minimum standards shall apply for all construction and
development proposed with any identified floodplain area.
   (A)   Fill. If fill is used, it shall:
      (1)   Extend laterally at least 15 feet beyond the building line from all
points;
      (2)   Consist of soil or small rock materials only, sanitary landfills
shall not be permitted;
      (3)   Be compacted to provide the necessary permeability and resistance
to erosion, scouring or settling;
      (4)   Be no steeper than one vertical to two horizontal feet unless
substantiated data, justifying steeper slopes are submitted to, and approved by
the Building Code Official or other designated official; and
      (5)   Be used to the extent to which it does not adversely affect
adjacent properties.
   (B)   Drainage facilities. Storm drainage facilities shall be designed to
convey the flow of stormwater runoff in a safe and efficient manner. The system
shall ensure proper drainage along streets, and provide positive drainage away
from buildings. The system shall also be designed to prevent the discharge
   (C)   Water and sanitary sewer facilities and systems.
      (1)   All new or replacement water and sanitary sewer facilities and
systems shall be located, designed and constructed to minimize or eliminate
flood damages and the infiltration of flood waters.
      (2)   Sanitary sewer facilities and systems shall be designed to prevent
the discharge of untreated sewage into floodwaters.
      (3)   No part of any on-site sewage system shall be located within any
identified floodplain area except in strict compliance with all state and local
regulations for such systems. If any such system is permitted, it shall be
located so as to avoid impairment to it, during a flood.
   (D)   Other utilities. All other utilities such as gas lines, electrical and
telephone systems shall be located, elevated (where possible) and constructed
to minimize the chance of impairment during a flood.
   (E)   Streets. The finished elevation of all new streets shall be no more
than one foot below the regulatory flood elevation.
   (F)   Storage. All materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive, or in
times of flooding, could be injurious to human, animal, or plant like, and not
listed in § 8-405, Development Which May Endanger Human Life, shall be stored
at or above the regulatory flood elevation and/or floodproofed to the maximum
extent possible.
   (G)   Placement of buildings and structures. All buildings and structures
shall be designed, located and constructed so as to offer the minimum
obstruction to the flow of water and shall be designed to have a minimum effect
upon the flow and height of floodwater.
   (H)   Anchoring.
      (1)   All buildings and structures shall be firmly anchored in accordance
with accepted engineering practices to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral
movement.
      (2)   All air ducts, large pipes, storage tanks and other similar objects
or components located below the regulatory flood elevation shall be securely
anchored or affixed to prevent flotation.
   (I)   Floors, walls and ceilings.
      (1)   Wood flooring used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be installed to accommodate a lateral expansion of the flooring, perpendicular
to the flooring grain without causing structural damage to the building.
      (2)   Plywood used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be a
“marine” or “water-resistant” inundation.
      (3)   Walls and ceilings at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be designed and constructed of materials that are water-resistant and will
withstand inundation.
      (4)   Windows, doors and other components at or below the regulatory
flood elevation shall be made of metal or other water-resistant material.
   (J)   Paints and adhesives.
      (1)   Paints or other finishes used at or below the regulatory flood
elevation shall be of “marine” or water-resistant quality.
      (2)   Adhesives used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be
of a “marine” or water-resistant variety.
      (3)   All wooden components (doors, trim, cabinets and the like) shall be
finished with a “marine” or water-resistant paint or other finishing material.
   (K)   Electrical components.
      (1)   Electrical distribution panels shall be a least three feet above
the 100-year flood elevation.
      (2)   Separate electrical circuits shall serve lower levels and shall be
dropped from above.
   (L)   Equipment. Water heaters, furnaces, air conditioning and ventilating
units, and other electrical, mechanical or utility equipment or apparatus shall
not be located below the regulatory flood elevation.
   (M)   Fuel supply systems. All gas and oil supply systems shall be designed
to prevent the infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharges from
the system into floodwaters. Additional provisions shall be made for the
drainage of these systems in the event that floodwater infiltration occurs.
   (N)   Additional regulations. In addition to the above, if any proposed
construction or development is located entirely or partially within any
identified floodplain are, applicants for permits shall provide all the
necessary information in sufficient detail and clarity to enable the Floodplain
Administrator to determine that:
      (1)   All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage and conform with the requirements of this and all other applicable codes
and ordinances;
      (2)   All utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and
water systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood
damage;
      (3)   Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood
hazards;
      (4)   Structures will be anchored to prevent floatation, collapse or
lateral movement;
      (5)   Building materials are flood-resistant;
      (6)   Appropriate practices that minimize flood damage have been used;
and
      (7)   Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air condition equipment
and other service facilities have been designed and located to prevent water
entry or accumulation.
(Ord. 1989-3, passed 2-21-1989, Art. IV, § 4.03; Ord. 2015-5, passed 12-8-2015)
§ 8-405 DEVELOPMENT WHICH MAY ENDANGER HUMAN LIFE.
   (A)   In accordance with the Pennsylvania Floodplain Management Act, being
35 P.S. §§ 679.101 et seq., and the regulations adopted by the Department of
Community and Economic Development as required by the Act, and new or
substantially improved structure which:
      (1)   Will be used for the production or storage of any of the following
dangerous materials or substances;
      (2)   Will be used for any activity the maintenance of a supply of more
than 550 gallons, or other comparable volume, of any of the following dangerous
materials or substances on the premises;
      (3)   Will involve the production, storage, or use of any amount of
radioactive substances; shall be subject to the provisions of this section, in
addition to all other applicable provisions. The following list of materials
and substances are considered dangerous to human life:
         (a)   Acetone;
         (b)   Ammonia;
         (c)   Benzene;
         (d)   Calcium carbide;
         (e)   Carbon disulfide;
         (f)   Celluloid;
         (g)   Chlorine;
         (h)   Hydrochloric acid;
         (i)   Hydrocyanic acid;
         (j)   Magnesium;
         (k)   Nitric acid and oxides of nitrogen;
         (l)   Petroleum products (gasoline, fuel oil and the like);
         (m)   Phosphorus;
         (n)   Potassium;
         (o)   Sodium;
         (p)   Sulphur and sulphur products;
         (q)   Pesticides (including insecticides, fungicides and
rodenticides); and
         (r)   Radioactive substances, insofar as such substances are not
otherwise regulated.
   (B)   Within any FW (Floodway Area), any structure of the kind described in
subsection (A) above, shall be prohibited.
   (C)   Within any FE (Special Floodplain Area) or FA (General Floodplain
Area), any new or substantially improved structure of the kind described in
subsection (A) above, shall be prohibited within the area measured 50 feet
landward from the top-of-bank of any watercourse.
   (D)   Where permitted within any floodplain area, any new or substantially
improved structure of the kind described in subsection (A) above, shall be:
      (1)   Elevated or designed and constructed to remain completely dry up to
at least one and one-half feet above the 100-year flood;
      (2)   Designed to prevent pollution from the structure or activity during
the course of a 100-year flood; and
      (3)   Any structure, or part thereof, that will be built below the
regulatory flood elevation shall be designed and constructed in accordance with
the standards for completely dry floodproofing contained in the publication
Floodproofing Regulations (U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, June 1972), or with
some other equivalent watertight standard.
(Ord. 1989-3, passed 2-21-1989, Art. IV, § 4.04)
§ 8-406 SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS FOR MANUFACTURED HOMES.
   (A)   Within any FW (Floodway Area), manufactured homes shall be prohibited.
   (B)   Within any FA (General Floodplain Area) or FE (Special Floodplain
Area), manufactured homes shall be prohibited within the area measured 50 feet
landward from the top-of-bank of any watercourse.
   (C)   Where permitted within any floodplain area, all manufactured homes,
and any additions thereto, shall be:
      (1)   Placed on a permanent foundation;
      (2)   Elevated so that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is one
and one-half feet or more above the elevation of the 100-year flood;
      (3)   Anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement.
   (D)   Installation of manufactured homes shall be done in accordance with
the manufacturers’ installation instructions as provided by the manufacturer.
Where the applicant cannot provide the above information, the requirements of
Appendix E of the 2003 International Residential Building Code or the U.S.
Department of Housing and Urban Development’s Permanent Foundations for
Manufactured Housing, 1996 Edition, draft or latest revision thereto shall
apply and 34 Pa. Code Chapters 401 through 405.
   (E)   Consideration shall be given to the installation requirements of the
2003 IBC (Appendix G, § 501.1-3) and the 2003 IRC (§§ R323.2, R323.3, RI
02.7.1, RI 05.3.1.1 and Appendix AE101, 604 and 605) or the most recent
revisions thereto and 34 Pa. Code Chapters 401 through 405, as amended where
appropriate and/or applicable to units where the manufacturer’ standards for
anchoring cannot be provided or were not established for the units(s) proposed
installation.
(Ord. 1989-3, passed 2-21-1989, Art. IV, § 4.05; Ord. 2009-5, passed 8-11-2009)
PART 5: GENERAL
Section
   
8-501   General
   
8-502   Application requirements for special permits
   
8-503   Application review procedures
   
8-504   Special technical requirements
§ 8-501 GENERAL.
   In accordance with the administrative regulations promulgated by the
Department of Community and Economic Development to implement the Pennsylvania
Floodplain Management Act, being 35 P.S. §§ 679.101 et seq., the following
activities shall be prohibited within any identified floodplain area unless a
special permit has been issued by the borough:
   (A)   The commencement of any of the following activities; or the
construction, enlargement or expansion of any structure used, or intended to be
used, for any of the following activities:
      (1)   Hospitals;
      (2)   Nursing homes; and
      (3)   Jails or prisons.
   (B)   The commencement of, or any construction of, a new manufactured home
park or manufactured home subdivision, or substantial improvement to an
existing manufactured home park or manufactured home subdivision.
(Ord. 1989-3, passed 2-21-1989, Art. V, § 5.00)
§ 8-502 APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS FOR SPECIAL PERMITS.
   Applicants for special permits shall provide five copies of the following
items:
   (A)   A written request including a completed building permit application
form;
   (B)   A small scale map showing the vicinity in which the proposed site is
located;
   (C)   A plan of the entire site, clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of one
inch being equal to 100 feet or less, showing the following:
      (1)   North arrow, scale and date;
      (2)   Topography based upon the North American Vertical Datum of 1988,
showing existing and proposed contours at intervals of two feet;
      (3)   All property and lot lines, including dimensions, and the size of
the site expressed in acres or square feet;
      (4)   The location of all existing street, drives, other accessways, and
parking areas with information concerning widths, pavement types and
construction, and elevations;
      (5)   The location of any existing bodies of water or watercourses,
buildings, structures and other public or private facilities, including
railroad tracks and facilities, and any other natural and human-made features
affecting, or affected by, the proposed activity or development;
      (6)   The location of the floodplain boundary line, information and spot
elevations concerning the 100-year flood elevations, and information concerning
the flow of water including direction and velocities;
      (7)   The location of all proposed buildings, structures, utilities and
any other improvements; and
      (8)   Any other information which the municipality considers necessary
for adequate review of the application.
   (D)   Plans of all proposed building, structures and other improvements,
clearly and legibly drawn at suitable scale showing the following:
      (1)   Sufficiently detailed architectural or engineering drawings,
including floor plans, sections and exterior building elevations, as
appropriate;
      (2)   For any proposed building, the elevation of the lowest floor
(including basement) and, as required, the elevation of any other floor;
      (3)   Complete information concerning flood depths, pressures,
velocities, impact and uplift forces, and other factors associated with the
100-year flood;
      (4)   Detailed information concerning any proposed floodproofing
measures;
      (5)   Cross-section drawings for all proposed streets, drives, other
accessways, and parking areas, showing all rights-of-way and pavement widths;
      (6)   Profile drawings for all proposed streets, drives and vehicular
accessways including existing and proposed grades; and
      (7)   Plans and profiles of all proposed sanitary and storm sewer
systems, water supply systems, and any other utilities and facilities.
   (E)   The following data and documentation:
      (1)   Certification from the applicant that the site upon which the
activity or development is proposed is an existing separate and single parcel,
owned by the applicant or the client he or she represents;
      (2)   Certification from a registered professional engineer, architect or
landscape architect that the proposed construction has been adequately designed
to protect against damage from the 100-year flood;
      (3)   A statement, certified by a registered professional engineer,
architect, landscape architect or other qualified person which contains a
complete and accurate description of the nature and extent of pollution that
might possible occur from the development during the course of a 100-year
flood, including a statement concerning the effects such pollution may have on
human life;
      (4)   A statement, certified by a registered professional engineer,
architect or landscape architect, which contains a complete and accurate
description of the effects the proposed development will have on 100-year flood
elevations and flows;
      (5)   A statement, certified by a registered profession engineer,
architect or landscape architect, which contains a complete and accurate
description of the kinds and amounts of any loose buoyant materials or debris
that may possible exist or be located on the site below the 100-year flood
elevation and the effects such materials and debris may have on 100-year flood
elevations and flows;
      (6)   The appropriate component of the Department of Environmental
Protection Planning Module for Land Development;
      (7)   Where any excavation or grading is proposed, a plan meeting the
requirements of the Department of Environmental Protection to implement and
maintain erosion and sedimentation control;
      (8)   Any other applicable permits such as, but not limited to, a permit
for any activity regulated by the Department of Environmental Protection under
§ 302 of Act 1978-166; and
      (9)   An evacuation plan which fully explains the manner in which the
site will be safely evacuated before or during the course of a 100-year flood.
(Ord. 1989-3, passed 2-21-1989, Art. V, § 5.01)
§ 8-503 APPLICATION REVIEW PROCEDURES.
   Upon receipt of an application for a special permit by the borough, the
following procedures shall apply in addition to those of
Part 2 of this chapter.
   (A)   Within three working days following receipt of the application, a
complete copy of the application and all accompanying documentation shall be
forwarded to the County Planning Commission by registered or certified mail for
its review and recommendations. Copies of the application shall also be
forwarded to the Borough Planning Commission and Borough Engineer for review
and comment.
   (B)   If an application is received that is incomplete the borough shall
notify the applicant, in writing, stating in what respect the application is
deficient.
   (C)   If the borough decides to disapprove an application, it shall notify
the applicant, in writing of the reasons for the disapproval.
   (D)   If the borough approves an application, it shall file written
notification, together with the application and all pertinent information with
the Department of Community and Economic Development, by registered or
certified mail, within five working days after the date of approval.
   (E)   Before issuing the special permit, the borough shall allow the
Department of Community and Economic Development 30 days, after receipt of the
notification by the Department, to review the application and decision made by
the borough.
   (F)   If the borough does not receive any communication from the Department
of Community and Economic Development during the 30-day review period, it may
issue a special permit to the applicant.
   (G)   If the Department of Community and Economic Development should decide
to disapprove an application, it shall notify the borough and the applicant, in
writing, of the reasons for the disapproval, and the borough shall not issue
the special permit.
(Ord. 1989-3, passed 2-21-1989, Art. V, § 5.02)
§ 8-504 SPECIAL TECHNICAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   In addition to the requirements of
Part 4 of this chapter, the following minimum requirements shall also apply to
any proposed development requiring a special permit. If there is any conflict
between any of the following requirements and those in
Part 4 of this chapter or in any other code, ordinance or regulation, the more
restrictive provision shall apply.
   (B)   No application for a special permit shall be approved unless it can be
determined that the structure or activity will be located, constructed and
maintained in a manner which will:
      (1)   Fully protect the health and safety of the general public and any
occupants of the structure. At a minimum, all new structures shall be designed,
located and constructed so that:
         (a)   The structure will survive inundation by waters of the 100-year
flood without any lateral movement or damage to either the structure itself, or
to any of its equipment or contents below the 100-year flood elevation;
         (b)   The lowest floor elevation will be at least one and one-half
feet above the 100-year flood; and
         (c)   The occupants of the structure can remain inside for an
indefinite period of time and be safely evacuated at any time during the 100-
year flood.
      (2)   Prevent any significant possibility of pollution, increased flood
levels or flows, or debris endangering life and property.
   (C)   All hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be undertaken only by
professional engineers or others of demonstrated qualifications, who shall
certify that the technical methods used correctly reflect currently accepted
technical concepts. Studies, analyses, computations and the like shall be
submitted in sufficient detail to allow a thorough technical review by the
borough and the Department of Community and Economic Development.
(Ord. 1989-3, passed 2-21-1989, Art. V, § 5.03)
PART 6: EXISTING STRUCTURES IN IDENTIFIED
FLOODPLAIN AREAS
Section
   
8-601   Existing structures
   
8-602   Improvements
§ 8-601 EXISTING STRUCTURES.
   The provisions of this chapter do not require any changes or improvements to
be made to lawfully existing structures. However, when an improvement is made
to any existing structure, the provisions of §
8-602 shall apply.
(Ord. 1989-3, passed 2-21-1989, Art. VI, § 6.00)
§ 8-602 IMPROVEMENTS.
   The following provisions shall apply whenever any improvements is made to an
existing structure located within any identified floodplain area.
   (A)   No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be allowed
within any floodway area that would cause any increase in the elevation of the
100-year flood.
   (B)   No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be allowed
within any FE area that would, together with all other existing and anticipated
development, increase the 100-year flood elevation more than one foot at any
point.
   (C)   Any modification, alteration, reconstruction or improvement, of any
kind to an existing structure, to an extent or amount of 50% or more of its
market value, shall constitute a substantial improvement and shall be
undertaken only in full compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
   (D)   Any modification, alteration, reconstruction or improvement of any
kind to an existing structure, to an extent or amount of less than 50% of its
market value, shall be elevated and/or floodproofed to the greatest extent
possible.
(Ord. 1989-3, passed 2-21-1989, Art. VI, § 6.01; Ord. 1999-05, passed 6-8-1999,
§ 3)
PART 7: VARIANCES
Section
   
8-701   General
   
8-702   Variance procedures and conditions
§ 8-701 GENERAL.
   If compliance with any of the requirements of this chapter would result in
an exceptional hardship to a prospective builder, developer or landowner, the
borough may, upon request, grant relief from the strict application of the
requirements.
(Ord. 1989-3, passed 2-21-1989, Art. VII, § 7.00)
§ 8-702 VARIANCE PROCEDURES AND CONDITIONS.
   Requests for variances shall be considered by the borough in accordance with
the procedures contained in § 8-212 and the following:
   (A)   No variance shall be granted for any construction, development, use,
or activity within any floodway area that would cause any increase in the 100-
year flood elevation;
   (B)   No variance shall be granted for any construction, development, use,
or activity within any FE area that would, together with all other existing and
anticipated development, increase the 100- year flood elevation more than one
foot at any point;
   (C)   Except for a possible modification of the one and one-half foot
freeboard requirement involved, no variance shall be granted for any of the
other requirement pertaining specifically to development regulated by special
permits in Part 5 or to Development Which May Endanger Human Life, §
8-405;
   (D)   If granted, a variance shall involve only the least modification
necessary to provide relief;
   (E)   In granting any variance, the borough shall attach whatever reasonable
conditions and safeguards it considers necessary in order to protect health,
safety and welfare, and to achieve the objectives of this chapter;
   (F)   Whenever a variance is granted, the borough shall notify the applicant
in writing that:
      (1)   The granting of the variance may result in increased premium rates
for flood insurance; and
      (2)   Such variances may increase the risks to life and property.
   (G)   In reviewing any request for a variance, the borough shall consider,
at a minimum, the following:
      (1)   There is good and sufficient cause;
      (2)   Failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship
to the applicant; and
      (3)   The granting of the variance will neither result in an unacceptable
or prohibited increase in flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
or extraordinary public expense, nor create nuisances, cause fraud on, or
victimize the public, or conflict with any other applicable state or local
ordinances and regulations.
   (H)   A complete record of all variance requests and related actions shall
be maintained by the borough. In addition, a report of all variances granted
during the year shall be included in the annual report to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency; and
   (I)   Notwithstanding any of the above, however, all structures shall be
designed and constructed so as to have the capability of resisting the 100-year
flood.
(Ord. 1989-3, passed 2-21-1989, Art. VII, § 7.01)
PART 8: DEFINITIONS
Section
   
8-801   General
   
8-802   Specific definitions
§ 8-801 GENERAL.
   Unless specifically defined below, words and phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give this chapter its most reasonable
application.
(Ord. 1989-3, passed 2-21-1989, Art. VIII, § 8.00)
§ 8-802 SPECIFIC DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE. A use of structure on the same lot with, and of
a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the principal use of
structure.
   BASE FLOOD. A flood which has a 1% chance of being equaled or exceed in any
given year (also called the 100-YEAR FLOOD or 1% ANNUAL CHANCE FLOOD).
   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE). The elevation shown on the flood insurance rate
map (FIRM) for Zones AE, AH, A1-30 that indicates the water surface elevation
resulting from a flood that has a 1% or greater chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
   BASEMENT. Any area of the building having its floor below ground level on
all sides.
   BUILDING. A combination of materials to form a permanent structure having
walls and a roof. Included shall be all manufactured homes and trailers to be
used for human habitation.
   COMPLETELY DRY SPACE. A space which will remain totally dry during flooding;
the structure is designed and constructed to prevent the passage of water and
water vapor.
   CONSTRUCTION. The construction, reconstruction, renovation, repair,
extension, expansion, alteration or relocation of a building or structure,
including the placement of manufactured homes.
   DEVELOPMENT. Any human-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, the placement of
manufactured homes, streets and other paving, utilities, filling, grading,
excavation, mining, dredging or drilling operations and the subdivision of
land.
   ESSENTIALLY DRY SPACE. A space which will remain dry during flooding, except
for the passage of some water vapor or minor seepage; the structure is
substantially impermeable to the passage of water.
   FLOOD. A temporary inundation of normally dry land areas.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). The official map on which the Federal
Emergency Management Agency as delineated both the areas of special flood
hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS). The official report provided by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency that includes flood profiles, the flood insurance
rate map, the flood boundary and floodway map, and the water surface elevation
of the base flood.
   FLOODPLAIN AREA. A relatively flat or low land area which is subject to
partial or complete inundation from an adjoining or nearby stream, river or
watercourse; and/or any area subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation of
surface waters from any source.
   FLOODPROOFING. Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions,
changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities,
structures and their contents.
   FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land
areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot.
   HISTORIC STRUCTURE. Any structure that is:
      (1)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual
listing on the National Register;
      (2)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to
qualify as a registered historic district;
      (3)   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in
states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of Interior; or
      (4)   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified
either:
         (a)   By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
         (b)   Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without
approved programs.
   IDENTIFIED FLOODPLAIN AREA. The floodplain area specifically identified in
this chapter as being inundated by the 100-year flood. Includes would be areas
identified as Floodway (FW), Flood-Fringe (FF) and General Floodplain (FA).
   LAND DEVELOPMENT. The improvement of one lot, or two or more contiguous
lots, tracts or parcels of land for any purpose involving a group of two or
more building, or the division or allocation of land or space between or among
two or more existing or prospective occupants by means of, or for the purpose
of streets, common areas, leasehold, condominiums, building groups or other
features; a subdivision of land.
   LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest floor of the lowest fully enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished, flood resistant partially enclosed area, used solely
for parking of vehicles, building access and incidental storage, in an area
other than a basement area is not considered the LOWEST FLOOR of a building,
provided that such space is not designed and built so that the structure is in
violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of this chapter.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A transportable, single-family dwelling intended for
permanent occupancy, office or place of assembly, contained in one or more
sections, built on a permanent chassis, which arrives at a site complete and
ready for occupancy except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly
operations, and constructed so that it may be used with or without a permanent
foundation. The term includes park trailers, travel trailers, recreational and
other similar vehicles which are placed on a site for more that 180 consecutive
days.
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK. A parcel of land under single ownership, which has
been planned and improved for the placement of two or more manufactured homes
for non-transient use.
   MINOR REPAIR.
      (1)   (a)   The replacement of existing work with equivalent materials
for the purpose of its routine maintenance and upkeep; or
         (b)   The installation of new replacement roofs, new replacement
windows, new siding or HVAC systems, gutters and downspouts, or the paving of
existing driveways or the replacement of yard sheds by new sheds not having an
area exceeding 144 square feet if the subject sheds are not being placed in a
floodplain area, regardless of the cost of such roofs, windows, siding, HVAC
systems, gutters and downspouts, paving or sheds.
      (2)   MINOR REPAIR shall not in any event include the cutting away of any
wall, partition or portion thereof, the removal or change of any required means
of egress, or requirement; nor shall minor repairs include addition to,
alteration of, replacement or relocation of any water supply, sewer drainage,
drain leader, gas, soil, waste, vent or similar piping, electric wiring or
mechanical or other work affecting public health or general safety.
   NEW CONSTRUCTION. Structures for which the start of construction commenced
on or after November 28, 1979, and includes any subsequent improvements
thereto.
   ONE HUNDRED YEAR FLOOD. A flood that, on the average, is likely to occur
once every 100 years (i.e. that has 1% chance of occurring each year, although
the flood may occur in any year).
   PERSON. An individual, partnership, public or private association or
corporation, firm, trust, estate, municipality, governmental unit, public
utility or any other legal entity whatsoever which is recognized by law as the
subject of rights and duties.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle which is:
      (1)   Built on a single chassis;
      (2)   Not more than 400 square feet, measured at the largest horizontal
projections;
      (3)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-
duty truck; and
      (4)   Not designed for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary
living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
   REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION. The 100-year flood elevation plus a freeboard
safety factor of one and one-half feet.
   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA). An area in the floodplain subject to a 1%
or greater chance of flooding in any given year. It is shown on the FIRM as
Zone A, AO, A1-30, AE, A99 or AH.
   SPECIAL PERMIT. A special approval which is require for hospitals, nursing
homes, jails, and new manufactured home parks and subdivisions and substantial
improvements to such existing parks, when such development is located in all,
or a designated portion of a floodplain.
   START OF CONSTRUCTION. Includes substantial improvement and other proposed
new development and means the date the permit was issued, provided the actual
start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition,
placement or other improvement was within 180 days after the date of the permit
and shall be completed within 12 months after the date of issuance of the
permit unless a time extension is granted, in writing, by the Floodplain
Administrator. The ACTUAL START means either the first placement of permanent
construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings,
the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the
stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufacture home on a foundation.
Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing,
grading and filing; nor does it include the installation of streets and
walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or
foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the
installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds
not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a
substantial improvement, the ACTUAL START OF CONSTRUCTION means the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building,
whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
   STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected on the ground or attached to the
ground including, but not limited to, buildings, sheds, manufactured homes and
other similar items.
   SUBDIVISION. The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel of land by
any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land
including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether immediate or
future, of lease, transfer of ownership or building or lot development:
provided, however, that the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural
purposes into parcels of more that ten acres, not involving any new street or
easement of access or residential dwellings shall be exempted.
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage from any cause sustained by a structure whereby
the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal
or exceed 50% or more of the market value of the structure before the damage
occurred.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT.
      (1)   Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or other improvement
of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of
the structure before the “start of construction” of the improvement.
      (2)   This term includes structures which have incurred “substantial
damage” regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not,
however include either:
         (a)   Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications
which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are
the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
         (b)   Any alteration of a “historic structure”, provided that the
alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a
historic structure.
   VIOLATION. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community’s floodplain management regulations. A structure
or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications,
or other evidence of compliance required in 44 C.F.R. § 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)
(10), d(3), E(2), E(4) or E(5) is presumed to be in VIOLATION until such time
as that documentation is provided.
(Ord. 1989-3, passed 2-21-1989, Art. VIII, § 8.01; Ord. 2009-5, passed 8-11-
2009; Ord. 2015-5, passed 12-8-2015)
CHAPTER 9: GRADING AND EXCAVATING
      Part
         
1.   STREET OPENINGS, BORINGS AND EXCAVATIONS
PART 1: STREET OPENINGS, BORINGS AND EXCAVATIONS
Section
   
9-101   Definitions
   
9-102   Permit required
   
9-103   Permit application
   
9-104   Issuance of permit; applicability
   
9-105   Permit fee
   
9-106   Emergency situations
   
9-107   Construction requirements
   
9-108   Maintenance of disturbed area; bonding requirements
   
9-109   Notification and correction of defects; failure to correct
   
9-110   Notice prior to paving; opening of newly paved surfaces
   
9-111   Liability of permit holder; indemnification of borough
   
9-112   Remedies
   
9-113   Plans required
   
9-114   Violations and penalties
   
9-115   Construal of borough actions
§ 9-101 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this Part, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      BOROUGH. The Borough of Dillsburg, York County, Pennsylvania.
      CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. The Code Enforcement Officer of the Borough of
Dillsburg or his or her authorized representative.
      ENGINEER. The duly appointed Borough Engineer of the Borough of Dillsburg
or his or her authorized representative.
      EXCAVATE. To cut, drill, grade, dig, scoop and remove earth or other
material making up the surface or subsurface of any street.
      OPEN. To cut, drill, dig or otherwise penetrate through the surface of
any street.
      PERSON. Includes any natural person, partnership, firm, association or
corporation.
      STREET. Any public street, avenue, road, square, alley, highway or other
public place located in the borough and established for the use of vehicles.
   (B)   In this Part, the singular shall include the plural, and the masculine
shall include the feminine and the neuter.
(Ord. 2000-7, passed 10-10-2000, § 1)
§ 9-102 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person shall open, excavate or bore in or under any street in the borough
without first securing a permit therefor, as hereinafter provided.
(Ord. 2000-7, passed 10-10-2000, § 2)
§ 9-103 PERMIT APPLICATION.
   (A)   Any person desiring to open, excavate, or bore in or under any street
in the borough shall file an application with the Code Enforcement Officer on
forms provided by the borough. Such application shall contain the following
information:
      (1)   The name and address of the applicant;
      (2)   The exact location of the proposed opening, excavation or boring;
      (3)   The approximate size and depth of the proposed opening, excavation
or boring;
      (4)   The proposed dates and times of commencing and completing the work;
      (5)   The method and progression of performing the work;
      (6)   The purpose of the proposed opening, excavation or boring; and
      (7)   Such other information as the Code Enforcement Officer may deem
pertinent.
   (B)   Such application shall contain a statement, which shall be subscribed
to by the applicant, to the effect that the applicant will comply with all
relevant ordinances of the borough (including this Part) and laws of the
Commonwealth and that the applicant will defend, protect and save harmless the
borough and its officers, agents, and employees from all loss and liability in
accordance with the provisions of this Part.
(Ord. 2000-7, passed 10-10-2000, § 3)
§ 9-104 ISSUANCE OF PERMIT; APPLICABILITY.
   Upon being satisfied that the application is in proper form and upon receipt
from the applicant of the fee prescribed by this Part, the performance bond
prescribed by this Part and the certificates of insurance prescribed by this
Part, the Borough Manager shall issue a permit. Such permit shall apply only to
the specific work described in the application, shall expire on the date and
time when the work is proposed to be completed and may contain such conditions
or limitations as the Borough Manager deems necessary for the protection of
persons and property.
(Ord. 2000-7, passed 10-10-2000, § 4)
§ 9-105 PERMIT FEE.
   The fee for each permit shall be as set, from time to time, by resolution of
the borough.
(Ord. 2000-7, passed 10-10-2000, § 5)
§ 9-106 EMERGENCY SITUATIONS.
   In the case of any leak, explosion or other accident in any subsurface pipe,
line, conduit, construction or apparatus, it shall be lawful for the person
owning or responsible for such pipe, line, conduit, construction or apparatus
to commence an opening or excavation to remedy such condition before securing a
permit, provided that application for a permit shall be made immediately and
not later than the next business day thereafter and that all other provisions
of this Part are fully complied with. If any such emergency condition shall not
be immediately attended to by the owner or person responsible for such pipe,
line, conduit, construction or apparatus, the borough, after such notice, or
attempt of notice, as it shall deem necessary under the circumstances of the
particular case, may proceed to have the work necessary and required by such
emergency done and charge the cost thereof to such owner or person.
(Ord. 2000-7, passed 10-10-2000, § 6)
§ 9-107 CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS.
   The following construction requirements shall apply to all openings or
excavations in streets of the borough.
   (A)   No work shall begin until all utility companies having facilities in
the area have been notified. The work shall be conducted so as not to interfere
with water mains, sewers or their connections with the house(s) or other
involved structure(s) or any other subsurface lines or construction until
permission of the proper authorities in connection with such subsurface lines
or construction shall have been obtained. Any damage to such lines or
construction shall be repaired immediately and shall be reported to the owner
thereof.
   (B)   Wherever practicable, tunneling shall be used as a construction method
in preference to disturbing the surface of the street, and the Code Enforcement
Officer may so specify on the permit. No tunneling shall be used unless the
express direction or approval of the Code Enforcement Officer is endorsed on
the permit.
   (C)   Openings shall be made in the street surface by sawing to neat lines.
Excavated material shall be immediately placed in trucks and removed from the
construction site.
   (D)   All openings or excavations shall be backfilled and restored in
accordance with the Borough Standards and Specifications and PennDOT rules and
regulations, or as directed by the Borough Engineer.
   (E)   No opening or excavation in any street shall extend from the curb line
into the street a distance greater than one foot beyond the centerline of the
street before being backfilled and the surface of the highway restored to a
condition safe and convenient for travel.
   (F)   No more than 200 feet longitudinally shall be opened in any street at
any one time.
   (G)   The applicant shall notify the Code Enforcement Officer prior to
backfilling and prior to placing the permanent surface (if the surface has been
disturbed) and shall not proceed with such work until the Code Enforcement
Officer has inspected the same and given his or her approval thereof.
   (H)   Every person to whom a permit is issued or by whom any opening or
excavation is made shall take every necessary and reasonable precaution to keep
the street in a safe and passable condition, both day and night, by the use of
guards, barriers, lights and other devices.
(Ord. 2000-7, passed 10-10-2000, § 7)
§ 9-108 MAINTENANCE OF DISTURBED AREA; BONDING REQUIREMENTS.
   The applicant shall maintain the portion of the street disturbed by the
opening or excavation for a period of 18 months from the date the backfilling
is completed at a proper grade and condition free from ridges and depressions.
Such maintenance work shall be done as often as may be necessary. To guarantee
proper restoration of the surface and proper maintenance of the disturbed area,
the applicant must deposit with the Code Enforcement Officer, prior to issuance
of the permit, a bond in an amount set by said Officer, with corporate surety
guaranteeing the proper performance of the work and the proper maintenance of
the disturbed area for the period of time required above. Utilities and other
persons who open or excavate in streets on a regular basis may, with the
permission of the Code Enforcement Officer, keep on deposit a single bond in an
amount set by the said Officer and applying to the work included in all of the
permits at any time outstanding.
(Ord. 2000-7, passed 10-10-2000, § 8)
§ 9-109 NOTIFICATION AND CORRECTION OF DEFECTS; FAILURE TO CORRECT.
   If, within a period of 18 months from the date the backfilling is completed,
the Code Enforcement Officer determines that the backfilling, surface
restoration or maintenance of the disturbed area is defective, he or she shall
notify the applicant, in writing, to that effect. Promptly upon receipt of such
written notice the applicant shall take immediate steps to correct such
defects. If the applicant fails to take immediate corrective action, the
borough may perform the work itself or cause the same to be performed by
another person. The applicant and the surety on its bond shall be liable for
all costs and expenses incurred by the borough in correcting such defects and
for any penalty assessed as a result of the applicant’s failure to take
immediate corrective action.
(Ord. 2000-7, passed 10-10-2000, § 9)
§ 9-110 NOTICE PRIOR TO PAVING; OPENING OF NEWLY PAVED SURFACES.
   The borough shall give timely notice to all persons owning property abutting
on any street within the borough about to be paved or improved and to all
public utility companies operating in the borough, and all such persons and
utility companies shall make all water, gas, sewer or other connections as well
as any repairs thereto which would necessitate the opening or excavation of
said street within 90 days from the giving of such notice, unless such time is
extended, in writing, by the borough. New paving shall not be opened for a
period of one year after the completion thereof, except in case of emergency
only, the existence of which emergency and the necessity for the opening of
such paving to be determined by the Engineer. If any person seeks to open or
excavate a street within one year after the completion of the paving thereof
for any reason other than an emergency as above stated, the applicant shall
make written application to the Borough Council, and a permit shall be issued
only after express approval of the Borough Council and only upon payment of a
permit fee as shall be set, from time to time, by resolution of the Borough
Council.
(Ord. 2000-7, passed 10-10-2000, § 10)
§ 9-111 LIABILITY OF PERMIT HOLDER; INDEMNIFICATION OF BOROUGH.
   Every person to whom a permit is issued or by whom any opening or excavation
is made shall assume all risks and be liable for all injuries or damages
occasioned by the opening or excavation of the street or by the failure to
properly protect the same, to backfill the same, to restore the surface or to
maintain the surface or by any other action or inactions in connection
therewith. Such person shall defend, indemnify and save harmless the borough,
its officials and employees of and from any such loss and/or liability. In
addition, such person shall submit to the Code Enforcement Officer, at the time
of applying for a permit, a certificate or certificates of insurance for public
liability and property damage, including blasting insurance where applicable,
in amounts satisfactory to the Code Enforcement Officer.
(Ord. 2000-7, passed 10-10-2000, § 11)
§ 9-112 REMEDIES.
   In the event any person violates any provision(s) of this Part or the terms
and conditions of any permit issued hereunder, the Code Enforcement Officer or
the Engineer may order a cessation of the work, order the performance of
additional or corrective work by or on behalf of the applicant at the
applicant’s expense, revoke the permit, institute such legal or equitable
actions as may be appropriate, institute an action for the imposition of a fine
under § 9-114 or take such other actions as may be deemed necessary under the
circumstances. The above remedies may be pursued simultaneously or
consecutively and are cumulative, not exclusive. No person who has violated any
provision(s) of this Part and has failed or refused to remedy such violation
shall be eligible for the issuance of any other permit hereunder until such
violation has been remedied.
(Ord. 2000-7, passed 10-10-2000, § 12)
§ 9-113 PLANS REQUIRED.
   No permit for opening or excavating in a street for the purpose of laying,
constructing, extending or relocating a water line, gas line, sanitary sewer
line, storm sewer line, electrical or communication cable or conduit or other
similar facility shall be issued until a plan showing the proposed location
thereof has been approved by the Borough Council. Such a permit, when issued,
shall require the applicant to furnish, upon completion of the work, as-built
plans showing the exact location of the facilities. The furnishing of such
plans shall be a condition of the bond required under this Part. When it
becomes necessary to perform extensive review of plans, applicant shall be
required to reimburse the borough for all review costs.
(Ord. 2000-7, passed 10-10-2000, § 13)
§ 9-114 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
   Any person, firm, corporation or other entity, whether as principal, agent
or employee, who shall violate or assist in the violation of any of the
provisions of this Part shall, upon conviction thereof before a magisterial
district judge, pay a fine of not more than $600 plus costs and, in default of
the payment of such fine and the costs of prosecution, shall be sentenced to
not more than 30 days imprisonment in the county prison. Each day that a
violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 2000-7, passed 10-10-2000, § 14)
§ 9-115 CONSTRUAL OF BOROUGH ACTIONS.
   (A)   Neither the issuance of a permit hereunder nor the taking of any other
action(s) hereunder shall be construed as an express or implied acceptance by
the borough of the dedication of any street.
   (B)   The provisions of this Part are severable, and if any of its
provisions shall be held to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such
decision(s) shall not affect the validity of any of the remaining provisions of
this Part. It is hereby declared as a legislative intent that this chapter
would have been adopted had such unconstitutional, illegal or invalid provision
not been included herein.
(Ord. 2000-7, passed 10-10-2000, § 15)
CHAPTER 10: HEALTH AND SAFETY
      Part
         
1.   PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
         
2.   SMOKE, SOOT AND ASHES
         
3.   DANGEROUS CONDITIONS OR STRUCTURES
PART 1: PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
Section
   
10-101   Requirement to cut and trim trees
   
10-102   Requirement to cut and trim weeds
   
10-103   Notification
   
10-104   Municipal assessment
   
10-105   Penalty
§ 10-101 REQUIREMENT TO CUT AND TRIM TREES.
   (A)   The owner of any property in the borough shall be required to cut or
trim and keep trimmed or cause to be kept trimmed all trees, bushes, shrubbery,
flowers or other vegetation standing on or overhanging the sidewalk area, which
shall include the area from the street side of any curbing, so that the
branches of said trees, bushes, shrubbery, flowers or other vegetation shall
have a clearance of at least 14 feet above any street, lane or alley, and eight
feet above the sidewalk.
   (B)   The owner of any property in the borough shall further be required to
trim and keep trimmed or cause to be kept trimmed all trees on his or her
property so that such tree shall not interfere with the proper, adequate
illumination of any sidewalk area, or any street, lane or alley from street
lighting provided by the Council to the extent that it would be injurious or
detrimental to residents, pedestrians or other travelers in the area.
(Ord. 144, passed 3-1-1979, Art. LX, § 6021)
§ 10-102 REQUIREMENT TO CUT AND TRIM WEEDS.
   The owner of any tract or lot of land situated in the borough shall be
required to cut or trim and keep cut or trimmed all grass, weeds or other
vegetation growing thereon that is not planted or used for agricultural
purposes; provided, however, that no owner shall at any time permit grass,
weeds or other vegetation to grow on his or her property to a height in excess
of eight inches, so that the lot shall conform generally in appearance to
surrounding areas. Methods other than cutting or trimming may be utilized so
long as there is no interference with or damage to adjoining land. Undeveloped
lots of record greater than one acre in size are excluded from this section and
these provisions on the condition that a 20-foot-wide buffer area be provided
adjacent to all abutting developed properties and public streets or sidewalks
within which no weeds or plant growth in excess of eight inches shall be
permitted.
(Ord. 144, passed 3-1-1979, Art. LX, § 6022; Ord. 2010-2, passed 7-13-2010)
§ 10-103 NOTIFICATION.
   Whenever the owner shall fail, neglect or refuse to comply with §§
10-101 or
10-102, the borough may, but shall not be obliged to, proceed to notify the
responsible person to correct any violation within 48 hours. If the violation
is not corrected within the specified times, the borough may proceed to remedy
and correct the violation and charge the cost thereof to the owner of the
property.
(Ord. 144, passed 3-1-1979, Art. LX, § 6023; Ord. 2010-2, passed 7-13-2010)
§ 10-104 MUNICIPAL ASSESSMENT.
   Whenever the borough shall take action to remedy and correct a violation of
§§
10-101 or
10-102, the owner shall be liable for the cost thereof plus a penalty of 10% of
such cost, which shall be considered a municipal assessment and be collected as
such or as other debts due boroughs are collectible; if payment shall not be
made within 30 days after notice of such cost, an additional 5% shall be added
for attorney fee for collection and costs of collection.
(Ord. 144, passed 3-1-1979, Art. LX, § 6024; Ord. 2010-2, passed 7-13-2010)
§ 10-105 PENALTY.
   Any person, firm, corporation or other entity who shall violate any
provision of this Part shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a
fine of not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine
and costs to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a
violation of this Part continues or each section of this Part which shall be
found to have been violated shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 144, passed 3-1-1979, Art. LX, § 6025; Ord. 2010-2, passed 7-13-2010)
PART 2: SMOKE, SOOT AND ASHES
Section
   
10-201   Emission of smoke, soot and ashes
§ 10-201 EMISSION OF SMOKE, SOOT AND ASHES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to cause or permit
the emission of smoke, soot, ashes or other foreign matter from chimneys,
smokestacks or other sources under their control which would be or tend to be
injurious to the health and welfare of persons or animals in the borough or
which would cause or be likely to cause damage to any property within the
borough.
   (A)   The word DAMAGE as used herein shall include all damage occasioned by
ashes, soot or other foreign matter falling upon property, whether it be caused
by the abrasive action of such soot, ashes or other foreign matter, by a
chemical or physical reaction thereof, or whether it be merely the deposit of
such soot, ashes or other foreign matter upon property within the borough.
   (B)   Whenever any violation of this section be brought to the attention of
any borough law enforcement officer, he or she shall forthwith notify the
violator to cease such violation by personal contact or by causing the Borough
Manager to forward written notice thereof. If the violation shall persist, or
an additional violation be perpetrated, after a period of ten days has elapsed,
the person responsible therefor, or the officers of any firm or corporation
responsible therefor, shall be subject to the penalties provided in subsection
(C) below.
   (C)   Any person, firm, corporation or other entity who shall violate any
provision of this Part shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a
fine of not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine
and costs to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a
violation of this Part continues or each section of this Part which shall be
found to have been violated shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 144, passed 3-1-1979, Art. LX, § 6050)
PART 3: DANGEROUS CONDITIONS OR STRUCTURES
Section
   
10-301   Definitions
   
10-302   Nuisance prohibition
   
10-303   Enforcement
§ 10-301 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this Part, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      NUISANCE. Any use of property within the borough, or any condition upon
property within the borough, that causes or results in:
         (a)   Annoyance or discomfort to persons beyond the boundaries of that
property;
         (b)   Interference with the health and/or safety of persons beyond the
boundaries of that property, or of persons who might reasonably be expected to
enter upon or be in that property; and
         (c)   Disturbance to or interference with the peaceful use of the
property of others within the borough.
      PERSON. Includes any natural person, partnership, corporation,
association, firm or other entity.
   (B)   Further, in this chapter, the singular shall include the plural, the
plural shall include the singular, and masculine shall include the feminine and
neuter.
(Ord. 1996-2, passed 9-17-1996, § 1)
§ 10-302 NUISANCE PROHIBITION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to create, continue, cause, maintain or
permit to exist any nuisance at any place within the borough. Within the
context of this Part, nuisances shall include, but not be limited to, the
following:
   (A)   The loud playing of radios, televisions, amplifiers or other sound
devices in a manner so that such can be heard, and therefore be an annoyance to
another person, off the premises from which the sound is emanating, or in a
manner which annoys a reasonable person of normal sensitivities;
   (B)   The operation of mechanically powered devices such as lawn mowers,
tractors, power tools, chain saws, model airplanes and cars, and similar
mechanically powered devices, between the hours of 10 p.m. and 6:30 a.m.
anywhere within the borough where such can be heard, and therefore be an
annoyance, to a reasonable person of normal sensitivities;
   (C)   Maintaining or permitting the maintenance of any of the following
dangerous conditions, structures or premises:
      (1)   Open wells, cisterns, septic systems or underground storage
receptacles of any nature;
      (2)   Open excavations or sinkholes;
      (3)   Unfinished buildings, foundations or structures which are not being
completed in a timely manner under a borough issued building permit;
      (4)   Buildings or structures damaged or partly destroyed by fire,
weather event or other circumstance, or which are being maintained in a state
of disrepair;
      (5)   Placement or storage of vehicles, materials or equipment at a
location and/or in a manner that creates an attractive nuisance, annoyance or
safety hazard;
      (6)   Lakes, ponds, swimming pools or stormwater management facilities
not properly safeguarded in a manner so as to abate safety hazards created
thereby; and
      (7)   Conditions created by persons on their premises, including, but not
limited to, earth disturbances, accumulation of tires and other debris or
materials, that cause ponding of water which may become stagnant and/or foul,
and which may be a breeding place for mosquitoes, flies or other insects.
   (D)   Conducting construction work on private property in such a manner that
dirt is carried by wind into another property and/or mud is tracked or moved by
drainage onto the streets or other properties that adjoin the site on which the
construction activity is taking place, and/or in a manner where construction
debris or remnants is accumulated on the site without being disposed of in a
timely manner, and/or allowing construction remnants to be moved off the site
by wind and other means;
   (E)   Conducting any construction or building activity, or operating
construction vehicles or equipment on any day of the year between the hours of
10:00 p.m. and 6:30 a.m. without a special permit issued by the Borough Manager
or designee. This special permit shall be issued only if it is demonstrated and
documented that the special permit is necessary to abate an emergency
condition, or otherwise protect public safety;
   (F)   Washing, tracking or otherwise depositing dirt, mud, soil, stone,
grass, petroleum products, chemicals or other debris or materials onto a public
street or alley, without removing the same by sunset on the date of occurrence,
and returning the public street or alley to its original condition;
   (G)   Using any property or operating any business or engaging in other
activity so as to permit or cause dust, mud, dirt, acid, noxious or offensive
fumes, gases or odors to be discharged into the air, or to be carried off the
premises, or to cause any water to become polluted by sewage, industrial
wastes, acids or other substance, or to cause or allow to continue noise of
such character to cause annoyance to a person or interference with the normal
use of adjacent property;
   (H)   Planting or placing trees, shrubs or other natural or human-made
obstructions which would prevent persons operating vehicles on a public street
or alley from having the site distance necessary to do so safely;
   (I)   Creating or maintaining an attractive nuisance. An ATTRACTIVE NUISANCE
is a condition which, by its nature, is both an attraction to children or other
persons, by appearance and/or accessibility, and inherently dangerous in terms
of creating an unusual safety risk. Following is a list, not intended to be
exhaustive, of examples of attractive nuisances:
      (1)   An abandoned or vacant building, structure or storage receptacle,
that is left accessible through uncovered and/or unsecured openings; and
      (2)   Appliances or equipment, not normally intended as play apparatus,
that is left unsecured and accessible to a child, and which would be attractive
for misuse by children.
   (J)   Any building or structure that is unsafe, unsanitary, deficient in
adequate means of exit, deemed a fire hazard by reasonable standard, or is
otherwise dangerous to public safety or welfare, or which by reason of improper
or illegal use, occupancy or maintenance is unsafe, shall be deemed unsafe and
abatable as a public nuisance. All such buildings or structures shall be
removed or otherwise made safe and secure as deemed acceptable by Council;
   (K)   It is deemed a nuisance in the context of this section to operate any
skate board, in-line skates, or similar unlicensed and/or non-motorized
recreational apparatus, including bicycles, on any sidewalk in any manner which
threatens the safety of another person, or in a manner which may damage the
property of another;
   (L)   The accumulation of rubbish, building materials, waste materials,
junk, old lumber, tires, paper, cardboard, bricks, stone, blocks, roofing
material, metal scraps or other material upon a premises as a fire hazard or as
a harborage for snakes, rodents, vectors or other vermin;
   (M)   The result of lighting where light is directed or reflected off a
property in a manner that creates a hazard for a motorist, or where the degree
of such light leaves the property is greater than 0.25 foot candles as measured
vertically between five and ten feet off the ground;
   (N)   A roof drain system or other stormwater drainage system that is
installed so as to direct surface water flow onto the property of another;
   (O)   The outdoor storage of refuse in a manner that permits it to be blown
from the premises, or produces an offensive odor that is detected on the
property of another;
   (P)   The disposition of household refuse and trash in a refuse receptacle
that is placed in an area accessible to the public and intended to be used by
the public;
   (Q)   Parking a recreational vehicle or utility trailer on a public street
or alley in the same location for more than a 24-hour period in any manner so
as to create a hazard for a motorist; and
   (R)   The act of repairing, adjusting, tuning, running or operating a
motorized vehicle where the motor is repeatedly “raced” or “revved” to the
extent of annoyance of another reasonable person of ordinary sensibility. In
the context of this section, the term “repeatedly” shall mean at least twice in
any ten-minute period.
(Ord. 1996-2, passed 9-17-1996, § 2)
§ 10-303 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Any person who creates, continues, causes, maintains or permits to
exist any nuisance at any place within the borough shall remove, discontinue or
otherwise abate the nuisance. In the event that a person so notified shall fail
to act accordingly, Borough Council shall have the authority acting on its own
or through its agent(s) to cause the removal, discontinuance or abatement of
the nuisance, which authority shall include the right to enter upon the
property of the person receiving the notice for this expressed purpose. Advance
notice shall not be required where there is immediate danger to persons or
property.
   (B)   Borough Council on its own or through its agent(s) shall be authorized
to hire the services of any professional expert for the purpose of identifying
and/or defining a nuisance, or for rendering other advice needed to effectively
deal with the nuisance.
   (C)   If the borough is caused to expend public funds for the purpose of
bringing about the removal, discontinuance or abatement of a nuisance, then
Borough Council is authorized to collect all associated costs, plus 10% for
administrative costs, including those resulting from the hiring of contractors
or professional experts, from the person responsible for creating, maintaining
or permitting the continuance of the nuisance. Such funds collected shall be in
addition to any penalties imposed under this section and shall be collectible
by any means available under applicable law.
   (D)   Any person, firm, corporation or other entity who shall violate any
provision of this Part shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a
fine of not less than $50 nor more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of
payment of said fine and costs to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days.
Each day that a violation of this Part continues or each section of this Part
which shall be found to have been violated shall constitute a separate offense.
   (E)   This Part shall not be construed to be the sole means for the
abatement of nuisances within the borough, and nothing herein shall preclude
any person from proceeding individually, or with other injured persons, to
effect the abatement of a nuisance. Furthermore, in the exercise of the powers
conferred in this chapter, the borough may institute proceedings in equity or
accomplish the condemnation of property of effectively bring about the
abatement of the nuisance.
(Ord. 1996-2, passed 9-17-1996, § 3)
CHAPTER 11: HOUSING
      Part
         
1.   TENANT REGISTRATION
         
2.   RESPONSIBILITIES OF OWNERS AND OCCUPANTS OF RENTAL PROPERTIES
PART 1: TENANT REGISTRATION
Section
   
11-101   Landlord notifications
§ 11-101 LANDLORD NOTIFICATIONS.
   Any individual, corporation, firm or other entity owning property in the
borough shall notify the Borough Council of any adult over the age of 18 years
residing in or on such property who is not a record owner of such property on
or before February 1, 1976, on forms to be provided by the borough. Such
notification shall be delivered or mailed to the Borough Secretary at the
Borough Office.
   (A)   Whenever any person residing in or on premises owned by any
individual, corporation, firm or other entity attains the age of 18 years, such
property owner shall notify the Borough Council in the manner above described
within 30 days following such person’s eighteenth birthday.
   (B)   Whenever any tenant or other person residing in or on premises owned
by any person, firm or corporation removes and is replaced by another tenant,
whether or not such tenant is in fact paying rent, the person, firm or
corporation owning such property shall be obliged to notify the Borough Council
of the new tenant within 30 days after such person has moved to said premises
in the manner prescribed above.
   (C)   Any person, firm, corporation or other entity who shall violate any
provision of this Part shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a
fine of not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine
and costs to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a
violation of this Part continues or each section of this Part which shall be
found to have been violated shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 144, passed 3-1-1979, Art. LX, § 6100)
PART 2: RESPONSIBILITIES OF OWNERS AND OCCUPANTS
OF RENTAL PROPERTIES
Section
   
11-201   Definitions - word usage
   
11-202   Annual registration and fee
   
11-203   Responsibilities of owners and occupants
   
11-204   Building Code Inspector
   
11-205   Inspection of rental properties and rooming houses
   
11-206   Notice of violation
   
11-207   Appeals
   
11-208   Housing Appeals Board
   
11-209   Conflict with other provisions
   
11-210   Penalties
   
11-211   Severability
§ 11-201 DEFINITIONS - WORD USAGE.
   For the purpose of this Part, the following terms, along with definitions
located in the current edition of the International Property Maintenance Code,
shall have the meaning indicated.
   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE. A detached structure located on or partially on any
premises which is not used or not intended to be used for living or sleeping by
human occupants.
   APPROPRIATE AUTHORITY. That person within the governmental structure of the
corporate unit charged with the administration of the appropriate code.
   ASHES. The residue from the burning of combustible material.
   BUILDING. An independent structure having a roof supported by columns or
walls resting on its foundations and includes dwelling, garage, barn, stable,
shed, greenhouse, mobile home, plant, factory, warehouse, school or similar
structure.
   BUILDING INSPECTOR (BUILDING CODE INSPECTOR, INSPECTOR). The individual or
entity authorized by Dillsburg Borough Council to inspect properties and any
other duties set forth in this Part.
   CENTRAL HEATING SYSTEM. A single system supplying heat to one or more
dwelling unit(s) or more than one rooming unit.
   CHIMNEY. A vertical masonry shaft of reinforced concrete or other approved
noncombustible, heat-resisting material enclosing one or more flues, for the
purpose of removing products of combustion from solid, liquid or gas fuels.
   CLEAN and SANITARY. A condition which will not promote germ or disease
growth.
   DORMITORY. A room in any dwelling used for sleeping purposes by two or more
unrelated persons.
   DWELLING. Any enclosed space which is wholly or partly used, or to be used,
for living or sleeping by human occupants; provided, that “temporary housing”
as hereinafter defined, shall not be regarded as a DWELLING.
   EGRESS. A going out, emergence, the right to go out, a way out, exit.
   FAMILY. One adult person plus one or more persons who are legally related to
said person and residing in the same dwelling unit with said person. In the
event that this definition is inconsistent with state or federal law relating
to housing or disability, the definition contained in the state or federal law
shall supersede this definition and prevail.
   FLUSH WATER CLOSET. A toilet bowl flushed with water under pressure with a
water sealed trap above the floor level. Such toilet bowls shall have a smooth,
easily cleanable surface.
   GUEST. Any person who shares a dwelling unit in a nonpermanent status for no
more than 30 days.
   HABITABLE ROOM. A room or enclosed floor space used or intended to be used
for living, sleeping, cooking or eating purposes, excluding laundries, furnace
rooms, pantries and utility rooms of less than 50 square feet, foyers or
communicating corridors, stairways, storage spaces and workshops, hobby and
recreation areas in unsealed or uninsulated parts of structure below ground
level or in attics.
   HEATED WATER. Water heated to a temperature of not less than 120°F.
   HOUSEHOLD. A family and/or one or more unrelated persons, who share the same
dwelling and use some or all of its cooking and eating facilities, including
servants and not more than two boarders.
   KITCHEN. Any room containing any or all of the following equipment or the
area of a room within three feet of such equipment: sink and/or other devices
for dishwashing, stove or other devices for cooking, refrigerator or other
devices for cool storage of food, cabinets and/or shelves for storage of
equipment and utensils and counter or table for food preparation.
   MULTIPLE DWELLING. Any dwelling containing more than two dwelling units and/
or rooming units.
   OCCUPANT. Any person over one year of age living, sleeping, cooking or
eating in or actually having possession of a dwelling unit or a rooming unit,
except that in dwelling units, a guest will not be considered an occupant.
   ORDINARY SUMMER CONDITIONS. A temperature of 10°F below the highest recorded
temperature in the locality for the prior ten-year period.
   ORDINARY WINTER CONDITIONS. A temperature of 15°F above the lowest recorded
temperature in the locality for the prior ten-year period.
   PERMISSIBLE OCCUPANCY. The maximum number of persons permitted to reside in
a dwelling unit or rooming unit.
   PLUMBING. Includes all of the following supplied facilities and equipment:
gas pipes, gas burning equipment, water pipes, garbage disposal units, waste
pipes, water closets, sinks, installed dishwashers, lavatories, bathtubs,
shower baths, installed clothes washing machines, catch basins, drains, vents
and other similar supplied fixtures, together with all connections to water,
sewer or gas lines.
   PRIVACY. The ability of a person or persons to carry out an activity
commenced without interruption or interference, either by sight or sound, by
unwanted persons.
   PROPERTY. A piece, parcel, lot or tract of land.
   REFUSE. All putrescible and nonputrescible solids (except body wastes),
including garbage, rubbish, ashes and dead animals.
   RENTAL PROPERTY. Any dwelling or dwelling unit occupied by a tenant or
tenants under a lease, written or oral, with the owner.
   RESIDENT. An individual who is domiciled in the Borough of Dillsburg or, in
the case of a nonindividual, an entity with its principal place of business and
mailing address in the borough.
   ROOMING HOUSE. A building arranged or occupied for lodging, with or without
meals, for compensation and not occupied as a one- or two-family dwelling and
shall include hotels and motels.
   SAFETY. The condition of being free from danger and hazard which may cause
accidents or disease.
   SANITARY. A condition which will not promote germ or disease growth.
   SPACE HEATER. A self-contained, heating appliance of either the circulating
type or the radiant type and intended primarily to heat only one room and which
is not a fixture to the real property.
   SWIMMING POOL. Any structure intended for recreational bathing that can
contain water over 24 inches (610 mm) deep. This includes in-ground,
aboveground and on-ground swimming pools, hot tubs and spas. All residential
swimming pools must meet the requirements of Chapter 41 and Appendix G of the
International Residential Code.
   SUPPLIED. Paid for, furnished by, provided by or under the control of the
owner or operator.
   TEMPORARY HOUSING. Any tent, trailer, mobile home or any other structure
used for human shelter which is designed to be transportable and which is not
attached to the ground, to another structure or to any utility system on the
same premises for more than 30 consecutive days.
(Ord. 2006-6, passed 6-13-2006)
§ 11-202 ANNUAL REGISTRATION AND FEE.
   (A)   All rental property dwellings, including, but not limited to,
dwelling, dwelling units, rooming houses, rooming units, dormitory rooms, must
be registered at the borough office no later than July 21, 2006, and each year
following between January 1 and March 31; except in the year 2007 when the
registration period will extend from January 1, 2007 until April 30t 2007. All
owners or legal controlling persons must comply with registration:
      (1)   Provide names, address and phone number of all occupants, tenants,
roomers or persons living within the dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit or
dormitory that may or may not have a valid lease or rental agreement. This
information must be updated within 30 days of occupant, tenant, roomer or
person change and should include forwarding information for previous occupants,
tenants, roomers or persons;
      (2)   Provide the name(s), address and phone numbers of owner; and
      (3)   Provide any other needed information allowable by law.
   (B)   Every person owning a rental property dwelling, a rooming house or
other rental property shall give notice, in writing, to the Building Code
Inspector within 24 hours after having transferred or otherwise disposed of the
legal control of any licensed rooming house or rental property. Such notice
shall include the name and address of the person or persons succeeding to the
ownership or control of such rooming house or rental property.
   (C)   As part of the annual registration a basic fee shall be paid for each
and any rental property dwelling, including, but not limited to, dwelling
units, rooming houses, rooming units, dormitory rooms. The fee schedule is as
follows:
      (1)   Year 1 (2006).
         (a)   One hundred and fifty dollar registration fee for up to three
units per address, $25 for each additional unit per address.
         (b)   This will cover IPMC Book, Q/A session, and up to two minimum
condition inspections per unit.
         (c)   Repeat failures will cost $55 per inspection.
      (2)   Year 2 (2007).
         (a)   Forty-five dollar registration fee for up to three units per
address, $75 for each additional unit per address.
         (b)   This will cover one complete inspection per unit.
         (c)   Repeat inspections will cost $60 each per unit and must be paid
at the time of the repeat inspection.
      (3)   Year 3 and beyond. Fee will be set by resolution.
   (D)   All fees and charges for inspection, as set forth by resolution of
Council, shall be paid in advance at the time application thereof is made to
the borough.
   (E)   All fees and charges for inspection due and unpaid under this Part
shall be recovered by the borough as other debts due the borough are now by law
recovered.
   (F)   Any owner who fails or refuses to register and pay the annual
registration fee will be subject to fines, penalties and actions as set forth
in this Part.
   (G)   As part of the annual registration a basic fee shall be paid for each
and any new and/or additional rental property dwelling, including, but not
limited to, dwelling units, rooming houses, rooming units, dormitory rooms. The
fee will be set yearly by resolution.
(Ord. 2006-6, passed 6-13-2006; Ord. 2007-5, passed 4-10-2007; Ord. 2007-10,
passed 12-11-2007)
§ 11-203 RESPONSIBILITIES OF OWNERS AND OCCUPANTS.
   (A)   In July of 2004, the borough adopted the International Property
Maintenance Code, which is available to the public for examination during
regular business hours at the Borough Office. This code defines the minimum
condition of a building in order to be habitable.
   (B)   Owners and occupants should be aware of and are responsible for any
and all information found in the current edition of the International Property
Code, as well as the following:
      (1)   In the case of rental properties which contain attached or detached
garages and/or off-street parking spaces, these spaces must be rented with the
dwelling unit to ensure adequate off-street parking in accordance with the
borough zoning ordinance requirements and may not be rented to non-tenants of
the property unless adequate parking spaces exist;
      (2)   Every owner of a rental property containing two or more dwelling
units shall supply facilities or containers for the sanitary and safe storage
and/or disposal of rubbish, recycling and garbage. In the case of single-family
dwellings, it shall be the responsibility of the occupant to furnish such
facilities or containers;
      (3)   All construction and materials, ways and means of egress and
installation and use of equipment shall conform to applicable state and local
laws dealing with fire protection per NFPA;
      (4)   No person shall operate a rental property rooming house or shall
occupy or let to another for occupancy any rental property, dormitory room and/
or rooming unit in any rooming house which is not in compliance with the
provisions of this Part. No owner or other person shall occupy or let to
another person any rooming unit or dormitory room unless it is clean and
sanitary and complies with all applicable requirements of the borough,
including the following.
         (a)   No person shall operate a rental property rooming house unless
he or she holds a valid certificate of occupancy issued by the appropriate
authority in the name of the operator and for the specific dwelling or dwelling
unit. The operator shall apply to the appropriate authority upon compliance by
the operator with the applicable provisions of this Part and of any rules and
regulations adopted pursuant thereto. The certificate shall be transferable.
Every person holding such a permit shall give notice, in writing, to the
appropriate authority within 24 hours after having sold, transferred, given
away or otherwise disposed of ownership of, interest in or control of any
rooming house. Such notice shall include the name and address of the person
succeeding to the ownership control of such rooming house.
         (b)   At least one flush water closet, lavatory basin and bathtub or
shower, properly connected to a water and sewer system approved by the Building
Inspector and in good working condition, shall be supplied for each six persons
or fraction thereof residing within a rooming house, including members of the
operator’s family wherever they share the use of said facilities; provided,
that:
            1.   In a rooming house where rooms are let only to males, flush
urinals may be substituted for not more than one and two-tenths the required
number of water closets;
            2.   All such facilities shall be so located within the dwelling as
to be reasonably accessible from a common hall or passageway to all persons
sharing such facilities;
            3.   Every lavatory basin and bathtub or shower shall be supplied
with heated and unheated water under pressure at all times;
            4.   No such facilities shall be located in a basement.
         (c)   The following provisions shall apply in all rental property
rooming houses:
            1.   Cooking in dormitory rooms and rooming units is prohibited;
            2.   Communal cooking and dining facilities in a rooming house are
prohibited; and
            3.   Access doors to rooming units shall have operating lock to
ensure privacy.
         (d)   Unless exempted by the Building Code Inspector in writing, the
operator of every rental property rooming house shall change supplied bed linen
and towels therein at least once a week and prior to the letting of any room to
any occupant, and the operator shall be responsible for the maintenance of all
supplied bedding in a clean and sanitary manner.
      (5)   Maintenance of exterior of all premises.
         (a)   The exterior of the premises and all structures thereon shall be
kept free of all nuisances and any hazards to the safety of occupants,
pedestrians, and other persons utilizing the premises and free of unsanitary or
noxious conditions. It shall be the duty of the owner, operator or occupant to
keep the premises free of hazards, including, but not limited to, the
following:
            1.   Refuse, including brush, weeds, broken glass, stumps, roots,
obnoxious growths, filth, animal excretion, trash, garbage, rubbish and debris.
All such material shall be enclosed or screened and periodically removed.
Natural growth, including dead and dying trees and limbs or other natural
growth which, by reason of rotting or deterioration or storm damage, constitute
a hazard to all persons in the vicinity thereof. Trees shall be kept pruned and
trimmed to prevent such conditions. This provision shall be applicable to trees
planted in the sidewalk area. Overhanging materials, including loose and low
hanging objects, and accumulations of ice and snow that by reason of location
and placement above ground level constitute a danger of falling on persons or
property below in the vicinity thereof. Ground surface hazards or unsanitary
conditions, including holes, excavations, breaks, projections, obstructions,
icy conditions, uncleared snow and excretion of pets or other animals on paths,
walks, curbs, driveways, parking lots and parking areas and other parts of the
premises which are accessible to and used by persons on the premises. All such
holes and excavations shall be filled and repaired, walks, sidewalks, curbs and
steps replaced, and other conditions removed when necessary to eliminate
hazards or unsanitary conditions. Performance is to be made with reasonable
dispatch upon discovery.
            2.   a.   All lots shall be graded so as to prevent puddling.
               b.   Adequate run-off drains shall be provided and maintained in
a manner that shall eliminate recurrent or excessive accumulations of
stormwater. The drainage water from down spouts or air conditioning condenser
units shall be directed so as not to create damage or hazard to neighboring
property or sidewalk areas or shall be discharged into underground drains.
            3.   Foundation walls shall be kept structurally sound, free from
defects and damage and capable of bearing safely imposed loads.
            4.   Chimneys and all flue and vent attachments thereto shall be
maintained in a manner structurally sound and free from defects in order to
capably perform at all times functions for which they were designed. Chimneys,
flues, gas vents and other draft-producing equipment shall provide sufficient
draft to develop the rated output of the connected equipment, be structurally
safe, durable, smoke-tight, and capable of withstanding the temperature and
action of flue gases.
            5.   Exterior porches, landings, balconies, decks, stairs and fire
escapes shall be provided with railings properly designed and maintained to
minimize the hazard of falling and the same shall be kept structurally sound,
in good repair and free from defects.
         (b)   The exterior of the premises, the exterior of the dwelling
structures, and the condition of accessory structures shall be maintained so
that the appearance of the premises and all buildings thereon shall reflect a
level of maintenance in keeping with the residential standards of the
neighborhood. The appearance of the premises and structures shall be so
maintained that they do not constitute a blighting factor for adjoining
property owners nor an element leading to the progressive deterioration and
downgrading of the neighborhood with the accompanying diminution of property
values. Such minimum standards shall include, but not be limited to, the
following:
            1.   Equipment and materials relating to commercial or industrial
uses shall not be stored or used at a location visible from the sidewalk,
street, other public areas or adjoining properties. All such materials shall be
enclosed or screened and be removed within 60 days;
            2.   All signs permitted by reason of other regulations, or as a
lawfill nonconforming use under the provisions of the borough’s zoning
ordinance, shall be maintained in good repair;
            3.   All reconstruction of walls and siding shall be accepted
standard quality. Materials used shall not be of a type that by their
appearance and under prevailing appraisal practices and standards will
depreciate the values of neighboring and adjoining premises;
            4.   The exterior of every structure or accessory structure
(including fences) shall be maintained in good repair, and all surfaces thereof
shall be kept painted or otherwise treated when necessary for purposes of
preservation and appearance. The same shall be maintained free of broken glass,
loose shingles, crumbling stone or brick, excessive peeling paint or other
conditions reflective of deterioration or inadequate maintenance, to the end
that the property itself may be preserved, safety and fire hazards eliminated,
and adjoining properties and the neighborhood protected from blighting
influences; and
            5.   All auxiliary structures in residential areas shall be
securely affixed and anchored to a foundation that would prevent said buildings
from being blown from their location by high winds and moved or removed by
vandals.
      (6)   Basements, cellars and crawlspaces are to be free of moisture
resulting from seepage, and cross ventilation shall be required when necessary
to prevent accumulation of moisture; and
      (7)   Every owner or other person in charge of a rental property or
rooming house shall keep or cause to be kept records of all requests for
repairs and complaints by tenants which are related to the provisions of this
Part and to any applicable rules and regulations, and of all corrections made
in response to such requests and complaints. Such records shall be made
available by the owner or other person in charge to the Building Code Inspector
for inspection and copying upon demand. Such records shall be admissible in any
administrative or judicial proceedings pursuant to the provisions of this Part
as prima facie evidence of the violation or the correction of violations of
this Part or applicable rules and regulations pursuant thereto.
(Ord. 2006-6, passed 6-13-2006; Ord. 2007-10, passed 12-11-2007)
§ 11-204 BUILDING CODE INSPECTOR.
   (A)   The Building Code Inspector is hereby authorized and directed to
inspect rental property dwellings and rooming houses and all other rental
properties, subject to the provisions of this Part.
   (B)   The Building Code Inspector is hereby authorized and directed to make
inspections pursuant to this Part, or in response to a complaint that an
alleged violation of the provisions of this Part or of applicable rules or
regulations pursuant thereto has been committed or when the Building Code
Inspector has valid reason to believe that a violation of this Part or of any
rules and regulations pursuant thereto had been committed.
   (C)   The Building Code Inspector is authorized and directed to make
inspections at any reasonable hour (9:00 a.m. until 7:00 p.m.) to determine
compliance with this Part. For this purpose, the Building Code Inspector is
authorized to enter and examine any rental property or rooming house, yard or
part, or either and every owner, operator, occupant or agent shall give the
Building Code Inspector free access to it. Inspection may be postponed and/or
rescheduled due to illness or other emergency or unforeseen circumstance. The
Building Code Inspector and the owner or occupant or other person in charge of
a dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house, rooming unit, or dormitory, subject
to this Part, may agree to an inspection by appointment at a time other than
the hours provided by this Part. The owner, agent or person in charge must be
present at all times during the inspection.
      (1)   The owner or occupant or other person in charge of a rental
property dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house or dormitory room, upon
presentation by the Building Code Inspector of proper identification, shall
give the Building Code Inspector entry and free access to every part of the
dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house, dormitory room or to the premises
surrounding any of these. Pets of any kind must be secured or removed from the
premises in order to provide entry and free access to all areas and parts.
Before making inspections within a contiguous area, the Building Code Inspector
shall first consult with organizations representative of property owners and
other residents of such contiguous area, if any such organization exists.
      (2)   If any owner, occupant or other person in charge of a rental
property dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, dormitory room or a multiple
dwelling or rooming house, subject to the provisions of this Part, refuses,
impedes, inhibits, interferes with, restricts, or obstructs entry and free
access to every part of the structure or premises where inspection authorized
by this Part is sought, the Building Code Inspector is authorized to seek, in a
court of competent jurisdiction, an order that such person in charge cease and
desist with such interference. Such person may also be subject to fines,
penalties and actions as set forth in this Part.
   (D)   The Building Code Inspector and the borough shall have the authority
to institute any action permitted by law to enforce the provisions of this
Part.
(Ord. 2006-6, passed 6-13-2006)
§ 11-205 INSPECTION OF RENTAL PROPERTIES AND ROOMING HOUSES.
   (A)   Whenever, upon inspection of the rental property or rooming house or
of the records required to be kept by this Part, the Building Code Inspector
finds that conditions or practices exist which are in violation of the
provisions of this Part or of any applicable rules and regulations pursuant
thereto, the Inspector shall serve the owner or other person in charge with
notice of such violation in a manner hereinafter provided. Such notice shall
state that unless the violations cited are corrected within the time provided,
the owner shall be subject to fines, penalties and actions provided by this
Part.
   (B)   On August 14, 2006 the borough will start inspecting residential
rental properties for compliance. The following items need to be brought into
compliance by December 31, 2006 in order to continue to occupy the residence.
      (1)   Smoke detectors must be mounted in each bedroom and in the common
area outside a bedroom, with a minimum of one per floor. These smoke detectors
must be hardwired to a 110v-power supply with a battery back up and
interconnected.
      (2)   Stairs, ramps and railings will be inspected for stability,
ballasted spacing, grip size and general egress path size.
      (3)   Electrical panels will be inspected for correct installation,
grounded/bonded, and circuits not overloaded. Main disconnect readily
accessible to tenants without entering another tenant’s residence. GFCI
circuits in kitchen, baths, and unfinished basements.
      (4)   Plumbing will be inspected for leaks with all attached fixtures in
good working order.
      (5)   Exterior doors must be in good working order with locking
capability as required by the International Residential Code.
      (6)   Windows must be in good working order, able to be opened for
ventilation and emergency egress. Windows within six foot of grade must have
locking capability.
      (7)   Residence clearly identified with street number in compliance with
borough ordinances.
   (C)   Inspection conducted after January 1, 2007 will require full
compliance to the current edition of the International Property Maintenance
Code and will be conducted every other year beginning in 2007. The fee will be
set yearly by resolution. The inspections will pay particular attention to the
following:
      (1)   Accumulation of rubbish and garbage on property (IPMC 307);
      (2)   Exterior areas (IPMC 302):
         (a)   Condition of private walkways, patios and driveways;
         (b)   Accessory structures - garages/sheds; and
         (c)   Motor vehicles not in use.
      (3)   Exterior structure (IPMC 304):
         (a)   Structural members;
         (b)   Rotted, exposed wood;
         (c)   Roof drains and down spouts - should not be discharged to create
a public nuisance;
         (d)   Chimneys - exterior maintenance, not decayed or unsafe interior
conditions; and
         (e)   Peeling, flaking or chipping paint.
(Ord. 2006-6, passed 6-13-2006; Ord. 2007-5, passed 4-10-2007; Ord. 2007-10,
passed 12-11-2007)
§ 11-206 NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
   (A)   Whenever the Building Code Inspector determines that any rental
dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house, rooming units, dormitory rooms or the
premises surrounding any of these fails to meet the requirements set forth in
this Part or in applicable rules and regulations issued pursuant thereto, the
Inspector shall issue a notice setting forth the alleged failures and advising
the owner or occupant or other person in charge that such failures must be
corrected. This notice shall:
      (1)   Be in writing;
      (2)   Set forth the alleged violations of this Part or if applicable
rules and regulations issued pursuant thereto;
      (3)   Describe the dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house, rooming unit,
dormitory room or premises where the violations are alleged to exist or to have
been committed;
      (4)   Provide a reasonable time for the correction of any violation
alleged. The time for compliance shall take into consideration the seriousness
of the violation and the climatic conditions. The Building Code Inspector may,
in the Inspector’s sole and absolute discretion, give one additional extension
of time; provided, the property owner is exercising due diligence and the
inability to make the correction is through no fault of the property owner;
      (5)   Be served upon the owner or occupant or other person in charge of
the dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house, rooming unit, dormitory room or
premises personally or by certified mail, return receipt requested, addressed
to the last known place of residence of the owner or occupant or other person
in charge. If one or more persons to whom such notice is addressed cannot be
found after diligent effort to do so, service may be made upon such persons by
posting a notice in or about the dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house,
rooming unit, dormitory room or premises described in the notice or by causing
such notice to be published in a newspaper for three consecutive days; and
      (6)   Include a statement of the right to file a lien in accordance with
the International Property Maintenance Code.
   (B)   At the end of the period of time allowed for the correction of any
violation alleged, the Building Code Inspector shall re-inspect the dwelling,
dwelling unit, rooming house, rooming unit, dormitory room or premises
described in the notice.
      (1)   Whenever the Building Code Inspector finds that any dwelling,
dwelling unit, rooming house, rooming unit, dormitory room or premises
constitutes a serious hazard to the health and safety of the occupants or the
public because it is dilapidated, unsanitary, vermin-infested or lacking in the
facilities and equipment required by this Part and any amendments thereto, the
Inspector shall designate such property as unfit for human habitation. Such
designation shall be posted on the dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house,
rooming unit, dormitory room or premises and shall specify the reason or
reasons. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove such notice except as
provided below.
      (2)   Any property so designated as unfit for human habitation shall be
vacated within 24 hours and shall not again be used for human habitation until
the conditions have been eliminated and the Building Code Inspector has removed
the designation and given written approval for occupancy.
      (3)   Any person aggrieved by a designation of unfitness for human
habitation may appeal to the Housing Appeals Board, as described in this Part.
   (C)   Any owner or occupant or other person in charge of a rental property
who has received notice of a violation of this Part and fails to take the
necessary corrective action will be subject to fines, penalties and actions as
set forth in this Part.
(Ord. 2006-6, passed 6-13-2006)
§ 11-207 APPEALS.
   (A)   Any person aggrieved by a determination of a UCC or IPMC violation
issued by the Building Code Inspector may appeal the determination to the UCC/
Housing Appeals Board on an appeal form that shall be available from the
Building Code Inspector or borough staff.
   (B)   The appeal must be filed at the Borough Office no later than ten days
after the date of the determination of violation.
   (C)   An appeal fee which shall be set by resolution must also be paid by
the appellant at the time the appeal is filed. No refund shall be paid if the
sole determination of the Housing Appeals Board is an extension of time for
compliance.
   (D)   The Housing Appeals Board shall meet to hear the appeal not later than
60 days after the appeal is filed. Notice of the time and date and place of the
hearing shall be sent by ordinary mail to the appellant or the appellant’s
attorney of record not less than ten days prior to the date and time of the
hearing.
   (E)   The burden of proof shall be on the Building Code Inspector to
establish a violation of this Part. The determination of the Building Code
Inspector shall be affirmed if supported by substantial evidence.
(Ord. 2006-6, passed 6-13-2006; Ord. 2007-5, passed 4-10-2007)
§ 11-208 HOUSING APPEALS BOARD.
   The UCC/Housing Board will be established and members appointed by separate
resolution adopted by the Borough Council.
(Ord. 2006-6, passed 6-13-2006)
§ 11-209 CONFLICT WITH OTHER PROVISIONS.
   In any case where a provision of this Part is found to be in conflict with a
provision of any zoning, building, fire safety or health ordinance or code of
the orough or regulations of the state’s Department of Labor and Industry
coexisting on the effective date of this Part, the provision which establishes
a higher standard for the promotion and protection of the health and safety of
the people shall prevail. In any case where a provision of this Part is found
to be in conflict with provision of any other ordinances or codes of the
borough existing on the effective date of this Part which establishes a lower
standard for the promotion and protection of the health and safety of the
people, the provisions of this Part shall prevail, and such other ordinances or
codes are hereby declared to be repealed to the extent that they may be found
in conflict with this Part.
(Ord. 2006-6, passed 6-13-2006)
§ 11-210 PENALTIES.
   Any person, firm, corporation or other entity who shall violate any
provision of this Part shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a
fine of not more than $1,000, plus costs and reasonable legal (including
attorney) fees, and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of
imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation of this Part
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 2006-6, passed 6-13-2006; Ord. 2007-10, passed 12-11-2007)
§ 11-211 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provision, sentence, clause, section, or any part of this Part is for
any reason found to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such
unconstitutionality, illegality or invalidity shall not affect or impair any of
the remaining provisions, sentences, clauses, sections, or parts of this Part.
It is hereby declared as the intent of the Borough Council, that this Part
would have been adopted had such unconstitutional, illegal or invalid
provision, sentence, clause, section or part thereof not have been included
herein.
(Ord. 2006-6, passed 6-13-2006)
CHAPTER 12: RESERVED
CHAPTER 13: LICENSES, PERMITS AND GENERAL
BUSINESS REGULATIONS
      Part
         
1.   PEDDLERS AND CANVASSERS TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESS
         
2.   OBSCENE MATERIALS
         
3.   FRANCHISING OF TELEVISION CABLE OR OTHER COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS
         
4.   AUTOMATIC PROTECTION DEVICES
PART 1: PEDDLERS AND CANVASSERS
TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESS
Section
   
13-101   Definitions
   
13-102   License required; conditions of issuance; fee
   
13-103   Reserved
   
13-104   License application
   
13-105   Issuance of license; custody, display and exhibit
   
13-106   Prohibited act
   
13-107   Supervision; records and reports
   
13-108   Denial, suspension and revocation of license; appeal
   
13-109   Penalties
§ 13-101 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this Part, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      LEGAL HOLIDAY. New Year’s Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day,
Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day.
      PERSON. Any natural person, partnership, association, corporation or
other legal entity.
      TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESS.
         (a)   Engaging in peddling, soliciting or taking orders, either by
sample or otherwise, for any goods, services, wares or merchandise upon any
street, alley, sidewalk or public ground, or from house to house, within the
borough.
         (b)   Selling, soliciting or taking orders for any goods, wares or
merchandise, from a fixed location within the borough, on a temporary basis,
which shall include, but not be limited to, such activities conducted at the
time of special occasions or celebrations, for seasonal purposes or for yearly
holidays.
         (c)   TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESS shall not apply to:
            1.   Farmers selling their own produce;
            2.   For the sale of goods, wares and merchandise, donated by the
owners thereof, the proceeds whereof are to be applied to any charitable or
philanthropic purpose;
            3.   Children under the age of 18 years who take orders for and
deliver newspapers, greeting cards, candy, bakery products and the like, or who
represent the Boy Scouts or Girl Scouts or similar organizations;
            4.   A person who has complied with the provisions of the
Solicitation of Funds for Charitable Purposes Act, 10 P.S. §§ 162.1 et seq., as
hereafter amended, supplemented, modified or reenacted by the General Assembly
of Pennsylvania.
   (B)   The singular shall include the plural; the plural shall include the
singular; and the masculine shall include the feminine and the neuter.
(Ord. 2008-5, passed 6-9-2008)
§ 13-102 LICENSE REQUIRED; CONDITIONS OF ISSUANCE; FEE.
   No person shall engage in any transient retail business within the borough
without first having obtained from the Borough Manager or designated borough
employee a license, for which a fee, which shall be for the use of the borough,
shall be charged, said fee to be in such amount established, from time to time,
by resolution of the Borough Council.
(Ord. 2008-5, passed 6-9-2008)
§ 13-103 RESERVED.
§ 13-104 LICENSE APPLICATION.
   Every person desiring a license under this Part shall first make application
to the Borough Manager or designated borough employee for such license. He or
she shall, when making such application, exhibit a valid license from any state
or county officer, if such license is also required. The applicant shall state:
   (A)   His or her criminal record, if any;
   (B)   Name and address of the person by whom he or she is employed; and
   (C)   Type of goods, wares, services and merchandise he or she wishes to
deal with in such transient retail business.
(Ord. 2008-5, passed 6-9-2008)
§ 13-105 ISSUANCE OF LICENSE; CUSTODY, DISPLAY AND EXHIBIT.
   Upon receipt of such application and the prescribed fee, the Borough Manager
or designated borough employee, if he or she shall find such application in
order, shall issue the license required under this Part. Such license shall
contain the information required to be given on the application therefor. Every
license holder shall carry such license upon his or her person if engaged in
transient retail business from house to house or upon any of the streets,
alleys, sidewalks or public grounds, or shall display such license at the
location where he or she shall engage in such business if doing so at a fixed
location. He or she shall exhibit such license, upon request, to all police
officers, municipal officials and citizens or residents of the borough.
(Ord. 2008-5, passed 6-9-2008)
§ 13-106 PROHIBITED ACT.
   No person in any transient retail business shall:
   (A)   Sell any product or type of product not mentioned in his or her
license;
   (B)   Hawk or cry his or her wares upon any of the streets, alleys,
sidewalks or public grounds in the borough;
   (C)   When operating from a vehicle, stop or park such vehicle upon any of
the streets or alleys in the borough for longer than necessary in order to sell
therefrom to persons residing or working in the immediate vicinity;
   (D)   Park a vehicle upon any of the streets or alleys in the borough for
the purpose of sorting, rearranging or cleaning any of his or her goods, wares
or merchandise or of disposing of any carton, wrapping material, or stock,
wares or foodstuffs which have become unsalable through handling, age or
otherwise; and
   (E)   Engage in any business activity, except by prior appointment, at any
time on a Sunday or legal holiday or at any time before 10:00 a.m. or after 8:
00 p.m. on any day of the week other than a Sunday or legal holiday.
§ 13-107 SUPERVISION; RECORDS AND REPORTS.
   The Borough Manager or designated borough employee shall supervise the
activities of all persons holding licenses under this chapter. He or she shall
keep a record of all licenses issued hereunder and shall make a report thereof
each month to the Borough Council.
(Ord. 2008-5, passed 6-9-2008)
§ 13-108 DENIAL, SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION OF LICENSE; APPEAL.
   The Borough Manager or designated borough employee is hereby authorized to
deny, suspend or revoke any license issued under this Part when he or she deems
such denial, suspension or revocation to be beneficial to the public health,
safety or morals, or for violation of any provision of this Part, or for giving
false information upon any application for a license hereunder. Appeals from
any suspension, revocation or denial of a license may be made to the Borough
Council at any time within ten days after such suspension, revocation or denial
and a hearing shall be held within 30 days of the petition for appeal. No part
of a license fee shall be refunded to any person whose license shall have been
suspended or revoked.
(Ord. 2008-5, passed 6-9-2008)
§ 13-109 PENALTIES.
   Any person, firm, corporation or other entity who shall violate any
provision of this Part shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a
fine of not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine
and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a
violation of this Part continues shall constitute a separate offense.
PART 2: OBSCENE MATERIALS
Section
   
13-201   Title
   
13-202   Purposes and findings
   
13-203   Prohibited activities
   
13-204   Show or display of obscene materials prohibited
   
13-205   Definition of obscene
   
13-206   Sexual conduct
   
13-207   Injunctive proceedings
   
13-208   Exemptions
   
13-209   Severability, interpretation of changes of the law
   
13-210   Penalties
§ 13-201 TITLE.
   This Part shall be known as the “Obscenity Ordinance”.
(Ord. 1981-5, passed 9-22-1981)
§ 13-202 PURPOSES AND FINDINGS.
   (A)   This is an obscenity ordinance proscribing, in accordance with
prevailing community standards, that display of or the sale of obscene
literature, pictures, figures, images or paraphernalia shall be unlawful.
   (B)   Council has determined that the sale and display of obscene materials
within the borough is offensive to the vast majority of the residents in said
borough, it being primarily a residential-family community having a number of
retired persons who object to sale or display of materials that foster a
prurient interest; and that the fostering of such prurient interests for both
residents and visitors has a detrimental effect to citizens of the borough.
(Ord. 1981-5, passed 9-12-1981)
§ 13-203 PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, organization, corporation or
association to utilize any real property within the borough for the purpose of
selling, showing or displaying any obscene literature, motion pictures, books,
magazines, pamphlets, newspapers, recordings, writings, drawings, photographs,
figures, images or other articles, instruments or paraphernalia that shall be
considered obscene in accordance with §
13-205 to members of the public, whether residents or nonresidents of the
borough.
(Ord. 1981-5, passed 9-22-1981)
§ 13-204 SHOW OR DISPLAY OF OBSCENE MATERIALS PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, organization, corporation or
association to show or display within the borough for the purpose of selling,
showing or displaying any obscene literature, motion pictures, books,
magazines, pamphlets, newspapers, recordings, writings, drawings, photographs,
figures, images or other articles, instruments or paraphernalia that shall be
considered obscene in accordance with §
13-205 to members of the public, whether residents or nonresidents of the
borough.
(Ord. 1981-5, passed 9-22-1981)
§ 13-205 DEFINITION OF OBSCENE.
   OBSCENE as used in this Part means that any writing, recording, pictorial
representation or material or paraphernalia that may display or be utilized in
sexual conduct hereafter defined, which to the average person by contemporary
community standards, has as its dominant theme when taken as a whole an appeal
to prurient interests. Any writing, recording, pictorial representation or
material or paraphernalia may be found to be OBSCENE if:
   (A)   The average person applying contemporary community standards would
find that such matter, taken as a whole, appeals to the prurient interest in
sex;
   (B)   The subject matter is depicted or described in a patently offensive
way; and
   (C)   The subject matter taken as a whole lacks serious literary, artistic,
educational or scientific value.
(Ord. 1981-5, passed 9-22-1981)
§ 13-206 SEXUAL CONDUCT.
   The type of sexual conduct referred to as obscene shall include patently
offensive representations; descriptions or the display of acts of sexual
intercourse; acts of oral or anal sodomy, whether actual or simulated; patently
offensive representations, descriptions or display of masturbation, excretory
functions; patently offensive exhibitions of the male or female genitals with
the actor actually in or in a simulated state of sexual excitement; or
materials or paraphernalia utilized to foster such sexual conduct.
(Ord. 1981-5, passed 9-22-1981)
§ 13-207 INJUNCTIVE PROCEEDINGS.
   The Solicitor of the borough, or such other person as may be authorized by
Council, shall have authority to bring any proceeding in a Court of Common
Pleas of the county to enjoin any person, firm, organization, corporation or
association who shall violate the provisions of §
13-203.
(Ord. 1981-5, passed 9-22-1981)
§ 13-208 EXEMPTIONS.
   The display of any offensive material as defined in this Part by a private
person within his or her own home to his or her family or invitees shall not be
considered an unlawful act. This Part shall not apply to display by any public
library, library of any school, college or university or any archive or library
under the supervision and control of the Commonwealth or its political
subdivisions.
(Ord. 1981-5, passed 9-22-1981)
§ 13-209 SEVERABILITY, INTERPRETATION OF CHANGES OF THE LAW.
   Provisions of this Part shall be severable and if any provision shall be
found by any court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional, the
remaining provisions of this Part shall remain valid. Should any court of
competent jurisdiction render any decision which shall have the effect of
rendering this Part or portion thereof invalid, the guidelines, standards and
law held by said court as requisite to sustain its validity shall have the
effect of amending this chapter as set forth in such decision.
(Ord. 1981-5, passed 9-22-1981)
§ 13-210 PENALTIES.
   Any person, firm, corporation or other entity who shall violate any
provision of this Part shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a
fine of not less than $100 nor more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of
payment of said fine and costs to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days.
Each day that a violation of this Part continues or each section of this Part
which shall be found to have been violated shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 1981-5, passed 9-22-1981)
PART 3: FRANCHISING OF TELEVISION CABLE OR OTHER COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS
Section
   
13-301   Prohibited activities
§ 13-301 PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, association or other entity to
construct, maintain or operate towers, poles, lines, cables or other apparatus
for the purpose of receiving, amplifying, transmitting or otherwise
distributing television or radio signals to the residents of the borough for
charge without first obtaining a franchise therefor.
(Ord. 197, passed 11-16-1976)
PART 4: AUTOMATIC PROTECTION DEVICES
Section
   
13-401   Definitions
   
13-402   Prohibited activities
   
13-403   Authority and responsibilities of officials
   
13-404   Duties and responsibilities of persons
   
13-405   Confidentiality
   
13-406   Penalties
§ 13-401 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this Part, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AUTOMATIC PROTECTION DEVICE (ALARM SYSTEM).
      (1)   Any mechanical or electrically operated device or instrument
composed of sensory apparatus and related hardware which is designed or used
for the detection of an unauthorized entry into a building, structure or
facility, or an attempt thereof, or designed or used for alerting others of the
commission or attempted commission of an unlawful act within a building,
structure or facility or designed or used for the detection of fire, flames or
smoke within a building, structure or facility, or any combination thereof, and
which emits a sound or transmits a signal or message when activated.
      (2)   AUTOMATIC PROTECTION DEVICES include, but are not limited to,
audible alarms, automatic-dialing devices, alarms connected directly to a
communications center, alarms relayed through any private central station and
proprietory alarms.
      (3)   Exemption: the following devices shall not be included under the
definition:
         (a)   Devices which are not designed or used to register alarms that
are audible, visible or perceptible outside of the protected building,
structure or facility such as those systems designed for the detection of
equipment malfunctions;
         (b)   Devices which are designed, used or provided for the sole
purpose of evacuation of occupants of industries, institutions and other
similar premises;
         (c)   Devices which are designed for and installed upon motorized
vehicles or trailers; and
         (d)   Devices maintained and/or operated by the Police Department for
the borough and/or borough’s designated fire company used for the detection of
unlawful acts or for demonstration purposes.
   COMMUNICATION CENTER. The York County Communications Center, Police
Department headquarters, any base of the Volunteer Fire Company, or any other
specifically authorized location.
   FALSE ALARM. Any activation of an automatic protection device signal or
notification of such activation by any means, resulting in or expecting the
response of the Police Department and/or the Volunteer Fire Company where an
emergency situation does not or did not exist at the time of such activation.
The term does not include alarms caused by hurricanes, tornadoes, earthquakes,
floods or other violent acts or acts of God. A rainstorm or thunderstorm does
not constitute a violent act or an act of God.
   FIRE DEPARTMENT. Any and all officers, members and equipment of Dillsburg
Borough’s designated fire company.
   PERSON. Any person, group, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
   POLICE CHIEF. The Chief of Police of the borough’s designated Police
Department or his or her designated representative.
   POLICE or POLICE DEPARTMENT. All members of the borough’s designated Police
Department.
   RECORDS. The reports, incidents, statistics or files of the Police
Department or Volunteer Fire Company.
   TROUBLE ALARM. A condition whereby an automatic protection device is in a
pre-alarm condition, commonly referred to as a “trouble setting”, and a
communications center receives notification of such a condition. In the absence
of an actual emergency a TROUBLE ALARM shall be considered a false alarm.
(Ord. 2001-7, passed 2-13-2001, § 1)
§ 13-402 PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES.
   (A)   False alarms limited. Except as otherwise provided in this Part, it
shall be prohibited for any person to accumulate more than three false alarms
in a period of 12 months. A 12-month period shall run from January 1 to
December 31 inclusive, on any give year. The number of false alarms during any
12-month period shall be ascertained from the records of the Police Department
or Fire Department, or both. Penalties will be assessed on any and all false
alarms occurring after the third one, as set in an amount to be established,
from time to time, by resolution of Borough Council.
   (B)   Testing prohibited without permission.
      (1)   It shall be prohibited for any person to conduct any test of
demonstration of any automatic protection device designed to make direct
connection to the communications center at any time without first obtaining the
express permission of the communications center or the appropriate borough
official.
      (2)   Such permission is not required where the device to be tested or
demonstrated is not connected to a communications center and receipt of the
alarm or signal is not relayed to the Police or Fire Department by any means.
   (C)   Automatic dialing service. It shall be prohibited for any person to
authorize and/or connect or interconnect an automatic dialing device to a
communications center telephone line not designated for such connections.
Connections to designated telephone lines shall not be made without the express
permission of the communications center involved.
   (D)   Suspension or revocation. It shall be prohibited for any person to
operate or maintain an automatic protection device at any time when his or her
privilege to do so has been suspended or revoked, in accordance with the
provisions of this Part.
(Ord. 2001-7, passed 2-13-2001, § 2)
§ 13-403 AUTHORITY AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF OFFICIALS.
   (A)   The enforcement and administration of this Part shall be the
responsibility of the Fire Department, Borough Manager, Code Enforcement
Officer or police.
   (B)   The Borough Manager may promulgate such rules as are necessary for
administration and enforcement of this Part. Any such rules shall be approved
by a duly approved resolution of the Council of the borough and shall be
available for public inspection.
   (C)   Where an automatic protection device which is directly connected to a
communications center is activated and continuously transmits a signal, either
through malfunction or defect in the system, the appropriate county official is
authorized to disconnect the automatic protection device until such time as
repairs are made.
(Ord. 2001-7, passed 2-13-2001, § 3)
§ 13-404 DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF PERSONS.
   (A)   Any person possessing and using an automatic protection device shall
maintain such device in good working order.
   (B)   Any person possessing and using an automatic protection device shall,
upon request, furnish information to the police concerning emergency contact in
case of system malfunctions. The Police Department, Fire Department or Fire
Marshal shall provide forms for the recording of this information.
   (C)   Any person who has had an automatic protection device disconnected
under §
13-403(C) of this Part shall not reconnect the device without the permission of
the police. Such permission shall not be withheld when proof of repair is
shown.
   (D)   Any person who has had an automatic protection device disconnected
under §
13-403(C) of this Part shall be deemed to have his or her privilege to operate
or maintain such device suspended or revoked. Such suspension or revocation
shall remain in full force and effect until the conditions of subsection (C)
above are met.
   (E)   Where an automatic protection device is installed or attached to a
business, warehouse, institution or other similar premises, the person having
the greatest administrative or operations power shall be held responsible for
that false alarm when a false alarm is received by the Police or Fire
Department. In the event that the identity of such person is not ascertained or
if the business, warehouse, institution or other similar premises is closed,
the owner or manager or any appropriate administrative personnel may be held
responsible for a false alarm.
(Ord. 2001-7, passed 2-13-2001, § 5)
§ 13-405 CONFIDENTIALITY.
   The information furnished and secured pursuant to this Part shall be
confidential in nature and shall not be subject to public inspection, and shall
be kept so that the contents thereof shall not be known, except to those
persons charged with the administration of this Part.
(Ord. 2001-7, passed 2-13-2001, § 6)
§ 13-406 PENALTIES.
   Any person, firm, corporation or other entity who shall violate any
provision of this Part shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a
fine of not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine
and costs to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a
violation of this Part continues or each section of this Part which shall be
found to have been violated shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 2001-7, passed 2-13-2001, § 8)
CHAPTER 14: RESERVED
CHAPTER 15: MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
      Part
         
1.   GENERAL REGULATIONS
         
2.   TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
         
3.   RESTRICTIONS ON SIZE, WEIGHT AND TYPE OF VEHICLE AND LOAD
         
4.   GENERAL PARKING REGULATIONS
         
5.   ON-STREET METERED PARKING
         
6.   OFF-STREET METERED PARKING
         
7.   OFF-STREET UNMETERED PARKING
         
8.   REMOVAL AND IMPOUNDMENT OF ILLEGALLY PARKED VEHICLES
         
9.   SNOW AND ICE EMERGENCY
         
10.   REGULATION OF PEDACYCLES AND NONMOTORIZED VEHICLES
         
11.   PEDESTRIAN REGULATIONS
PART 1: GENERAL REGULATIONS
Section
   
15-101   Definitions and interpretation
   
15-102   Manner of adopting permanent traffic and parking regulations
   
15-103   Provisions to be a continuation of existing regulations
   
15-104   Temporary and emergency regulations
   
15-105   Experimental regulations
   
15-106   Traffic on streets closed or restricted for construction, maintenance
or special events
   
15-107   Use of streets by processions and assemblages
   
15-108   Authority of police officers
   
15-109   Authorization for use of speed timing devices
§ 15-101 DEFINITIONS AND INTERPRETATION.
   (A)   Words and phrases, when used in this chapter, except for sections or
parts to which different or additional definitions apply, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in the Vehicle Code, 75 Pa.C.S.A. §§ 101 et seq.,
except that, in this chapter, the word STREET may be used interchangeably with
the word HIGHWAY, and shall have the same meaning as the word “highway” as
defined in the Vehicle Code.
   (B)   The term LEGAL HOLIDAYS as used in this chapter shall mean and
include: New Year’s Day; Memorial Day; Independence Day; Juneteenth; Labor Day;
Thanksgiving Day; and Christmas Day.
   (C)   In this chapter, the singular shall include the plural; the plural
shall include the singular, and the masculine shall include the feminine.
   (D)   Although the streets in the borough run generally in a northeast-
southwest and a northwest-southeast direction, for the purpose of this chapter,
Baltimore Street and the streets running parallel or generally parallel to
Second Street shall be deemed to run in a north-south direction, and Harrisburg
Street and the streets parallel or generally parallel to York Street shall be
deemed to run in an east-west direction.
§ 15-102 MANNER OF ADOPTING PERMANENT TRAFFIC AND PARKING REGULATIONS.
   All traffic and parking regulations of a permanent nature shall be enacted
as chapters, as parts of chapters, as amendments to chapters, or as amendments
to this chapter, except where the law specifically authorizes less formal
action.
§ 15-103 PROVISIONS TO BE A CONTINUATION OF EXISTING REGULATIONS.
   The provisions of this chapter, so far as they are the same as those of
chapters and regulations in force immediately before the enactment of this
chapter, are intended as a continuation of those earlier chapters and
regulations, and not as new enactments. Nothing in this chapter shall affect
any act done or liability incurred, or any suit or prosecution pending or to be
instituted under any of those repealed or superseded chapters or regulations.
§ 15-104 TEMPORARY AND EMERGENCY REGULATIONS.
   (A)   The Borough Manager or designated official shall have the following
powers to regulate traffic and parking temporarily and in the time of
emergency:
      (1)   In the case of fire, flood, storm or other emergency, to establish
temporary traffic and/or parking regulations; and
      (2)   In the case of emergency or to facilitate public works, or in the
conduct of parades, processions or public events, to restrict or prohibit
traffic and/or parking in limited areas for periods of not more than 72 hours.
   (B)   Such temporary and emergency regulations shall be enforced by the
Police Department in the same manner as permanent regulations. Any person who
shall operate or park a vehicle or tractor in violation of any such regulation,
or who shall move, remove, destroy, injure or deface any sign or marking
erected, posted or made to give notice of any such regulation, shall upon
conviction thereof, be subject to the penalty set forth in the law or elsewhere
in this chapter for a violation of such nature and, in case of a violation for
which no specific penalty is set forth in the law or elsewhere in this chapter,
to a fine of not more than $25 together with costs of prosecution.
§ 15-105 EXPERIMENTAL REGULATIONS.
   The borough may, from time to time by resolution, designate places upon and
along the highways in the borough where, for a period of not more than 90 days,
specific traffic and/or parking regulations, prohibitions and restrictions
shall be in force and effect, and shall designate such locations by proper
signs and markings. Such regulations, prohibitions and restrictions shall be
effective as is they had been specified in this chapter. No person shall
operate and no person shall move, remove, destroy or deface any sign or marking
erected, posted or made by authority of this section. Any person who shall
violate any provision of this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be
subject to the penalty set forth in the law or elsewhere in this chapter for a
violation of such nature and, in case of a violation for which no specific
penalty is set forth in the law or elsewhere in this chapter, to a fine of not
more than $25 together with costs of prosecution; provided, the purpose of this
section is to allow for test and experimental determination of the feasibility
and desirability of permanent changes in the chapters of the borough relative
to traffic and parking.
§ 15-106 TRAFFIC ON STREETS CLOSED OR RESTRICTED FOR CONSTRUCTION, MAINTENANCE
OR SPECIAL EVENTS.
   (A)   The borough shall have authority to close any street or specific part
of a street to vehicular traffic and to place barriers or station police
officers at each end of the closed portion while construction or maintenance
work is under way or a special event is being conducted on the closed portion.
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle upon any such closed
portion.
   (B)   The borough shall have authority to establish a restricted traffic
area upon any street where construction or maintenance work is under way and to
station flagger at each end of the restricted portion. It shall be unlawful for
any person to drive a vehicle upon any such restricted traffic area at any time
when the flagger is displaying a sign directing that vehicle to stop, or is
signaling that vehicle, by a flag or other device, not to proceed.
   (C)   Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
§ 15-107 USE OF STREETS BY PROCESSIONS AND ASSEMBLAGES.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      ASSEMBLAGE. A gathering of people without vehicles, which interferes with
the movement of pedestrian or vehicular traffic on any street.
      PROCESSION. A group of individuals, vehicles, animals and/or objects
moving along a street in a way that interferes with the normal movement of
traffic. A PROCESSION shall not include a funeral caravan or military convoy.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to hold or participate in any
assemblage unless the person organizing or conducting the assemblage first
obtains a permit from the Borough Manager, which shall be issued without fee.
Application for the permit shall be made at least four weeks in advance of the
day on which the assemblage is proposed to be held, but in any case where a
state-designated highway is proposed to be used, application shall be made at
least eight weeks in advance of the proposed date. The permit shall state the
place where and the date when the assemblage is to be held, the hour when the
assemblage may convene and the hour by which it shall have been completely
dispersed. It shall be unlawful for any person to hold or to participate in any
assemblage unless the permit has been granted, or at any time or place other
than that authorized by the permit.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to hold or participate in any
procession unless the person organizing or conducting the procession first
obtains a permit from the Borough Manager, which shall be issued without fee.
Application for the permit shall be made at least four weeks in advance of the
day when the procession is proposed to be held, but in any case where a state-
designated highway is proposed to be used, application shall be made at least
eight weeks in advance of the proposed date. The permit shall specify the date
on which the procession is to be held, the route to be followed by the
procession, the hour when and place where participants may commence to assemble
and form before the procession is under way, the time when the procession may
commence to move along its route, and the time by which the end of the
procession shall have been disbanded. It shall be unlawful for any person to
hold or to participate in any procession unless the permit shall have been
granted, or under any conditions as to time or route or otherwise than those
stated in the permit.
   (D)   Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
§ 15-108 AUTHORITY OF POLICE OFFICERS.
   The police officers of the borough are hereby authorized to direct traffic
on the highways of the borough and at intersections thereof and to otherwise
enforce the provisions of this chapter.
§ 15-109 AUTHORIZATION FOR USE OF SPEED TIMING DEVICES.
   (A)   The Police Department is hereby authorized to use all speed timing
devices for the determination of speed of a motor vehicle as are approved or
will be approved by the Department of Transportation of the Commonwealth, in
accordance with 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 3368.
   (B)   This section authorizes the use of said devices upon all highways
within the borough, be they borough, county or state highways, and does also
hereby elect to exercise all powers granted to local authorities under the
Vehicle Code of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, 75 Pa.C.S.A. §§ 6101 et seq.
as hereafter amended, supplemented, modified or reenacted by the General
Assembly of the state.
PART 2: TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Section
   
15-201   Maximum speed limits established on certain streets
   
15-202   Maximum speed limits established on certain bridges and elevated
structures
   
15-203   Maximum speed limits established for certain vehicles on hazardous
grades
   
15-204   Maximum speed limits established in parks
   
15-205   Traffic signals at certain locations
   
15-206   Intersections where turn prohibited on red signal
   
15-207   One-way streets established
   
15-208   Turning at certain intersections prohibited or restricted
   
15-209   Right turns prohibited at certain intersections
   
15-210   U-turns prohibited at certain locations
   
15-211   No passing zones established
   
15-212   Through highways established
   
15-213   Stop intersections established
   
15-214   Yield intersections established
   
15-215   Operation of motor vehicles restricted on public lands
   
15-216   Rotary traffic islands established
   
15-217   Play highways established and authorized
   
15-218   Snowmobile roads designated
§ 15-201 MAXIMUM SPEED LIMITS ESTABLISHED ON CERTAIN STREETS.
   (A)   All street speed limits shall be 25 mph unless posted otherwise.
   (B)   Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine in an amount established by the state.
§ 15-202 MAXIMUM SPEED LIMITS ESTABLISHED ON CERTAIN BRIDGES AND ELEVATED
STRUCTURES.
   (A)   Maximum speed limits are established, as follows, on certain bridges
and elevated structures, and it shall be unlawful for any person to drive a
vehicle on any such bridge or elevated structure at a higher speed than the
maximum prescribed for that bridge or elevated structure:
 
Bridge or Elevated Structure Location Maximum Speed Limit
   (Reserved)
 
   (B)   Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine in an amount established by the state.
§ 15-203 MAXIMUM SPEED LIMITS ESTABLISHED FOR CERTAIN VEHICLES ON HAZARDOUS
GRADES.
   (A)   The following are declared to be hazardous grades and, upon any such
hazardous grade, no person shall drive a vehicle, having a gross weight in
excess of that referred to for that grade, in the direction stated for that
grade, at a speed in excess of that established in this section for that grade,
and, if so stated for a particular grade, the driver of every such vehicle
shall stop the vehicle before proceeding downhill:
 
               Direction of Maximum Gross                     Required to Stop
Street Between Travel       Weight        Maximum Speed Limit Before Proceeding
                                                              Downhill
   (Reserved)
 
   (B)   Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine in an amount established by the state.
§ 15-204 MAXIMUM SPEED LIMITS ESTABLISHED IN PARKS.
   (A)   A speed limit of 15 mph is established on all streets and roadways in
the public parks maintained and operated by the borough, except in the
following locations, where the lower maximums, as specified, shall apply:
 
Park Street Location Maximum Speed Limit
   (Reserved)
 
   (B)   Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine in an amount established by the state.
§ 15-205 TRAFFIC SIGNALS AT CERTAIN LOCATIONS.
   (A)   At the following locations traffic signals as indicated below shall be
erected (or are ratified if previously erected), and traffic at those locations
shall be directed by those signals:
 
Locations
Baltimore Street and Harrisburg Street
Baltimore Street and Route 15
 
   (B)   Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine in an amount established by the state.
§ 15-206 INTERSECTIONS WHERE TURN PROHIBITED ON RED SIGNAL.
   (A)   The following are established as intersections where drivers of
vehicles headed in the direction or directions indicated are prohibited from
making a right turn (or a left turn from a one-way street into another one-way
street) on a steady red signal:
 
Intersections                          Restriction
Baltimore Street and Harrisburg Street Between 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m.
 
   (B)   Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine in an amount established by the state.
§ 15-207 ONE-WAY STREETS ESTABLISHED.
   (A)   The following are established as one-way roadways, and it shall be
unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle on any one-way street other than in
the direction established for traffic on that street:
Street From To Direction of Travel
Street              From             To                    Direction of Travel
Dill Alley          East Harrisburg  East Church Street    North
                    Street
East Church Street  Harrisburg Pike  North Baltimore       West
                                     Street
Gherkin Alley       Dill Alley       East York Street      North
Rose Alley          Harrisburg Pike  Clark Alley           West
Unnamed alley       Chestnut Street  Harrisburg Pike north West
                    (SR4026)         of Harrisburg Street
Unnamed alley       North Chestnut   Harrisburg Pike       West
                    Street
West Hanover Street South Baltimore  South Second Street   West Street
 
   (B)   Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine in an amount established by the state.
§ 15-208 TURNING AT CERTAIN INTERSECTIONS PROHIBITED OR RESTRICTED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle of the type
indicated traveling upon the first-named street at any of the following
intersections, in the direction or directions indicated in each case, to make a
left turn and/or a right turn into the second-named street, as indicated, at
any time when such a turn is prohibited by this section:
 
Vehicles Traveling Direction of Not to Make Turn  When    Type of Vehicle
On                 Travel       Into                      Applicable To
Chestnut Street    Either       Left or right     Anytime Vehicles over 7.5
                                Harrisburg Street         tons (15,000 lbs)
Harrisburg Street  North        Greenbrier        Anytime Vehicles over 7.5
                                                          tons (15,000 lbs)
 
   (B)   Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine in an amount established by the state.
§ 15-209 RIGHT TURNS PROHIBITED AT CERTAIN INTERSECTIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle traveling upon the
first-named street at any of the following intersections, in the direction or
directions indicated in each case, to make other than a left turn, at any time
stated, both right turns and straight-across traffic being prohibited:
 
Vehicle Traveling On Direction of Travel Times Not to Make Right Turn Into or
                                               Travel Straight Across
   (Reserved)
 
   (B)   Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine in an amount established by the state.
§ 15-210 U-TURNS PROHIBITED AT CERTAIN LOCATIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle traveling upon any
of the following portions of streets, in the direction or directions indicated
for that street, to make a U-turn:
 
Street Portion Direction of Travel
   (Reserved)
 
   (B)   Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine in an amount established by the state.
§ 15-211 NO PASSING ZONES ESTABLISHED.
   (A)   The following are established as no passing zones, and it shall be
unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to overtake or pass another vehicle or
to drive on the left side of the roadway in any no passing zone:
 
Street Direction of Travel Between
   (Reserved)
 
   (B)   Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine in an amount established by the state.
§ 15-212 THROUGH HIGHWAYS ESTABLISHED.
   (A)   The following highways are established as through highways, thus
authorizing stop or yield signs to be erected facing traffic approaching every
intersection with the through highway except for those intersections with
traffic signals, or with exceptions or modifications as indicated below. Every
driver of a vehicle approaching a stop or yield sign authorized by this section
shall stop the vehicle or yield right-of-way as required by 75 Pa.C.S.A. §§
3323(b), 3323(c) of the Vehicle Code, as the case may be, and shall not proceed
into or across the through highway until he or she has followed all applicable
requirements of that section of the law:
 
Highway  Between
Route 74 Route 15 and southern borough limit
 
   (B)   Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine in an amount established by the state.
§ 15-213 STOP INTERSECTIONS ESTABLISHED.
   (A)   Overall ordinances combing pre-existing ordinances that the borough
has previously designated at stop intersections and they have existing signage.
These may be amended or they may be removed or added stop signs as needed
designated by proper signage.
   (B)   Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine in an amount established by the state.
§ 15-214 YIELD INTERSECTIONS ESTABLISHED.
   (A)   The following intersections (in addition to intersections with the
through highways established by §
15-212) are established as yield intersections, and official yield signs shall
be erected (or are ratified if previously erected) in such a position as to
face traffic approaching the second-named street (the through street) on the
first-named street (the yield street) in the direction or directions indicated
for that intersection. Every driver of a vehicle approaching the intersection
on the first-named or yield street, in the direction indicated in each case,
shall slow down or stop the vehicle as required by 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 3323(c) of
the Vehicle Code, and then yield the right-of-way as required by that
subsection of the Vehicle Code.
 
Yield Street           Through Street Direction of Travel
North Baltimore Street Route 15       North
 
   (B)   Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine in an amount established by the state.
§ 15-215 OPERATION OF MOTOR VEHICLES RESTRICTED ON PUBLIC LANDS.
   (A)   No motor vehicle including a motorcycle, pedalcycle or minibike shall
be operated on any property or any sidewalks owned by the borough or any other
public agency or instrumentality within the borough without the permission of
the property owner and a permit from the Borough Manager.
   (B)   Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $100 and costs.
§ 15-216 ROTARY TRAFFIC ISLANDS ESTABLISHED.
   (A)   The following locations are designated as rotary traffic islands, and
every vehicle passing around a rotary traffic island shall be driven only to
the right of the island:
 
Location
(Reserved)
 
   (B)   Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine in an amount established by the state.
§ 15-217 PLAY HIGHWAYS ESTABLISHED AND AUTHORIZED.
   (A)   The following areas upon the streets in the borough are established as
play highways:
 
Street Between Days Hours
   (Reserved)
 
   (B)   The Borough Manager is authorized to designate as play highways,
whenever he or she deems that action advisable, and for whatever period of time
directed by him or her, any part of any street in the borough where sledding
and coasting shall be permitted. That play highway shall be set apart for the
purpose under the direction of the Borough Manager.
   (C)   No person shall drive any motor vehicle upon any play highway at any
time when that street shall be designated as a play highway, except in case of
emergency, with special permission of the Borough Manager or of the police
officer in charge, who shall first clear that play highway of all persons using
it for the purpose for which it was set aside. Any person who violates any
provision of this section shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine in
an amount established by the state.
§ 15-218 SNOWMOBILE ROADS DESIGNATED.
   (A)   The following roads and streets within the borough are designated as
special snowmobile roads:
 
                       Used by Snowmobiles Only
Street or Road Between When Closed to Vehicular Shared With Vehicular Traffic
                       Traffic
   (Reserved)
 
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a snowmobile on any
highway, street or road in the borough other than as provided above. Provided,
nothing in this section shall prohibit any person from operating a snowmobile
on any other street in the borough:
      (1)   As authorized by the Vehicle Code, 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 7721, for
emergency and bridge crossings and for direct crossing of streets or two-lane
highways; and
      (2)   For special snowmobile events where authorized in advance and the
street is blocked off as provided in the Vehicle Code, 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 7723. Any
person who violates any provision of this section shall be subject to the
penalties prescribed in § 7752(a) of the Vehicle Code, 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 7752(a).
PART 3: RESTRICTIONS ON SIZE, WEIGHT AND TYPE OF VEHICLE AND LOAD
Section
   
15-301   Vehicle weight limits established on certain streets and bridges
   
15-302   Restrictions on size of vehicles on certain streets and bridges
   
15-303   Restrictions as to weight and size of vehicles on certain streets and
bridges
   
15-304   Truck traffic restricted on certain streets
§ 15-301 VEHICLE WEIGHT LIMITS ESTABLISHED ON CERTAIN STREETS AND BRIDGES.
   (A)   On the following bridges and streets or parts of streets, by authority
granted by § 4902(a) of the Vehicle Code, 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 4902(a), it shall be
unlawful for any person or persons to drive any vehicle or combination having a
gross weight in excess of the maximum prescribed below for that bridge or
street or part of street, as the case may be:
Street or Bridge Between Maximum Gross Weight
Street or Bridge            Between                        Maximum Gross Weight
Alleys on the east side of, Northeast corner of property
and extends parallel with,  known as 151 South Baltimore   8,000 lbs.
South Baltimore Street      Street and East York Street
Bomar Alley                 Entire length                  33,000 lbs.
Church Street               Entire length                  15,000 lbs.
East Harrisburg Street      Harrisburg Pike and Chestnut   15,000 lbs.
                            Street
                            South and west of South Second
Gettysburg Street           Street and south and east of   15,000 lbs.
                            Chalet Avenue
Greenbriar Lane             North Baltimore Street and     15,000 lbs.
                            Harrisburg Pike
Welty Avenue                North Baltimore Street and     15,000 lbs.
                            Harrisburg Pike
West York Street            West of South Second Street    15,000 lbs.
York Street                 Entire length                  15,000 lbs.
 
   (B)   Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be
prosecuted under §§ 4902(a) and 4902(g)(1) of the Vehicle Code, 75 Pa.C.S.A. §§
4902(a) and 4902(g)(1) and, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine in an
amount established by the state.
(Ord. 2019-1, passed 9-10-2019; Ord. 2020-1, passed 2-11-2020)
§ 15-302 RESTRICTIONS ON SIZE OF VEHICLES ON CERTAIN STREETS AND BRIDGES.
   (A)   On the following bridges and streets or parts of streets, by authority
granted by § 4902(a) of the Vehicle Code, 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 4902(a), it shall be
unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle or combination in violation of the
size restrictions prescribed below for that bridge or street or part of street,
as the case may be:
 
Street or Bridge Between                              Restrictions
Clemens Drive    Greenbriar Lane and Welty Avenue     3 or more axles
Greenbriar Lane  Harrisburg Pike and Clemens Drive    3 or more axles
Welty Avenue     Harrisburg Pike and Clemens Drive    3 or more axles
York Street      Chestnut Street and Baltimore Street 3 or more axles
 
   (B)   Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be
prosecuted under §§ 4902(a) and 4902(g)(1) of the Vehicle Code, 75 Pa.C.S.A. §§
4902(a) and 4902(g)(1) and, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine in an
amount established by the state.
(Ord. 2019-1, passed 9-10-2019; Ord. 2020-1, passed 2-11-2020)
§ 15-303 RESTRICTIONS AS TO WEIGHT AND SIZE OF VEHICLES ON CERTAIN STREETS AND
BRIDGES.
   (A)   By reason of hazardous traffic conditions and other safety factors, by
authority granted by § 4902(b) of the Vehicle Code, 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 4902(b), it
shall be unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle or combination in
violation of the restriction prescribed below for that bridge or street or part
of street.
Street or Bridge Between Restrictions
Street or Bridge         Between                     Restrictions
Alleys on the east side  Northeast corner of
of, and extends parallel property known as 151 South 8,000 lbs.
with, South Baltimore    Baltimore Street and East
Street                   York Street
Bomar Alley              Entire length               33,000 lbs.
Church Street            Entire length               15,000 lbs.
Clemens Drive            Greenbriar Lane and Welty   10 tons and/or 3 or more
                         Avenue                      axles
                         South and west of South
Gettysburg Street        Second Street and south and 15,000 lbs.
                         east of Chalet Avenue
Greenbriar Lane          North Baltimore Street and  15,000 lbs.
                         Harrisburg Pike
Greenbriar Lane          Harrisburg Pike and Clemens 10 tons and/or 3 or more
                         Drive                       axles
Harrisburg Street, East  Harrisburg Pike and         15,000 lbs.
                         Chestnut Street
Welty Avenue             North Baltimore Street and  15,000 lbs.
                         Harrisburg Pike
Welty Avenue             Harrisburg Pike and Clemens 10 tons and/or 3 or more
                         Drive                       axles
West York Street         West of South Second Street 15,000 lbs.
York Street              Entire length               15,000 lbs.
York Street              Chestnut Street and         3 or more axles
                         Baltimore Street
 
   (B)   Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be
prosecuted under §§ 4902(b) and 4902(g)(1) of the Vehicle Code, 75 Pa.C.S.A. §§
4902(b) and 4902(g)(1) and, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine in an
amount established by the state.
(Ord. 2019-1, passed 9-10-2019; Ord. 2020-1, passed 2-11-2020)
§ 15-304 TRUCK TRAFFIC RESTRICTED ON CERTAIN STREETS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle other than a
passenger car on any of the following streets or parts of streets; provided,
nothing in this section shall prohibit any person from driving an emergency
vehicle on any of those streets or parts of streets, or from driving on any of
those streets or parts of streets a truck or other commercial vehicle making
local deliveries to or pickups from premises located along that street or part
of a street.
 
Street Between
   (Reserved)
 
   (B)   Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine in an amount established by the state.
(Ord. 2019-1, passed 9-10-2019; Ord. 2020-1, passed 2-11-2020)
PART 4: GENERAL PARKING REGULATIONS
Section
   
15-401   Vehicles to be parked within marked spaces
   
15-402   Parking prohibited at all times in certain locations
   
15-403   Parking prohibited in certain locations, certain days and hours
   
15-404   Parking of trucks, buses and certain other vehicles prohibited in
certain locations
   
15-405   Parking time limited in certain locations, certain days and hours
   
15-406   Handicap parking
   
15-407   Standing or parking on roadway for loading or unloading
   
15-408   Angle parking required on portions of certain streets
   
15-409   Residential permit parking
   
15-410   Parking prohibited on portions of certain highways during street
sweeping hours
   
15-411   Penalties
§ 15-401 VEHICLES TO BE PARKED WITHIN MARKED SPACES.
   Wherever a space is marked off on any street for the parking of an
individual vehicle, every vehicle parked there shall be parked wholly within
the lines bounding that space, and it shall be a violation of this Part for any
person to park a vehicle or allow it to remain parked otherwise.
§ 15-402 PARKING PROHIBITED AT ALL TIMES IN CERTAIN LOCATIONS.
   Parking shall be prohibited at all times in the following locations:
Street Side Between
Street                 Side  Between
Autumn Woods Court     South From 210 Autumn Woods Court to 212 Autumn Woods
                             Court
Beaver Street          West  A distance of 50 feet on the south side of the
                             entrance serving Green Meadows
                             From a point 170 feet south of its intersection
                             with East Harrisburg Street, continuing in a
Chestnut Street        East  southerly direction to a point 350 feet south of
                             the intersection of Chestnut Street and East York
                             Street
                             From a point at the intersection of Chestnut
                             Street with East Harrisburg Street and continuing
Chestnut Street        West  in a southerly direction to a point 350 feet south
                             of the intersection of Chestnut Street and East
                             York Street
                             A distance of 150 feet on either side of the
Chestnut Street        West  entrance driveway serving the Dillsburg Elementary
                             School.
Clemens Drive          South From Chestnut Street to Hollow Lane
South Baltimore Street East  Intersection with Oak Avenue north to its
                             intersection with Pheasant Ridge Road
                             Borough boundary north of Oak Avenue north to a
South Baltimore Street West  line extended west from the intersection of
                             Pheasant Ridge Road
West Franklin Street   South From the intersection with Baltimore Street to
                             Bomar Alley
                             Beginning at a point being the same as the eastern
                             side of the intersection of East York Street with
York Street            Both  the unnamed one way north bound alley and
                             continuing in an easterly direction to its
                             intersection with Chestnut Street
 
   (B)   Parking shall be prohibited at all times during certain periods in the
following locations:
 
Street              Side  Between                     Periods
West Hanover Street North From South Baltimore Street From December 15 until
                          to South Second Street      March 15
 
(Ord. 2008-2, passed 3-11-2008; Ord. 2009-4, passed 7-14-2009; Ord. 2010-4,
passed 12-14-2010; Ord. 2015-4, passed 10-13-2015)
§ 15-403 PARKING PROHIBITED IN CERTAIN LOCATIONS, CERTAIN DAYS AND HOURS.
   Parking shall be prohibited in the following locations at all times on the
days and between the hours indicated in this section, as follows:
 
Street Side Between Days Hours
   (Reserved)
 
§ 15-404 PARKING OF TRUCKS, BUSES AND CERTAIN OTHER VEHICLES PROHIBITED IN
CERTAIN LOCATIONS.
   (A)   Parking in off-street parking areas or driveways between the main
building and the adjacent streets in the (T-C) Town Center District, (C-H)
Commercial Highway District, (M-C) Manufacturing Commercial District, (P-C)
Planned Commercial District and (MU-C) Mixed Use Center District by commercial
vehicles, including trucks, busses and other commercial vehicles, shall be
limited to the time it takes to load or unload said vehicle in order to provide
for the least amount of interruption and to enable access to parking spaces,
and in consideration for the safety of the general public for whom the parking
spaces are designed.
   (B)   All commercial vehicles not so actively engaged in loading or
unloading shall be consigned to the rear of the front line of the main building
and, in the case of a corner lot, to the rear of the facade of the main
building facing any street.
(Ord. 2008-4, passed 4-9-2008)
§ 15-405 PARKING TIME LIMITED IN CERTAIN LOCATIONS, CERTAIN DAYS AND HOURS.
   No person shall park a vehicle, or allow it to remain parked, for longer
than the time indicated, in any of the following locations, at any time on the
days and between the hours indicated:
Street Side Between Days Hours
Street      Side            Between         Days      Hours
                            Per signs -
                            first 2 spaces
                            from
East                        intersection
Harrisburg  North and south with Baltimore  Monday to 8:00 a.m.—6:00 p.m. (2
Street                      Street and      Saturday  hours)
                            continuing east
                            for
                            approximately
                            114 feet
                            Per signs -
                            first 2 spaces
                            from
                            intersection
East York   North and south with Baltimore  Monday to 8:00 a.m.—6:00 p.m. (2
Street                      Street and      Saturday  hours)
                            continuing east
                            for
                            approximately
                            65 feet
North                       Harrisburg      Monday to 8:00 a.m.—6:00 p.m. (2
Baltimore   East and west   Street to Quay  Saturday  hours)
Street                      Alley
                            Harrisburg
                            Street to sign
                            on the 100
                            block of
                            Baltimore
South                       Street, first
Baltimore   East            space from      Monday to 8:00 a.m.—6:00 p.m. (2
Street                      intersection    Saturday  hours)
                            with East York
                            Street and
                            continuing
                            south for
                            approximately
                            52 feet
                            Harrisburg
                            Street to sign
                            on the 100
                            block of
                            Baltimore
South                       Street, first 2
Baltimore   West            spaces from     Monday to 8:00 a.m.—6:00 p.m. (2
Street                      intersection    Saturday  hours)
                            with West York
                            Street and
                            continuing
                            south for
                            approximately
                            68 feet
West Church                 North Baltimore Monday to 6:00 a.m.—6:00 p.m. (15
Street      North           Street Bomar    Friday    minutes)
                            Alley
                            Per signs -
                            first 2 spaces
                            from
West                        intersection
Harrisburg  North           with Baltimore  Monday to 8:00 a.m.—6:00 p.m. (2
Street                      Street and      Saturday  hours)
                            continuing west
                            for
                            approximately
                            110 feet
                            Per signs -
                            first 3 spaces
                            from
West                        intersection
Harrisburg  South           with Baltimore  Monday to 8:00 a.m.—6:00 p.m. (2
Street                      Street and      Saturday  hours)
                            continuing west
                            for
                            approximately
                            200 feet
                            Per signs -
                            first 2 spaces
                            from
                            intersection
West York   North           with Baltimore  Monday to 8:00 a.m.—6:00 p.m. (2
Street                      Street and      Saturday  hours)
                            continuing west
                            for
                            approximately
                            70 feet
                            Per signs -
                            first 2 spaces
                            from
                            intersection
West York   South           with Baltimore  Monday to 8:00 a.m.—6:00 p.m. (2
Street                      Street and      Saturday  hours)
                            continuing west
                            for
                            approximately
                            88 feet
 
(Ord. 2007-4, passed 4-10-2007; Ord. 2009-4, passed 7-14-2009; Ord. 2014-4,
passed 10-14-2014)
§ 15-406 HANDICAP PARKING.
   Any space marked as a parking space reserved for the physically handicapped,
whether the marking be by sign posted at the parking space or by the commonly
accepted “Handicapped Parking” painted on the surface of the macadam or
curbstone, unless the vehicle occupying that space is outfitted with a
handicapped placard or a motor vehicle registration tag, as issued to
physically handicapped.
 
Street              Side  Location                          Purpose
                          A point 25 feet to the east and
East Church Street  South terminating 50 feet to the east   Handicapped parking
                          of North Baltimore Street on the
                          south side of East Church Street
                          40 feet from Harrisburg Street on
North Second Street West  North Second Street 30 feet blue  Handicapped parking
                          area
 
§ 15-407 STANDING OR PARKING ON ROADWAY FOR LOADING OR UNLOADING.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, stand or park a vehicle (other
than a pedalcycle) on the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the
edge or curb of any street, except that standing or parking for the purpose of
loading or unloading persons or property shall be permitted on the following
named streets for no longer than necessary for the loading or unloading.
 
Street              Side Between                         Time
North Second Street West Harrisburg Street to Quay Alley 8:00 a.m.—4:00 p.m.
 
§ 15-408 ANGLE PARKING REQUIRED ON PORTIONS OF CERTAIN STREETS.
   Only angle parking shall be permitted on the following portions of streets:
 
Street Side Between
   (Reserved)
 
§ 15-409 RESIDENTIAL PERMIT PARKING.
   [Reserved]
§ 15-410 PARKING PROHIBITED ON PORTIONS OF CERTAIN HIGHWAYS DURING STREET
SWEEPING HOURS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle or to allow the same
to remain parked, at any time when posted.
§ 15-411 PENALTIES.
   (A)   Any person who violates any provision of this Part shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $25 and costs;
provided, it shall be the duty of the police officers and of parking
enforcement personnel of the borough to report to the appropriate official all
violations of any provision of this Part indicating, in each case, the section
violated; the license number of the vehicle involved in the violation; the
location where the violation took place; and any other facts that might be
necessary in order to secure a clear understanding of the circumstances
attending the violation. The police officer or other person making the report
shall also attach to or place upon every such vehicle a notice stating that the
vehicle was parked in violation of this Part.
   (B)   The notice shall contain instructions to the owner or driver of the
vehicle that if he or she will report to the borough office and pay the sum of
$15 within 72 hours after the time of the notice, that act will save the
violator from prosecution and from payment of the fine and costs prescribed in
the first sentence of this section.
(Ord. 2007-4, passed 4-10-2007)
PART 5: ON-STREET METERED PARKING
Section
   
15-501   Parking meter zone established
   
15-502   Days and hours parking meters in operation and parking time limits
apply
   
15-503   Placement and characteristics of parking meters
   
15-504   Parked vehicles to be wholly within marked spaces
   
15-505   Coin deposit in meter; overtime parking unlawful
   
15-506   Unlawful to deposit substitute for coin in meter
   
15-507   Unlawful to deposit coin in meter to extend parking time beyond legal
limit
   
15-508   Unlawful to remain parked at meter showing violation
   
15-509   Unlawful to tamper with meter
   
15-510   Ticketing of vehicles parked unlawfully; payment
   
15-511   Penalty for violation
   
15-512   Exceptions
§ 15-501 PARKING METER ZONE ESTABLISHED.
   Parking meter zones are established upon and along certain streets in the
borough as follows:
 
Street Between Rate Maximum Parking Time
   (Reserved)
 
§ 15-502 DAYS AND HOURS PARKING METERS IN OPERATION AND PARKING TIME LIMITS
APPLY.
   Parking meters shall be operated by the deposit of a coin in the meter as
prescribed by §
15-505 of this Part, and the parking rates for specified lengths of time, as
well as the maximum parking times prescribed in §
15-501 of this Part, shall apply at all times between the hours of 9:00 a.m.
and 6:00 p.m. Monday through Thursday and Saturday, and between the hours of 9:
00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. Friday, in the parking meter zones listed in §
15-501 of this Part; provided, however, the requirements of this Part as to
parking time limits and as to deposit of coins in meters shall not apply on
legal holidays.
§ 15-503 PLACEMENT AND CHARACTERISTICS OF PARKING METERS.
   (A)   Parking meters installed in the parking meter zones established by §
15-501 of this Part shall be placed upon the curb or sidewalk, and immediately
adjacent to the individual parking spaces described in §
15-504 of this Part.
   (B)   Each parking meter shall be placed or set so as to show that the
parking space adjacent to that meter is or is not legally occupied. Each
parking meter installed shall indicate by a proper legend the legal parking
time established by the borough and when the adjacent space is occupied by a
vehicle, the parking meter shall indicate on and by its dial and pointer the
duration of the period of legal parking, and, on the expiration of that period,
shall indicate illegal parking or overparking.
§ 15-504 PARKED VEHICLES TO BE WHOLLY WITHIN MARKED SPACES.
   (A)   Lines and/or markings shall be painted or placed upon the curb,
sidewalk or roadway adjacent to each parking meter for the purpose of
delineating the parking space for which that meter shall be used.
   (B)   Every vehicle parked at any parking meter shall be parked wholly
within the lines or markings so placed and applicable to that meter.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful and a violation of this Part for any person to
park a vehicle across any such line or marking, or to park a vehicle in such a
position that that vehicle is not wholly within the area designated by those
lines or markings.
§ 15-505 COIN DEPOSIT IN METER; OVERTIME PARKING UNLAWFUL.
   (A)   Whenever a vehicle is to be parked in any space adjacent to a parking
meter, at any time in the period of limited parking as prescribed by §
15-502 of this Part, the driver of the vehicle, upon entering the parking
space, shall immediately deposit, or cause to be deposited, in that parking
meter, one or more proper coins of the United States of America as specified in
the legend on the parking meter. Upon the deposit of the coin or coins, and
placing the meter in operation, the parking space may be lawfully occupied by
the vehicle for the time indicated on the meter.
   (B)   If any vehicle shall remain in any such parking space for such length
of time that the meter shall indicate by proper signal that the lawful parking
time has expired, that vehicle shall be considered as having been parked
overtime, and the parking of a vehicle overtime shall be a violation of this
Part.
§ 15-506 UNLAWFUL TO DEPOSIT SUBSTITUTE FOR COIN IN METER.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit in any parking meter
installed under the provisions of this Part any slug or other substitute for a
coin of the United States of America.
§ 15-507 UNLAWFUL TO DEPOSIT COIN IN METER TO EXTEND PARKING TIME BEYOND LEGAL
LIMIT.
   It shall be unlawful and a violation of this Part for any person to deposit
or cause to be deposited, in any parking meter installed under the provisions
of this Part any coin for the purpose of increasing or extending the parking
time of any vehicle beyond the legal parking established for that parking zone.
§ 15-508 UNLAWFUL TO REMAIN PARKED AT METER SHOWING VIOLATION.
   It shall be unlawful, and a violation of this Part for any person to permit
a vehicle to remain in a parking space adjacent to a parking meter installed
under this Part when that meter displays a signal indicating that the vehicle
has already been parked there beyond the period of time prescribed for that
parking space, or the time for which a coin or coins was deposited in that
meter for the parking of that vehicle.
§ 15-509 UNLAWFUL TO TAMPER WITH METER.
   It shall be unlawful, and a violation of this Part, for any person to
deface, tamper with, open or willfully break, destroy or impair the usefulness
of any parking meter installed under the provisions of this Part; provided,
nothing in this section shall apply to the servicing or opening of parking
meters by officers, employees or police officers of the borough under the
direction of the Borough Manager.
§ 15-510 TICKETING OF VEHICLES PARKED UNLAWFULLY; PAYMENT.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the police officers and parking enforcement
personnel of the borough, acting in accordance with the directions of the Chief
of Police, to report:
      (1)   The number of each parking meter that indicates that a vehicle
occupying the adjacent parking space is, or has been, parked in violation of
any provision of this Part;
      (2)   The date and hour of the violation;
      (3)   The license number of the vehicle; and
      (4)   Any other facts, the knowledge of which is necessary for a thorough
understanding of the circumstances attending the violation.
   (B)   The police officer or other person making the report shall also place
on or attach to the vehicle a notice to the owner or driver of the vehicle that
the vehicle was parked in violation of this Part, and instructing the owner or
driver that if he or she will report to the borough office and pay the sum of
$50 within 72 hours after the time of the notice, that act will save the
violator from prosecution and from payment of the fine prescribed in §
15-511(1) of this Part.
§ 15-511 PENALTY FOR VIOLATION.
   (A)   Any person who violates any provision of this Part, with the exception
of §
15-509 of this Part, and who fails to pay the fine set forth in §
15-510 of this Part, shall be cited within 15 days of the violation and upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $15 and costs.
   (B)   Any person who violates any provision of §
15-509 of this Part shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not
more than $1,000 and costs, and, in default of payment of fine and costs, to
imprisonment for not more than 30 days.
§ 15-512 EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   By resolution, the borough may temporarily suspend the provisions of
this Part by requiring coin deposit in meters and establishing a maximum
parking time at meters.
   (B)   The borough shall have authority to establish no parking or special-
purpose parking zones within any parking meter zone, and to remove parking
meters from those areas as previously installed there, and the provisions of
this Part shall not apply in those areas where no-parking or special-purpose
parking is in effect.
PART 6: OFF-STREET METERED PARKING
Section
   
15-601   Metered parking lots established
   
15-602   Placement and characteristics of parking meters
   
15-603   Reserved parking spaces for handicapped may be provided
   
15-604   Parked vehicles to be wholly within marked spaces
   
15-605   Manner of parking at meters
   
15-606   Coin deposit in meter; overtime parking unlawful
   
15-607   Unlawful to deposit substitute for coin in meter
   
15-608   Unlawful to remain parked at a meter showing violation
   
15-609   Unlawful to tamper with meter
   
15-610   Metered parking lots for certain types of vehicles only
   
15-611   Ticketing of vehicles parked unlawfully; payment
   
15-612   Penalty for violation
§ 15-601 METERED PARKING LOTS ESTABLISHED.
   (A)   The following are established as the metered parking lots established
by this borough:
 
Lot Location Rate Maximum Parking Time Days in Operation Hours in Operation
   (Reserved)
 
   (B)   Provided, the parking meters in the metered lots shall be in
operation, the parking lots shall be open for parking and the provisions of
this Part regulating the operation of parking meters and establishing parking
time limits shall be in force on the days and between the hours prescribed on
the individual lots. But, on Sundays and legal holidays, no parking time limit
shall apply and the placing of coins in meters shall not be required.
§ 15-602 PLACEMENT AND CHARACTERISTICS OF PARKING METERS.
   Parking meters installed in the parking lots shall be placed immediately
adjacent to the individual parking spaces that shall be marked off and
maintained in the lots. For each parking meter there shall be a clear
indication, through use of a directional arrow, or an identification as to
number with the parking space, to show which individual parking space it
serves. Each parking meter shall indicate by a proper legend the parking rate
and the maximum parking time established by §
15-601 of this Part, and, when the parking space is occupied and the parking
meter put into operation by the insertion of one or more coins, the parking
meter shall indicate on and by its dial and pointer the duration of legal
parking, and, upon the expiration of that period, shall indicate illegal
parking or overparking.
§ 15-603 RESERVED PARKING SPACES FOR HANDICAPPED MAY BE PROVIDED.
   The borough, at its discretion, may provide, at convenient and suitable
locations in any one or more of the metered parking lots, reserved parking
spaces for handicapped, and shall designate those spaces by appropriate signs.
It shall be unlawful, and a violation of this Part, for any person to park in
any such reserved parking space any vehicle unless that vehicle bears or
displays either a “handicapped registration plate”, a “handicapped parking
placard”, a “disabled veteran registration plate” or a “disabled veteran
placard”.
§ 15-604 PARKED VEHICLES TO BE WHOLLY WITHIN MARKED SPACES.
   Lines and/or markings shall be painted or placed upon the surface of the
metered parking lots, adjacent to each parking meter, for the purpose of
delineating the parking space for which that meter shall be used. Every vehicle
parked adjacent to any parking meter shall be parked wholly within the lines or
markings so placed and applicable to that meter. It shall be unlawful and a
violation of this Part for any person:
   (A)   To park a vehicle across any such line or marking;
   (B)   To park a vehicle in such a position that the vehicle shall not be
within the area so delineated by the lines or markings; and
   (C)   To park a vehicle elsewhere in any such lot that in an individual
parking space adjacent to a parking meter.
§ 15-605 MANNER OF PARKING AT METERS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle in any metered parking
lot:
   (A)   Otherwise than with the front of the parked vehicle nearest to the
parking meter applicable to that vehicle; and
   (B)   With any part of the vehicle touching the meter post or head or the
raised base or barrier on which meters are erected.
§ 15-606 COIN DEPOSIT IN METER; OVERTIME PARKING UNLAWFUL.
   Whenever a vehicle is to be parked in any metered parking lot, at any time
when the lot is open for use and the meters are to be in operation, the driver
of the vehicle, upon entering the parking space, shall immediately deposit, or
cause to be deposited, in the proper parking meter, one or more proper coins of
the United States of America as specified in the legend on the parking meter.
Upon the deposit of the coin or coins, and placing the meter in operation, the
parking space may be lawfully occupied by the vehicle for the time indicated on
the meter. If any vehicle remains in any such parking space for such length of
time that the meter indicates that the lawful parking time has expired, that
vehicle shall be considered as being parked overtime, and the parking of a
vehicle overtime shall be a violation of this Part; provided, every hour that a
vehicle remains parked at a meter showing a violation shall constitute a
separate violation of this Part.
§ 15-607 UNLAWFUL TO DEPOSIT SUBSTITUTE FOR COIN IN METER.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit in any parking meter
installed under the provisions of this Part any slug or other substitute for a
coin of the United States of America.
§ 15-608 UNLAWFUL TO REMAIN PARKED AT A METER SHOWING VIOLATION.
   It shall be unlawful, and a violation of this Part for any person to permit
a vehicle to remain in a parking space adjacent to a parking meter installed
under this Part when that meter displays a signal indicating that the vehicle
has already been parked there beyond the period of time prescribed for that
parking space, or the time for which a coin or coins were deposited in that
meter for the parking of that vehicle.
§ 15-609 UNLAWFUL TO TAMPER WITH METER.
   It shall be unlawful, and a violation of this Part, for any person to
deface, tamper with, open or willfully break, destroy or impair the usefulness
of any parking meter installed under the provisions of this Part. Provided,
nothing in this section shall apply to the servicing or opening of parking
meters by officers, employees or police officers of the borough under the
direction of the Borough Manager or borough.
§ 15-610 METERED PARKING LOTS FOR CERTAIN TYPES OF VEHICLES ONLY.
   The metered parking lots established by this Part shall be for the use of
passenger cars, passenger vans and pickup trucks only, and it shall be unlawful
for any person to park any other type of vehicle in any of those lots.
§ 15-611 TICKETING OF VEHICLES PARKED UNLAWFULLY; PAYMENT.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the police officers and parking enforcement
personnel of the borough, acting in accordance with the directions of the Chief
of Police, to report:
      (1)   The number of each parking meter that indicates that a vehicle
occupying the adjacent parking space is, or has been, parked in violation of
any provision of this Part;
      (2)   The date and hour of the violation;
      (3)   The license number of the vehicle; and
      (4)   Any other facts, the knowledge of which is necessary for a thorough
understanding of the circumstances attending the violation.
   (B)   The police officer or other person making the report shall also place
on or attach to the vehicle a notice to the owner or driver of the vehicle that
the vehicle was parked in violation of this Part, and instructing the owner or
driver that if he or she will report to the borough office and pay the sum of
$50 within 72 hours after the time of the notice, that act will save the
violator from prosecution and from payment of the fine prescribed in §
15-612(A) of this Part.
§ 15-612 PENALTY FOR VIOLATION.
   (A)   Any person who violates any provision of this Part, with the exception
of §
15-609 of this Part, and who fails to pay the fine set forth in §
15-611 of this Part, shall be cited within 15 days of the violation and upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $15 and costs.
   (B)   Any person who violates any provision of §
15-609 of this Part shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not
more than $1,000 and costs, and, in default of payment of fine and costs, to
imprisonment for not more than 30 days.
PART 7: OFF-STREET UNMETERED PARKING
Section
   
15-701   Unmetered parking lots established
   
15-702   Reserved parking spaces for handicapped may be provided
   
15-703   Unlawful to park overtime or when lot closed
   
15-704   Unmetered lots for certain types of vehicles
   
15-705   Manner of parking
   
15-706   Parking on rental basis only
   
15-707   Penalty for violation
§ 15-701 UNMETERED PARKING LOTS ESTABLISHED.
   The following are established as the unmetered parking lots operated by the
borough:
 
Lot Location Maximum Parking Time Days in Operation Hours in Operation
   (Reserved)
 
§ 15-702 RESERVED PARKING SPACES FOR HANDICAPPED MAY BE PROVIDED.
   The borough, at its discretion, may provide, at convenient and suitable
locations in one or more of the unmetered parking lots, reserved parking spaces
for handicapped, and shall designate those spaces by appropriate signs. It
shall be unlawful and a violation of this Part for any person to park in any
such reserved parking space any vehicle unless that vehicle bears or displays
either a “handicapped registration plate”, a “handicapped parking placard”, a
“disabled veteran registration plate” or a “disabled veteran placard”.
Provided, all provisions requirements and restrictions contained in the other
sections of this Part shall apply to vehicles lawfully parked in reserved
parking spaces for handicapped.
§ 15-703 UNLAWFUL TO PARK OVERTIME OR WHEN LOT CLOSED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle or to allow a vehicle
to remain parked in any unmetered parking lot:
   (A)   For longer than the maximum parking time prescribed by §
15-701 of this Part; and
   (B)   At any time when the lot is not in operation and is closed to public
use.
§ 15-704 UNMETERED LOTS FOR CERTAIN TYPES OF VEHICLES.
   The unmetered parking lots established by §
15-701 of this Part shall be for the use of passenger cars, passenger vans and
pickup trucks only, and it shall be unlawful for any person to park any other
kind or class of vehicle in any such lot.
§ 15-705 MANNER OF PARKING.
   Every vehicle parked in an unmetered parking lot shall be parked wholly
within the lines bounding or marking the individual parking space assigned to
that vehicle, and shall be parked headed into the parking space. It shall be
unlawful for any person:
   (A)   To park a vehicle in a space not rented by him or her;
   (B)   To park a vehicle otherwise than as required by this section; and
   (C)   To park a vehicle elsewhere than in an individual parking space, the
prohibited areas including, but not limited to, the access and exit driveways
and turning and maneuvering spaces.
§ 15-706 PARKING ON RENTAL BASIS ONLY.
   The parking spaces in the unmetered parking lots shall be available for
parking on a monthly rental basis only. The rental fee shall be fixed by the
borough by a resolution and shall be for a calendar month or the part of a
calendar month remaining after the rental arrangements are made. The rental fee
shall be paid in advance to the Borough Manager for the use of the borough, and
after the first month shall be automatically renewable until the renter
notifies the borough that he or she wishes to terminate the rental
arrangements. At any time, however, the borough may, by amending §
15-701 of this Part, discontinue provision of a specific unmetered parking lot
or a portion of the parking spaces in any such lot, or may change any unmetered
parking lot, or part of an unmetered parking lot, to a metered parking lot or
to metered parking spaces. The rental parking spaces shall be assigned by the
Borough Manager. The name of the renter of a parking space and/or the numbers
and/or letters on the registration tag of the vehicle entitled to be parked
there shall be posted by the borough at the rental space or shall be painted on
the surface of that parking space.
§ 15-707 PENALTY FOR VIOLATION.
   Any person who violates any provision of this Part shall, upon conviction,
be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $15 and costs; provided, it shall
be the duty of the police officers and of parking enforcement personnel of the
borough to report to the appropriate official all violations of any provision
of this Part, indicated, in each case, the section violated; the license number
of the vehicle involved in the violation; the location where the violation took
place; and, any other facts that might be necessary in order to secure a clear
understanding of the circumstances attending the violation. The police officer
or other person making the report shall also attach to or place upon every such
vehicle a notice stating that the vehicle was parked in violation of this Part.
The notice shall contain instructions to the owner or driver of the vehicle
that if he or she will report to the borough office and pay the sum of $25
within 72 hours after the time of the notice, that act will save the violator
from prosecution and from payment of the fine and costs prescribed in the first
sentence of this section.
PART 8: REMOVAL AND IMPOUNDMENT OF ILLEGALLY PARKED VEHICLES
Section
   
15-801   Applicability and scope
   
15-802   Authority to remove and impound
   
15-803   Tow-away zones designated
   
15-804   Designation of approved storage garages; bonding; towing and storage
   
15-805   Payment of towing and storage charges
   
15-806   Reclamation costs
   
15-807   Records of vehicles removed and impounded
   
15-808   Restrictions upon removal of vehicles
   
15-809   Penalty for violation
   
15-810   Reports and disposition of unclaimed vehicles
§ 15-801 APPLICABILITY AND SCOPE.
   This Part is enacted under authority of § 6109(a)(22) of the Vehicle Code,
75 Pa.C.S.A. § 6109(a)(22), and gives authority to the borough to remove and
impound those vehicles which are parked in a tow-away zone and in violation of
parking regulations of this Part. Vehicles which have been abandoned (as
defined by the Vehicle Code) or which are parked in such a manner as to
interfere with traffic or pose a hazard to others may be towed under the
provisions of the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code.
§ 15-802 AUTHORITY TO REMOVE AND IMPOUND.
   The borough shall have authority to remove and impound, or to order the
removal and impounding, of any vehicle parked overtime or otherwise illegally,
provided that the circumstances of its parking were within the conditions
stated in §
15-801 of this Part; provided, no such vehicle shall be removed or impounded
except in strict adherence to the provisions of this Part or the provisions of
the Vehicle Code.
§ 15-803 TOW-AWAY ZONES DESIGNATED.
   The following designated streets and/or parking lots are hereby established
as tow-away zones. Signs shall be posted to place the public on notice that
their vehicles may be towed for violation of the borough parking regulations:
 
Street     Side Between                                                  Parking
                                                                         Lot
Northbound      At the intersection of U.S. Route 15 and Mountain Road/  Tow-
lanes of   East West Harrisburg and extending northward to the           away
U.S. Route      northernmost limits of the premises known as Harbold’s Zone A
15              Ford Inc.
Southbound      At the intersection of U.S. Route 15 with Old Mill Road  Tow-
lanes of   West and extending to the intersection of U.S. Route 15 and   away
U.S. Route      South Mountain Road                                      Zone B
15
 
§ 15-804 DESIGNATION OF APPROVED STORAGE GARAGES; BONDING; TOWING AND STORAGE.
   Removal and impounding of vehicles under this Part shall be done only by
“approved storage garages” that shall be designated from time to time by the
borough. Every such garage shall submit evidence to the borough that it is
bonded or has acquired liability insurance in an amount satisfactory to the
borough as sufficient to indemnify owners of impounded vehicles against loss or
damage to those vehicles while in the custody of the garage keeper for the
purpose of towing or storage. The approved storage garage shall submit to the
borough its schedule of charges for towing and storage of vehicles under this
Part, and, when the schedule is approved by the borough, those charges shall be
adhered to by the approved storage garage; no different schedule of charges
shall be demanded of or collected from any person whose vehicle is removed or
impounded under this Part by any approved storage garage. The borough shall
delete from its list of approved storage garages any garage that makes any
unapproved charge in connection with any vehicle removed or impounded under
this Part.
§ 15-805 PAYMENT OF TOWING AND STORAGE CHARGES.
   The payment of towing and storage charges shall not relieve the owner or
driver of any vehicle from liability for any fine or penalty for the violation
of the provision of this Part for which the vehicle was removed or impounded.
§ 15-806 RECLAMATION COSTS.
   In order to reclaim his or her vehicle, the owner shall pay towing and
storage costs, plus a $25 fee of which $10 shall be transferred to the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation by the garage to which the vehicle
was taken.
§ 15-807 RECORDS OF VEHICLES REMOVED AND IMPOUNDED.
   The borough shall cause a record to be kept of all vehicles impounded under
this Part and shall be able at all reasonable times to furnish the owners or
the agents of the owners of those vehicles with information as to the place of
storage of the vehicle.
§ 15-808 RESTRICTIONS UPON REMOVAL OF VEHICLES.
   No vehicle shall be removed under the authority of this Part or the Vehicle
Code if, at the time of the intended removal, the owner or the person for the
time being in charge of the vehicle is present and expresses a willingness and
intention to remove the vehicle immediately.
§ 15-809 PENALTY FOR VIOLATION.
   Any person who shall violate any provision of this Part shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of $50 together with all costs
of disposing of the vehicle under provisions of the Vehicle Code, 75 P.S. §§
7301 et seq.
§ 15-810 REPORTS AND DISPOSITION OF UNCLAIMED VEHICLES.
   If after a period of 15 days the vehicle in storage remains unclaimed, a
report shall be filed with PennDOT in accordance with § 7311 of The Vehicle
Code, 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 7311 by the person having legal custody of the vehicle. If
the vehicle has not been claimed after 30 days, the vehicle may be transferred
to a licensed salvor who will then be responsible for filing the proper reports
and disposing of the vehicle in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 73 of
the Vehicle Code (75 Pa C.S.A. §§ 7301 et seq.).
PART 9: SNOW AND ICE EMERGENCY
Section
   
15-901   Parking during snow storm and snow removal on streets not designated
as snow emergency routes, or on all borough streets during snow storms in which
a snow emergency has not been declared; penalty
   
15-902   Snow emergencies; snow emergency routes; penalty for violation
§ 15-901 PARKING DURING SNOW STORM AND SNOW REMOVAL ON STREETS NOT DESIGNATED
AS SNOW EMERGENCY ROUTES, OR ON ALL BOROUGH STREETS DURING SNOW STORMS IN WHICH
A SNOW EMERGENCY HAS NOT BEEN DECLARED; PENALTY.
   (A)   Parking. During any snow storm (defined as any weather condition in
which any accumulation of snow or sleet greater than four inches has fallen or
is predicted to fall, or in which there has been or is predicted any
accumulation of ice) parking shall be regulated on all borough streets as
follows:
      (1)   During the course of any snow storm, parking shall be prohibited on
the even numbered side of all borough streets (i.e., house numbers are even
numbers) until such time as the snow or ice event is over and plowing, salting
and/or cindering is completed on said side of the street;
      (2)   After 8:00 a.m. on the day following any snow storm and until after
plowing, salting, and/or cindering is completed, parking shall be prohibited on
the uneven numbered side of all borough streets (i.e., house numbers are uneven
numbers) until such time as plowing, salting and/or cindering is completed on
said side of the street;
      (3)   At all times during and after any snow storm, it shall be
prohibited for any person to shovel, push, throw or plow snow from a sidewalk,
driveway, lot or any other area into the street; and
      (4)   Borough police are hereby authorized to have any vehicle parked in
violation of this section towed away, by a borough authorized towing service,
at the expense of the owner of said vehicle.
   (B)   Penalty. Any individual, group, corporation or other entity who shall
violate any provision of this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of
payment of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30
days. Each day that a violation of this section continues shall constitute a
separate offense.
(Ord. 2014-1, passed 9-9-2014)
§ 15-902 SNOW EMERGENCIES; SNOW EMERGENCY ROUTES; PENALTY FOR VIOLATION.
   (A)   Snow emergencies.
      (1)   In order to facilitate the movement of traffic and to combat the
hazards of snow and ice on the streets and roads of this borough, the Mayor, in
his or her discretion, may declare a snow or ice emergency (hereinafter
referred to as a “snow emergency”). Information on the existence of a snow
emergency shall be given by the borough through radio, newspaper or other
available media, and information regarding the termination of the emergency
shall be given by the use of the same media.
      (2)   After any snow emergency is declared, it shall be unlawful, at any
time during the continuance of the emergency, for any person, individual,
group, corporation or other entity:
         (a)   To park a motor vehicle or to allow that vehicle to remain
parked anywhere on any snow emergency route designated in subsection (B) below;
and
         (b)   To drive any motor vehicle on any such snow emergency route,
unless that vehicle is equipped with snow tires or chains or a four-wheel drive
system, plus adequate equipment on the vehicle to provide sufficient traction
to keep such vehicle in motion.
   (B)   Snow emergency routes. The following are designated as snow emergency
routes:
 
Street            Route
Baltimore Street  Entire length through borough
Chestnut Street   Entire length through borough
Harrisburg Pike   Entire length through borough
Harrisburg Street Entire length through borough
York Street       Entire length through borough
 
   (C)   Penalty for violation.
      (1)   If at any time during a period of snow emergency declared under
this section a person shall park a motor vehicle or allow a motor vehicle to
remain parked anywhere along a snow emergency route, the person shall be guilty
of a violation of this section, and upon conviction, shall be fined as set
forth in subsection (C)(6) below.
      (2)   If, at any time during a period of snow emergency declared under
this section, a person shall drive a motor vehicle upon a snow emergency route,
without having that vehicle equipped with snow tires or chains or a four-wheel
drive system, plus adequate equipment on the vehicle to provide sufficient
traction to keep such vehicle in motion so that other traffic on such roadways
will not be blocked or impeded, that person shall be guilty of a violation of
this section, and, upon conviction, shall be fined as set forth in subsection
(C)(6) below.
      (3)   Any person who operates a motor vehicle upon any road or street or
portion thereof listed in subsection (B) above, which vehicle shall become
stalled upon any of the roads, streets or portions thereof listed above during
a period of emergency declared as provided by this section, if such stalling
shall have been by reason of failure to have such vehicle equipped with the
equipment prescribed in subsection (C)(2) above, shall be guilty of a violation
of this section, and, upon conviction, shall be fined as set forth in
subsection (C)(6) below, and assessed costs for removal of said vehicle from
the road or street.
      (4)   The borough’s designated police are hereby authorized to have any
cars parked in violation of this section towed away by a borough authorized
towing service, at the expense of the owner.
      (5)   In order to assist operators of motor vehicles in determining the
highways affected by this section, there shall be placed, on signs on the roads
and streets designated in subsection (B) above, snow emergency route signs.
      (6)   Unless another penalty is expressly provided by the Pennsylvania
Vehicle Code, any individual, group, corporation or other entity who shall
violate any provision of this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of
payment of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30
days. Each day that a violation of this section continues shall constitute a
separate offense.
(Ord. 2014-1, passed 9-9-2014)
PART 10: REGULATION OF PEDACYCLES AND NONMOTORIZED VEHICLES
Section
   
15-1001   Riding and parking of pedalcycles on sidewalks along certain streets
prohibited
   
15-1002   Restrictions on use of pushcarts
   
15-1003   Skates, skateboards, coasters, sleds and other toy vehicles
§ 15-1001 RIDING AND PARKING OF PEDALCYCLES ON SIDEWALKS ALONG CERTAIN STREETS
PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to ride or to park a pedalcycle on
the sidewalk along the following portions of the streets in the borough:
 
Street Side Between
   (Reserved)
 
   (B)   Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $5 and costs.
§ 15-1002 RESTRICTIONS ON USE OF PUSHCARTS.
   (A)   The word PUSHCART, as used in this section, shall mean a vehicle,
including a pedalcycle, propelled solely by human power, and used or intended
for use for the display, transport, exhibit or sale of goods, wares or
merchandise.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to propel a pushcart upon any
sidewalk in any business district except as necessary to move the pushcart to a
location from which it is to be loaded or unloaded or from which goods, wares
or merchandise are to be sold or dispenses under permit from the borough as
provided in subsection (C) below.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to park a pushcart upon any
sidewalk except for the purpose of selling or dispensing from that pushcart
goods, wares or merchandise to passersby under permit from the borough. Every
such permit shall be issued to the person making application for the permit,
upon payment of a fee, which shall be for the use of the borough set by the
borough by resolution. The permit shall be granted to the applicant, upon
payment of the fee, and upon the applicant signing an agreement with the
borough that he or she shall be bound by the conditions imposed by borough and
made a part of the permit, dealing with the following matters:
      (1)   Restricting or limiting the parking of the pushcart to one or more
stated locations upon the sidewalk and to stated days and hours at each
location;
      (2)   Stating requirements to be adhered to in connection with the
disposal of garbage and refuse resulting from the operations carried on; and
      (3)   Requiring that there be no violation of any law, ordinance or
regulation pertaining to health, sanitation and the handling of food or drink.
   (D)   Any person who violates any provision of this section, or any
condition of any permit granted under this section, upon conviction, shall be
sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
§ 15-1003 SKATES, SKATEBOARDS, COASTERS, SLEDS AND OTHER TOY VEHICLES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to ride on a sled upon any
sidewalk in the borough, or upon any roadway unless that roadway is on a
portion of a street blocked off for sledding by authority of §§
15-105 or
15-217 of this chapter; provided, nothing in this subsection (A) shall prevent
a pedestrian from pulling a sled, with or without a rider, upon a sidewalk.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in roller skating,
skateboarding or to ride upon or propel any coaster or other toy vehicle upon:
      (1)   Any street except in order to cross the roadway; and
      (2)   Any sidewalk located in a business district, except that nothing in
this subsection (B) shall prevent a pedestrian from pulling a coaster or other
toy vehicle, with or without a rider, upon a sidewalk.
   (C)   Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $5 and costs.
PART 11: PEDESTRIAN REGULATIONS
Section
   
15-1101   Pedestrians to obey traffic-control signals
   
15-1102   Pedestrian control signal locations established
   
15-1103   Locations where pedestrian crossing in unmarked crosswalks restricted
   
15-1104   Locations where pedestrians may cross only in crosswalk
   
15-1105   Penalty for violation
§ 15-1101 PEDESTRIANS TO OBEY TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNALS.
   At all locations in the borough where official traffic-control signals are
installed, pedestrians, except where directed otherwise by pedestrian-control
signals installed under §
15-1102 of this Part, shall obey the directions of those traffic-control
signals, as follows:
   (A)   When facing a green signal, a pedestrian may proceed across the
roadway within a crosswalk;
   (B)   When facing a steady yellow signal, a pedestrian shall not start to
cross the roadway; and
   (C)   When facing a steady red signal, a pedestrian shall not enter the
roadway.
§ 15-1102 PEDESTRIAN CONTROL SIGNAL LOCATIONS ESTABLISHED.
   (A)   At the following locations, official pedestrian-control signals shall
be erected (or are ratified if previously erected):
 
Location
Intersection of Baltimore and Harrisburg Streets
 
   (B)   (1)   Every pedestrian facing a steady or flashing “Don’t Walk” signal
shall obey the directions of that signal, as follows:
         (a)   When facing a steady “Don’t Walk” signal, a pedestrian shall not
start to cross the roadway in the direction of the signal, but any pedestrian
who has partially completed his or her crossing on the “Walk” signal should
proceed to a sidewalk or safety zone while the “Don’t Walk” signal is showing;
and
         (b)   When facing a flashing “Don’t Walk” signal a pedestrian shall
not start to cross the roadway in the direction of the indication, but any
pedestrian who has partly completed crossing during the “Walk” indication
should proceed to a sidewalk or safety zone;
      (2)   Any pedestrian who fails to obey the directions of a “Don’t Walk”
signal, as indicated above, shall be guilty of an offense and a violation of
this Part.
§ 15-1103 LOCATIONS WHERE PEDESTRIAN CROSSING IN UNMARKED CROSSWALKS
RESTRICTED.
   Except when authorized by a police officer or other appropriately attired
person authorized to direct, control or regulate traffic, it shall be unlawful
for any pedestrian to cross the roadway at any of the following streets, at the
intersection with that street indicated.
 
Street Intersection Direction of Travel
   (Reserved)
 
§ 15-1104 LOCATIONS WHERE PEDESTRIANS MAY CROSS ONLY IN CROSSWALK.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any pedestrian:
      (1)   To cross any roadway in a business district within the borough
except in a crosswalk; and
      (2)   To cross the roadway, in any of the following portions of streets
in the borough, except in a crosswalk:
 
Street Between
   (Reserved)
 
   (B)   Provided: nothing in this section shall permit any pedestrian to cross
in a crosswalk at any location where that crossing is prohibited by §
15-1102 of this Part.
§ 15-1105 PENALTY FOR VIOLATION.
   Any pedestrian who violates any provision of this Part shall be guilty of a
summary offense, and, upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of $5
and costs.
CHAPTER 16: PARKS AND RECREATION
      Part
         
1.   RULES AND REGULATIONS FOR RECREATIONAL PARKS
PART 1: RULES AND REGULATIONS FOR
RECREATIONAL PARKS
Section
   
16-101   Short title
   
16-102   Effect on existing legislation
   
16-103   Rules and regulations
   
16-104   Penalty for violation
   
16-105   Severability
§ 16-101 SHORT TITLE.
   This Part shall be known and may be cited as the “Park Ordinance”.
(Ord. 2017-2, passed 5-9-2017)
§ 16-102 EFFECT ON EXISTING LEGISLATION.
   The provisions of prior ordinances or resolutions, or parts thereof, that
are inconsistent with this Part are repealed in whole or in part to the extent
of any and all such inconsistencies.
(Ord. 2017-2, passed 5-9-2017)
§ 16-103 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   Recreational parks solely owned and located within the borough shall be
subject to rules and regulations as follows.
   (A)   Parks will be closed from dusk to dawn and there shall be no
trespassing, including trespassing by motor vehicle, including overnight
parking, on park property during said hours, except with advanced, written
approval of the Borough Council.
   (B)   There shall be no littering.
   (C)   Negligent or deliberate destruction or removal of natural or physical
property is prohibited.
   (D)   Outdoor recreation activity shall be restricted to locations
appropriate for such activities.
   (E)   Open fires or hot coals shall not be permitted except in fireplaces or
grills. Fires shall not be left unattended and shall be thoroughly extinguished
before they are abandoned.
   (F)   Gambling, soliciting or selling of any kind, except for authorized
concessions, is prohibited.
   (G)   No one shall possess, use, sell or be under the influence of alcoholic
beverages or illegal drugs.
   (H)   Use or possession of explosives, fireworks, air guns, bows, slingshots
or any similar item is prohibited, unless specifically approved in advance and
in writing by the borough or a valid carry permit is possessed. This shall not
be deemed to apply to police officers or other authorized personnel. Any person
found with a prohibited item without the specific, express, written
authorization of the borough will be in violation of the Part and subject to
the penalties specified herein. Any person found to be in possession of a
prohibited item shall possess and produce their authorization to carry such
item upon demand.
   (I)   Discharge of firearms by personnel other than law enforcement officers
is prohibited.
   (J)   Injuring, trapping, hunting, killing or killing wild or domestic
animals from the premises is prohibited.
   (K)   There shall be no boisterous, destructive, immoral or indecent conduct
in any park area.
   (L)   No events shall be permitted without advanced, written approval of the
Borough Council.
   (M)   Parks may be closed at any time and for any duration by the borough
including the President of Council, the Mayor and the Chief of Police, if
weather conditions warrant said closure, or if hazardous conditions exists that
may endanger life, health, safety or property. In said event, there shall be no
trespassing on park property during said times.
   (N)   Camping or sleeping anywhere on the park grounds or facilities is
prohibited.
   (O)   Motor vehicles shall be parked only in designated spaces within the
parking lot, not on the grass or the paved paths within the park. Motor
vehicles shall be driven only on the access drives and parking lot, and not on
the grass or the paved paths within the park. Nothing in this section shall be
interpreted to interfere with the normal operation and maintenance of the
parks.
   (P)   Parking lot use is limited to those individuals currently using the
park facilities. The use of the parking lot as a “park and ride” or for
carpooling, or for overnight parking is strictly prohibited.
   (Q)   Motorized vehicles such as all-terrain vehicles (ATVs) and dirt bikes
are prohibited from all areas of the park.
   (R)   Washing, waxing, repairing or in any other way servicing a motor
vehicle is prohibited.
   (S)   Trespassing on or in borough equipment, materials, stockpiles or
storage sheds is prohibited.
   (T)   Use of any equipment to amplify voice, music or any other sound is
prohibited except with advanced, written approval of the Borough Council.
   (U)   In-line skating, roller skating or skate boarding is prohibited.
   (V)   No kicking or throwing of balls, stones or other items against any
building, vehicles or equipment.
   (W)   Golfing or practicing of golf is prohibited.
   (X)   Children under ten years old shall be accompanied by a responsible
person at all times.
   (Y)   Use of tobacco products, including smoking, is prohibited.
   (Z)   The use of the park grounds and or facilities by any organized or
commercial group, person, persons or entity without obtaining advanced, written
approval from Borough Council is prohibited.
   (AA)   The posting of signs and/or the distributing of materials without
obtaining advanced, written approval from Borough Council is prohibited.
   (BB)   Dogs and other domestic animals shall be kept on a leash, not more
than six feet long, and under control. Any waste therefrom shall be removed
from park property or otherwise properly disposed of in accordance with state
law.
   (CC)   Dog park rules and regulations.
      (1)   All dogs must be spayed or neutered.
      (2)   All dogs must be legally licensed and vaccinated and shall wear a
visible dog license.
      (3)   Aggressive dogs are prohibited from this park and dogs exhibiting
aggressive behavior must be removed from the park immediately, without debate.
      (4)   No dogs over 30 pounds permitted in small dog area.
      (5)   Dog owners are solely liable for injuries or damages caused by
their dog or dogs.
      (6)   Dog waste must be cleaned up by dog owners and placed in proper
receptacles.
      (7)   Dogs must be on a leash, not more than six feet long, and under
control by their owners/handlers at all times outside of the small or large
fenced dog park area.
      (8)   No dogs under four months of age are permitted in the dog park.
      (9)   No animals other than dogs are permitted in the dog park.
      (10)   Dog owners must be in the dog park and within view and voice
control of their dogs at all times.
      (11)   Children under 12 must be closely supervised at all times by an
adult.
      (12)   No more than three dogs and/or children allowed per handler.
      (13)   No food or treats (human or dog), alcoholic beverages, drugs,
strollers, bicycles, children’s toys or tobacco use allowed in the dog park.
      (14)   Owners/handlers must stop their dogs from digging and immediately
fill any holes dug.
      (15)   Excessive barking is prohibited by borough ordinance.
(Ord. 2017-2, passed 5-9-2017)
§ 16-104 PENALTY FOR VIOLATION.
   Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this Part
shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than
$1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term
of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation of this Part
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 2017-2, passed 5-9-2017)
§ 16-105 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provision, sentence, clause, section or any part of this Part is for
any reason found to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such
unconstitutionality, illegality or invalidity shall not affect or impair any of
the remaining provisions, sentences, clauses, sections or parts of this Part.
It is hereby declared as the intent of the Borough Council, that this Part
would have been adopted had such unconstitutional, illegal or invalid
provision, sentence, clause, section or part thereof not have been included
herein.
(Ord. 2017-2, passed 5-9-2017)
CHAPTER 17: RESERVED
CHAPTER 18: RESERVED
CHAPTER 19: RESERVED
CHAPTER 20: SOLID WASTE
      Part
         
1.   GARBAGE DISPOSAL
         
2.   RECYCLING PROGRAM
PART 1: GARBAGE DISPOSAL
Section
   
20-101   Definitions
   
20-102   Prohibited activities
   
20-103   Refuse collection
   
20-104   Approved receptacles and containers
   
20-105   Schedule of collection
   
20-106   Duty of collector
   
20-107   Fees
   
20-108   Penalties
§ 20-101 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this Part, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ASHES. The residue from the burning of combustible material
   DISPOSAL. The storage, collection, disposal or handling of refuse.
   DWELLING. A building or structure designed for living quarters for one or
more families, including mobile homes and modular housing resting directly on
and securely anchored to a concrete or bonded masonry foundation extending
below the frost level and supporting the entire perimeter or a concrete slab so
supported; but not including hotels, rooming houses or other accommodations
used for transient occupancy, or recreational vehicles, tents, converted
vehicles, foundations or other make-shift structures.
   GARBAGE. All animal and vegetable waste resulting from handling,
preparation, cooking or consumption of foods.
   HAZARDOUS MATERIAL. All products and substances deemed hazardous by either
the Pennsylvania DEP or its successor or the Environmental Protection Agency or
its successor.
   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, firm, corporation, association,
institution, cooperative enterprise, municipality, municipal authority, federal
government or agency, state institution or agency or any other legal entity
whatsoever which is recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties. It
shall also mean owner, lessee or occupant of a residential dwelling, commercial
establishment or institutional establishment. In any provision of this Part
prescribing a fine, imprisonment or penalty, or any combination thereof, the
terms PERSON shall include the officers and directors of any corporation or
other legal entity having officer and directors.
   REFUSE. All putrescible and nonputrescible solids (except body wastes),
including garbage, rubbish, ashes and dead animals.
   RUBBISH. Glass, metal, paper, plant growth, wood or non-putrescible solid
wastes.
   SOLID WASTE. Garbage, trash, ashes, refuse and other discarded solid
materials whose original purpose has been completed.
(Ord. 2009-3, passed 3-10-2009)
§ 20-102 PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person:
   (A)   To permit an unlicensed state hauler to collect or remove refuse from
a household, institution or commercial enterprise;
   (B)   To collect, remove, haul or convey any refuse through or upon any of
the streets or alleys of the borough without having a valid state license to do
so;
   (C)   To dump, burn, bury or otherwise dispose of refuse, rubbish or other
incendiary materials within the borough, except when grass clippings and leaves
will be used for soil enrichment purposes, or the burning is for the sole
purpose of cooking food;
   (D)   To deposit any ashes, garbage, refuse or rubbish or any dangerous or
detrimental substance into a receptacle owned by another or upon premises owned
or occupied by another;
   (E)   To throw, drop, deposit or otherwise place any waste material,
sweepings, ashes, household wastes, glass, metal, refuse or rubbish into or
upon any street or alley within the borough or upon premises owned or occupied
by another, or into or upon any stream or drainage facility;
   (F)   To interfere with, scatter or disturb the contents of any receptacle
containing ashes, garbage, refuse or rubbish;
   (G)   To burn, bury, dump or otherwise dispose of hazardous material within
the borough; or
   (H)   To violate any of the provisions hereinbefore or hereinafter set forth
in this Part.
(Ord. 2009-3, passed 3-10-2009)
§ 20-103 REFUSE COLLECTION.
   (A)   All municipal solid waste and recycling generated at any dwelling,
excluding residential rental properties containing two or more dwelling units,
shall be collected exclusively by a licensed state hauler, contracted by the
borough through the public bidding process and it shall be deemed as mandatory.
It shall also be mandatory that each dwelling unit that is not on the borough’s
contracted trash hauler’s quarterly program or that does not use an onsite
commercial trash container provided by the property owner must purchase a
minimum of 26 “pay per bags”.
   (B)   All municipal, industrial, commercial and/or special needs waste not
covered under the borough contract in subsection (A) above, shall be disposed
of by a state approved trash hauler (individual contracts may be generated with
the borough’s contracted hauler).
(Ord. 2009-3, passed 3-10-2009; Ord. 2010-1, passed 2-9-2010)
§ 20-104 APPROVED RECEPTACLES AND CONTAINERS.
   (A)   Each householder, commercial establishment or person having refuse
shall use and/or obtain approved containers per his or her hauler’s
specifications. All persons shall place all refuse, rubbish and solid waste
inside said containers and keep closed said containers to prevent the escape of
materials contained therein.
   (B)   No person shall permit the accumulation or residue of liquids or
solids, including, but not limited to, hazardous waste, or a combination
thereof, on or around any container, or within any non-approved container
including, but not limited to dumpsters, which may be covered by special
contractual arrangements.
(Ord. 2009-3, passed 3-10-2009)
§ 20-105 SCHEDULE OF COLLECTION.
   All refuse shall be placed for collection no later than 6:00 a.m. the day of
collection and no earlier than 6:00 p.m. the day before. Any container not
taken by the collector(s) shall be removed from curbside no later than 6:00
a.m. the day after collection.
(Ord. 2009-3, passed 3-10-2009)
§ 20-106 DUTY OF COLLECTOR.
   It shall be the duty of any collector to report any violation of storage,
disposal or container requirements when noticed to the Borough Manager or the
Borough Manager’s designated representative, who shall notify the violator to
make provisions for ceasing such violation. If not corrected or ceased within
ten days after such notification, such violator shall be subject to penalties
per Borough Code.
(Ord. 2009-3, passed 3-10-2009)
§ 20-107 FEES.
   (A)   All billing for refuse, rubbish, solid waste and recycling collection
covered and included in the borough’s mandatory contract with the exclusive
hauler, shall be prepared by said hauler in the name of the owner or resident
of each household, and the charge is hereby imposed upon such owner or
resident. The charges provided herein shall be billed quarterly in advance to
the owner or resident of the property involved. The contracted hauler is not
required to pick up refuse and recycling which will be subject to the borough’s
code of ordinances, if charges are more than ten days in arrears.
   (B)   Fees for collection not covered under borough’s mandatory contract are
not controlled by, and/or are not the responsibility of the borough.
   (C)   All charges which remain unpaid 30 days after the invoice due date
shall be deemed delinquent. All delinquent accounts shall have added a penalty
of $10. Thereafter, the penalty will be added quarterly during each quarter the
bill remains unpaid (in the months of January, April, July and October). If the
owner or resident of any property to which this section is applicable shall
fail to pay any charges or fees after the same becomes delinquent, the
contracting collector is authorized to file a civil lawsuit for the collection
of fees, charges, penalties, interest and costs of collection. Upon the filing
of a civil lawsuit for the collection of any delinquent fee or charge, an
additional penalty of $50 shall be added to the delinquent account.
   (D)   Upon the filing of a civil lawsuit for the collection of fees,
charges, penalties, interest and cost of collection, the contracting collector
shall be entitled to charge and collect as part thereof, all costs of
collection, including reasonable attorney fees.
(Ord. 2009-3, passed 3-10-2009; Ord. 2011-1, passed 4-12-2011)
§ 20-108 PENALTIES.
   Any individual, group, corporation or other entity who shall violate any
provision of this Part shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a
fine of not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine
and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a
violation of this Part continues shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 2010-1, passed 2-9-2010)
PART 2: RECYCLING PROGRAM
Section
   
20-201   Authorization
   
20-202   Definitions
   
20-203   Program guidelines
   
20-204   Unlawful acts
   
20-205   Fees and tags
   
20-206   Borough bag trash collection
   
20-207   Recycling bins
   
20-208   Penalty for violation
   
20-209   Repealer and severability
§ 20-201 AUTHORIZATION.
   A mandatory recycling program is hereby established within the boundaries of
the borough. Such program shall remain in operation in the borough as long as
Council determines that the public interest is served. All persons must comply
with the terms, conditions, rules, procedures and so forth of the program as
established.
(Ord. 2007-2, passed 2-15-2007)
§ 20-202 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this Part, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALUMINUM CONTAINERS. Empty all-aluminum non-aerosol beverage and food
containers.
   BI-METAL OR STEEL CONTAINERS. Empty non-aerosol food or beverage containers
consisting of all-steel or ferrous sides and bottom and an aluminum top
(sometimes called “tin” cans).
   BOROUGH. Dillsburg Borough, York County, Pennsylvania, or its authorized
representative or representatives.
   COLLECTOR or CONTRACTOR. That individual, partnership, firm, corporation or
business entity designated by the borough by means of an independent contract,
as the person having the exclusive right and privilege to collect, haul, carry
or remove recyclable materials.
   COMMINGLED. Recyclable materials that have been mixed at the source of
generation (i.e., placed in the same container).
   DWELLING. A building used for residential living quarters for one or more
families except hotels, motels, rooming houses, convalescent homes and tourist
home or other accommodations used for transient occupancy.
   DWELLING UNIT. A building or portion thereof arranged or designed for
occupancy by not more that one family for living purposes and have cooking
facilities.
   GLASS CONTAINERS. All empty bottles and jars made of clear, green or brown
glass, but not including non-container glass, light bulbs, window or door plate
glass, mirrors, porcelain and ceramic product.
   LEAF WASTE. Leaves fallen from trees, bushes or the like only. Does not
include grass clippings, garden waste, tree trimmings, shrubbery, chipped
shrubbery and/or other vegetation.
   MULTI-FAMILY DWELLING PROPERTY. Any property having five or more dwelling
units per structure.
   NEWSPAPER. Paper of the type commonly referred to as newsprint and
distributed at fixed intervals, having printed thereon news and other matters
of public interest, but not including glossy advertising inserts included with
newspapers and not including magazines and periodicals and not including high
grade office paper.
   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, firm, corporation, association,
institution, cooperative enterprise, municipality, municipal authority, federal
government or agency, state institution or agency or any other legal entity
whatsoever which is recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties. It
shall also mean owner, lessee or occupant of an residential dwelling,
commercial establishment or institutional establishment. In any provision of
this Part prescribing a fine, imprisonment or penalty, or any combination
thereof, the terms PERSON shall include the officers and directors of any
corporation or other legal entity having officer and directors.
   PLASTIC CONTAINER. All empty #1 or #2 type plastic soap, detergent or
beverage containers, but not including plastic containers used for oils,
paints, solvents, chemicals or otherwise potentially hazardous materials and
not including any other plastic product.
   RECYCLABLE MATERIAL. Those materials which may be processed or refabricated
for re-use and which are specified by the borough for separation from the
regular solid waste.
   RECYCLE. The collection, separation, recovery and sale or re-use of metals,
glass, paper, yard waste, plastic and other materials which would otherwise be
disposed of or processed as municipal solid waste.
   RECYCLING BIN. The plastic container provided by the borough for the express
purpose of storing recyclable materials for collection by the borough’s
collector.
   SOLID WASTE. Garbage, trash, ashes, refuse and other discarded solid
materials whose original purpose has be completed.
(Ord. 1993-5, passed 9-21-1993, § 2; Ord. 2007-2, passed 2-15-2007)
§ 20-203 PROGRAM GUIDELINES.
   (A)   The borough shall arrange by contract or other means through a
suitable contractor to provide for the collection of commingled recyclable
materials. It shall be unlawful for persons other that those employed by the
contractor to collect recyclable materials from the recycling containers.
   (B)   Collections shall be made weekly on dates and at times as established
by the contractor, from time to time.
   (C) Recyclable materials, other than leaf waste, must be placed only in
recycling container obtained from the borough or the borough’s contracted waste
hauler. Materials not in a recycling container will not be collected.
   (D)   Recycling bins must be placed within three feet of the curbline at
curbside, but not on the street. Recycling bins shall contain only recyclable
materials and the contents shall not be collected if other materials are
present.
   (E)   Recyclable materials shall include aluminum, steel or bimetal
containers, #1 and #2 plastic bottles, clear and colored glass beverage
containers and newspapers. Containers shall be cleaned and dried. Newspapers
shall be tied together in a bundle no more than 12 inches thick or shall be
placed a brown paper bag. Glass and plastic containers shall have lids and/or
caps removed and discarded.
   (F)   Recycling bins shall be placed at curbside no later than 6:00 a.m. the
day of collection and no earlier than 6:00 p.m. the day before. The bins shall
be removed from curbside no later than 6:00 p.m. the day after collection.
   (G)   All recycling bins obtained from the borough shall remain the property
of the borough and shall be returned to the borough upon leaving residence in
the borough or if otherwise not to be used for its intended purpose. It shall
be unlawful for any person to place materials in the recycling bin of another,
or to disturb or spill the contents of the recycling bin of another, or to take
the recycling bin of another from his or her property without permission.
   (H)   The total weight of the contents of a recycling bin placed at curbside
for collection shall not exceed 50 pounds.
   (I)   In case of a multi-family, commercial, institutional or municipal
property, the owner and/or resident of said property may be required to use a
recycling container that is not the same as used for single-dwelling units. The
purpose of the alternate container is to prevent an accumulation of a large
number of recycling bins on a property on collection day. Separate arrangements
for the container and payment for the service may be made directly with the
contractor.
   (J)   (1)   All nonresidential property, units, occupants or any other
entities of any kind whatsoever that are not part of the borough’s weekly
recycling collection program are required to do the following:
         (a)   Obtain and utilize a separate recycling receptacle for all
recyclable goods. This receptacle may be a single receptacle for co-mingled
recycling products or may be separate receptacles for each individual recycled
product; and
         (b)   Must provide in writing to the borough, by the end of the first
business week of February of the following year, a written report of the total
weight of recycled products removed from the receptacle by the hauler either by
providing the total co-mingled weight or by the weight by individual product
for the preceding year.
      (2)   Failure to comply with both subsections (J)(1)(a) and (J)(1)(b)
above shall be considered a violation of the statute.
   (K)   All persons who reside in residential dwellings and all persons
responsible for the management or operation of multiple-family housing
properties, commercial, municipal and institutional establishments who gather
leaf waste shall source separate all leaf waste and place in an loose,
unconfined pile for collection within two feet of the curbline, but not on the
sidewalk, no earlier than 24 hours before advertised collection date. There
will be various collections between October 17 and December 10 of each year.
Additional collection days may be added if deemed necessary by Borough Council.
This section shall not prevent any person from utilizing leaf waste for
compost, mulch, agricultural, horticultural, subcultural, gardening or
landscaping purposes.
(Ord. 2007-2, passed 2-15-2007)
§ 20-204 UNLAWFUL ACTS.
   (A)   The following actions shall be unlawful:
      (1)   To violate or to cause or to assist in the violation of any
provision of this Part;
      (2)   To place or cause to be placed any material other than the
recyclable materials designated by this Part such as solid waste, in a borough
recycling bin;
      (3)   For any person to hinder, obstruct, to prevent or to interfere with
the borough or designated contractor in the performance of any duty under this
Part as in the enforcement of this Part;
      (4)   For any person to cause or allow his or her pet to cause the
contents of a recycling bin to be spilled or scattered;
      (5)   Theft of recycling bins;
      (6)   Willful damage to and/or unauthorized use of recycling bins; and
      (7)   To place or cause to be placed any foreign material with the leaf
waste.
   (B)   All unlawful acts set forth in this or any other section of this Part
shall be considered a summary criminal offense punishable as set forth in § 20-
208. Enforcement shall be the duty of the policing agency representing the
borough or by other person or persons that may be designated by Council, from
time to time.
(Ord. 1993-5, passed 9-21-1993, § 4; Ord. 2007-2, passed 2-15-2007)
§ 20-205 FEES AND TAGS.
   Fees and tags will be set by the contractor.
(Ord. 1993-5, passed 9-21-1993, § 5)
§ 20-206 BOROUGH BAG TRASH COLLECTION.
   The recycling program outlined herein shall not be construed to modify
normal borough trash collection as established in
Part 1 of this
Chapter 20.
(Ord. 1993-5, passed 9-21-1993, § 6)
§ 20-207 RECYCLING BINS.
   (A)   Recyclable materials shall be collected only from recycling bins
provided or otherwise authorized by the borough.
   (B)   The borough will obtain a limited number of recycling bins to initiate
the program. One recycling bin per eligible household will be provided free of
charge upon request of a borough property owner. Recycling bins shall be
considered the responsibility of the person or persons obtaining such.
Recycling bins lost, stolen or otherwise rendered unusable shall be replaced at
a cost equivalent to the amount for which the borough can obtain the bin from
the manufacturer. Persons wishing to obtain an additional recycling bin
(maximum two per household) may do so at a cost equivalent to the amount for
which the borough can obtain the bin from the manufacturer. After the initial
number of recycling bins obtained for distribution by the borough are
completely distributed, the borough shall obtain an additional limited supply
which shall be sold at a cost equivalent to the amount for which the borough
can obtain the bin from the manufacturer.
   (C)   Any person legally obtaining a recycling bin from the borough may use
paint markers or other reasonable means to apply his or her name and address to
the recycling bin for identification so long as the bin is not damaged and the
appearance of the bin is not significantly altered.
   (D)   Recycling bins shall be returned to the borough for a refund of $2 for
each purchased bin upon leaving borough residency or if the bin is otherwise
not going to be used for its intended purpose. No refund shall be paid for bins
that are damaged, not appropriately cleaned or are otherwise unusable.
(Ord. 1993-5, passed 9-21-1993, § 7)
§ 20-208 PENALTY FOR VIOLATION.
   Any person, firm, corporation or other entity who shall violate any
provision of this Part shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a
fine of not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine
and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a
violation of this Part continues or each section of this Part which shall be
found to have been violated shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 1993-5, passed 9-21-1993, § 8; Ord. 1988-04, passed 2-13-1999)
§ 20-209 REPEALER AND SEVERABILITY.
   Any ordinance, or part thereof, conflicting with this Part shall be, and
hereby is, repealed in so far as it conflicts with this Part. Further, the
provisions of this Part are severable. If any sentence, clause, or section of
this Part is for any reason found to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid,
such unconstitutionality, illegality or invalidity shall not affect or impair
any of the remaining provisions of this Part. It is hereby declared to be the
intent of the Borough Council that this Part would have been adopted had such
unconstitutional, illegal or invalid sentence, clause or section not been
included herein.
(Ord. 2007-2, passed 2-15-2007)
CHAPTER 21: STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND DRIVEWAYS
      Part
         
1.   SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL
         
2.   CONSTRUCTION, REPAIR OR REPLACEMENT OF STREETS, SIDEWALKS OR DRIVEWAYS
         
3.   WIDTH OF ALL SIDEWALKS ALONG ROADWAYS, ALLEYS AND/OR THOROUGHFARES
PART 1: SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL
Section
   
21-101   Definitions
   
21-102   Responsibility for removal of snow and ice from sidewalks
   
21-103   Responsibility for removal from roofs
   
21-104   Depositing of snow and ice restricted
   
21-105   Penalties
§ 21-101 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this Part, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BUSINESS DAY. Any day not a Sunday or a national holiday.
   BUSINESS HOURS. Hours between 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on any business day.
   CARTWAY. Portion of a street or highway improved, designed or ordinarily
used for vehicular travel, exclusive of the berm or shoulder.
   PERSON. Any natural person or persons, firm, partnership, corporation,
municipal corporation or other legal entity, group, association or body.
   SIDEWALK. Portion of a street between the curb lines, or the lateral lines
of a cartway and the adjacent property lines, intended for use by pedestrians.
   STREET or HIGHWAY. The entire width between the boundary lines of a way
publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for
purposes of vehicular travel.
(Ord. 2014-2, passed 9-9-2014)
§ 21-102 RESPONSIBILITY FOR REMOVAL OF SNOW AND ICE FROM SIDEWALKS.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of each and every person owning, leasing or
having any present interest in any real estate fronting or abutting on a paved
sidewalk, whether as owner, tenant, occupant, lessee or otherwise, to remove
and clear away, or cause to be removed or cleared any snow, ice or slush or
other accumulation to create a path of at least 36 inches in width in along and
over the existing sidewalk and around all fire hydrants in front of, alongside
of, adjacent to or adjoining their property. Whenever a sidewalk continues to
the curb on a property which is on the corner of the intersection of two
borough streets or alleys, the obligation of said person of that property shall
include shoveling a path, at least 36 inches wide, to the point at which the
sidewalk meets the cartway of the street or alley at that intersection.
   (B)   Except as provided in subsection (C) below, snow and ice shall be
removed from sidewalks pursuant to subsection (A) above, within 24 hours after
the cessation of any fall of snow, sleet or freezing rain. All sidewalks and
fire hydrants must also be kept clear in accordance with this Part even if
accumulations of snow or ice are due to drifting, blowing, melting and re-
freezing, or as the result of snow removal equipment re-depositing snow in the
process of clearing streets and roadways.
   (C)   In the event snow and/or ice on a sidewalk has become so hard that it
cannot be removed without likelihood of damage to the sidewalk, the person
charged with its removal shall, within the time mentioned in subsection (B)
above, cause enough sand or other abrasive, nonskid material, to be put on the
sidewalk to make pedestrian travel over this sidewalk reasonably safe; and
shall, as soon thereafter as weather permits, cause to be cleared a path upon
said sidewalk of at least 36 inches in width as required in subsection (A)
above.
(Ord. 2014-2, passed 9-9-2014)
§ 21-103 RESPONSIBILITY FOR REMOVAL FROM ROOFS.
   Every person in charge or control of any building or other structure,
whether as owner, tenant, occupant, lessee or otherwise, shall remove and clear
away, or cause to be removed and cleared away, any accumulation of snow and ice
on said building or other structure which is liable to fall on any sidewalk,
roadway or other public way. Such work shall be completed within a reasonable
time, but not later than 12 hours after the cessation of any fall of snow,
sleet or freezing rain.
§ 21-104 DEPOSITING OF SNOW AND ICE RESTRICTED.
   No person shall deposit or cause to be deposited, blown, thrown, placed or
strewn any snow or ice on or immediately next to a fire hydrant or on any
sidewalk, roadway or loading and unloading areas of a public transportation
system, except that snow and ice may be mounded by the borough on public
cartways incident to the cleaning thereof or mounded on curbs incident to the
clearing of sidewalks in business districts.
(Ord. 2014-2, passed 9-9-2014)
§ 21-105 PENALTIES.
   Any person, firm, corporation or other entity who shall violate any
provision of this Part shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a
fine not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine
and costs, to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a
violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
PART 2: CONSTRUCTION, REPAIR OR REPLACEMENT OF STREETS, SIDEWALKS OR DRIVEWAYS
Section
   
21-201   Preconstruction requirements
   
21-202   Specifications
   
21-203   Determination of Borough Engineer
   
21-204   Permit required
§ 21-201 PRECONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS.
   Whenever any person shall intend to construct, repair, replace, open or
dedicate any street, way, alley or drainage facility in connection therewith
for public use, the procedure set forth in the following subsections of this
section shall be followed.
   (A)   Before construction, such person, whether individual, firm,
association or partnership, shall submit plans of such street, way, alley or
drainage facility, together with a filing fee in an amount to be established by
resolution of Borough Council. Plans shall include the grade and profiles of
streets and alleys, the course, structure and capacity of any drainage
facility, the method of drainage of adjacent or contiguous territory, and such
other details as Council may require.
   (B)   After filing, the Borough Manager shall forward such plans to the
Borough Engineer for review and recommendations. The Borough Engineer shall
return the plans with his or her recommendations at the next regular Council
meeting held at least 15 days after his or her receipt of plans, or at such
later time as Council may approve. Council shall consider the plans and
recommendations of the Borough Engineer at such meeting, and approve, alter or
disapprove the plans as submitted. Council may specify changes or modification
of plans when necessary for the health, safety, welfare or orderly growth of
the borough, and may approve plans subject to any such specified changes or
modifications.
   (C)   Prior to approval, Council may, at its discretion, arrange for a
public hearing after giving such notice as Council may consider advisable.
   (D)   Upon approval, plans shall be signed by the Borough Manager and shall
be filed with the Borough Engineer.
   (E)   Prior to construction, or upon approval of plans, Council may require
the posting of a performance bond in such amount as may be reasonably
calculated to ensure construction in accordance with plans and payment of
inspection charges.
   (F)   Upon approval of such plans and posting of the performance bond, if
required, the Borough Manager shall issue a permit for such construction, which
shall authorize construction in accordance with plans as submitted or as
modified.
   (G)   During construction, there shall be such inspection by Council, its
agent or the Borough Engineer as Council may direct, and at the expense of the
person to whom the permit for such construction was issued. Inspection charges
shall be billed by the Council as they accrue, or monthly.
   (H)   Upon completion of construction in accordance with approved plans,
Council, at the request of the builder, shall adopt the facility in accordance
with applicable law, and thereafter shall assume responsibility for
maintenance.
(Ord. 144, passed 3-1-1979, Art. LX)
§ 21-202 SPECIFICATIONS.
   All new streets shall be laid out in accordance with the following minimum
requirements.
   (A)   Grades shall be approved by the Borough Engineer when established by
the builder or developer. Anyone may request in writing that the Borough
Engineer determine grades for any new street; upon such request, Council shall
require the Borough Engineer to determine grades, and the cost thereof shall be
paid through Council by the person so requesting.
   (B)   The right-of-way and cartway widths of any new street or extension of
any existing street shall be as indicated in the subdivision and land
development ordinance (
Chapter 22 of this code of ordinances) or as recommended by the Borough
Engineer and approved by Borough Council.
   (C)   Curbs shall be constructed on each side of any new street in
accordance with minimum requirements set forth in §
21-203.
   (D)   Each new street shall be divided into blocks having not less than 500
nor more than 1,500 feet between street right-of-way lines, but only as
approved by Council.
   (E)   Sidewalks shall be constructed on each side of any new street between
the curbing and the right-of-way line. The location and width of sidewalks
shall be as determined by the Borough Engineer and listed in the Curb and
Sidewalk Construction Specifications.
   (F)   The builder or developer constructing any new street shall establish
permanent street boundary monuments, and shall place permanent monuments in
accordance with specifications determined by the Borough Engineer to be
forwarded with approved plans.
   (G)   All streets shall be paved from curb to curb. The crown or cross slope
of the paved surface shall be sloped from the center of the street to either
side in accordance with normal street construction practices, shall be
indicated on the plan submitted in accordance with § 21-201(B) and shall be
subject to approval of Council. Sub-grade and surface courses shall be
indicated on the plan aforesaid and subject to approval of Council.
   (H)   Council may, in its sound discretion, permit deviation or variance
from above requirements upon request, whenever the safety, welfare and traffic
considerations would not be adversely affected.
(Ord. 144, passed 3-1-1979, Art. LX; Ord. 2004-8, passed 11-9-2004)
§ 21-203 DETERMINATION OF BOROUGH ENGINEER.
   (A)   Whenever Council shall determine it to be necessary for the public
safety or general welfare of the borough that the sidewalks or curbing should
be constructed, raised, lowered, repaired or replaced, Council shall notify the
property owner on which a sidewalk or curb shall abut to construct raise,
lower, repair or replace such sidewalk or curb within a reasonable time
specified in such notice in accordance with the grades and specifications
determined by the Borough Engineer and listed in the Curb and Sidewalk
Construction Specifications.
   (B)   (1)   Any property owner so notified, or any other person intending to
construct, raise, lower, repair or replace any sidewalk or curb shall apply to
the borough for a building permit. Such building permit shall be secured prior
to any construction.
      (2)   All sidewalks, curbs and gutters shall be constructed or
reconstructed in accordance with grades and specifications developed by the
Borough Engineer and listed in the Curb and Sidewalk Construction
Specifications.
   (C)   (1)   Whenever any person shall neglect or refuse to comply with the
provisions of this Part, Council shall, after the time specified in the notice,
cause to construct or reconstruct the sidewalk or curb at the expense of the
property owner upon which such sidewalk or curb shall abut.
      (2)   Any expenditure made by the borough in such construction or
reconstruction shall be collected from the property owner aforesaid, together
with an administrative cost of 10% of such cost, by an action at law or as
other municipal assessments or liens may, by law, be collected and/or by such
other relief as deemed appropriate.
   (D)   Any person, firm, corporation or other entity who shall violate any
provision of this Part shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a
fine of not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine
and costs to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a
violation of this Part continues or each section of this Part which shall be
found to have been violated shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 144, passed 3-1-1979, Art. LX; Ord. 2001-8, passed 11-9-2004)
§ 21-204 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or other entity to
open or excavate or to cause the opening or excavation of any public street
within the borough without first obtaining a permit for such opening or
excavation as follows.
   (A)   Any person, firm, corporation or other entity intending to open or
excavate within the limits of any public thoroughfare of the borough shall
first submit a request in writing to the Borough Manager for a permit to so
open or excavate, which request shall indicate the location of such opening or
excavation, the size thereof and the period of time the thoroughfare will be
open, as well as a statement of the reason for such opening or excavation,
together with a permit fee in an amount to be established by resolution of
Borough Council.
   (B)   The Borough Manager shall forward such request to the Street Committee
for investigation by them and the Borough Engineer. The Committee and Borough
Engineer, considering the location of the opening or excavation, the effect it
will have upon traffic of the borough, and the safety and welfare of the
residents, shall approve or reject such plans and notify the applicant thereof
within 30 days, or shall submit such plans for consideration of Council at the
next succeeding Council meeting after notifying applicant of the time such
plans shall be considered. Plans for such opening or excavation may be approved
with modification of the location and size thereof as well as the date for
opening or excavation or the length of time the thoroughfare may be kept open.
   (C)   The opening or excavation in the thoroughfare shall be closed and
covered, and the surface shall be reconstructed in accordance with
specifications as determined by the Engineer; such specifications shall be
forwarded to applicant with the permit when issued. The Engineer shall consider
the construction of the thoroughfare in determining specifications, and shall
require only such reconstruction as is reasonably calculated to return the
thoroughfare to its former condition.
   (D)   The approving body, whether the Street Committee or Council, may
require that a performance bond or cash be posted in an amount not greater than
double the amount that may be reasonably required to close the opening and
reconstruct the surface of the thoroughfare, including necessary inspection.
   (E)   Covering of the opening and reconstruction of the surface shall be
inspected while such work is in progress by an agent of the borough. The
applicant shall be responsible to notify the Street Committee or the Borough
Engineer as required of the time the opening or excavation is to be covered and
reconstructed. Four further inspections shall be made at three-month intervals;
based upon such inspections, Council may require further construction,
reconstruction or treatment whenever it is determined that the reconstruction
was not in accordance with the specifications provided by the Borough Engineer,
or that the thoroughfare was not returned to its former condition. Actual cost
of such inspections shall be paid to the borough by the applicant.
   (F)   (1)   Any person, firm, corporation or other entity who shall violate
any provision of this Part shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay
a fine of not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said
fine and costs to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a
violation of this Part continues or each section of this Part which shall be
found to have been violated shall constitute a separate offense.
      (2)   The imposition of a fine or costs shall not excuse the violation
nor permit it to continue; any violation or defect shall be remedied within the
time specified by Council, which time shall not be less than 15 days from
notification; failure to effect a remedy as required shall be considered a
separate violation.
(Ord. 144, passed 3-1-1979, Art. LX)
PART 3: WIDTH OF ALL SIDEWALKS ALONG ROADWAYS, ALLEYS AND/OR THOROUGHFARES
Section
   
21-301   Purpose
   
21-302   Regulation of width
§ 21-301 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this Part is to formalize and reaffirm by codification those
powers specifically given to the borough pursuant to Pennsylvania Borough Code,
53 Pa.C.S.A. §§ 1202 et seq. which contains, among other things, the power of
the borough to regulate public sidewalks with regard to health and cleanliness,
street lighting, ornamental illumination, planting of street trees, shade trees
and other vegetation and the undertaking of development, urban renewal and
revitalization projects within local neighborhoods along and upon public
sidewalks.
(Ord. 2008-1, passed 3-11-2008)
§ 21-302 REGULATION OF WIDTH.
   Henceforth, the borough, through this Part, shall herby exercise the powers
provided to it pursuant to Pennsylvania Borough Code, 53 Pa.C.S.A. §§ 1202 et
seq. and acknowledge, formalize and reaffirm its right to regulation and
control of all public sidewalks along public roads, alleys and/or thoroughfares
for the purposes set forth therein.
   (A)   This Part shall formalize the borough’s authority to regulate the
entire width of all sidewalks along public roadways, alleys and/or
thoroughfares within the borough pursuant to, and for the purposes set forth in
the Pennsylvania Borough Code, 53 Pa.C.S.A. §§ 1202 et seq.
   (B)   Nothing within this Part shall be construed to be a taking of the
borough of any private property whose fee ownership shall remain in the name of
the individuals, groups or entities to whom the property is deeded.
   (C)   Nothing within this Part shall be construed to provide the Borough any
fee ownership of any sidewalk or any obligation to maintain said sidewalks.
Specifically, nothing within this Part shall be construed to in any way
abrogate, affect or amend the actual fee title owners’ existing obligations and
responsibilities pursuant to Chapter 21 of the borough’s code of ordinances,
including, but not limited to, snow and ice removal or the construction, repair
or replacement of said sidewalks.
(Ord. 2008-1, passed 3-11-2008)
CHAPTER 22: SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT
      Part
         
1.   AUTHORITY, PURPOSE, TITLE AND JURISDICTION
         
2.   DEFINITIONS
         
3.   MODIFICATIONS
         
4.   PLAN REQUIREMENTS AND PROCESSING PROCEDURES
         
5.   DESIGN STANDARDS AND REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
         
6.   MOBILE HOME PARKS
         
7.   ADMINISTRATION
PART 1: AUTHORITY, PURPOSE, TITLE AND JURISDICTION
Section
   
22-100   Authority
   
22-101   Purpose
   
22-102   Title
   
22-103   Jurisdiction
§ 22-100 AUTHORITY.
   This chapter is adopted by authority of and pursuant to the provisions of
the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act of July 31, 1968, P.L. 805,
Act 247, 53 P.S. § 10101, ff., as amended.
(Ord. 178, passed 7-15-1974, Art. I, § 100; Ord. 1997-03, passed 3-18-1997)
§ 22-101 PURPOSE.
   This chapter has been designed and adopted to provide uniform standards and
procedures for the regulation and control of subdivision and land development
within the borough. The purpose of such regulation and control is to provide
for the safe and coordinated development of the borough by assuring sites
suitable for building purposes and human habitation; by coordinating proposed
streets and other proposed public improvements with those existing; by assuring
that adequate easements and rights-of-way are provided for drainage facilities
and public utilities; and by assuring that reservations, if any, by the
developer of any area designed for use as public grounds shall be suitable in
size and location for the designated uses.
(Ord. 178, passed 7-15-1974, Art. I, § 101; Ord. 1997-03, passed 3-18-1997)
§ 22-102 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known as the “Dillsburg Borough Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance”.
(Ord. 178, passed 7-15-1974, Art. I, § 102; Ord. 1997-03, passed 3-18-1997)
§ 22-103 JURISDICTION.
   No subdivision or land development of any lot, tract or parcel of land shall
be made, no street, sanitary sewer, storm sewer, water main or other
improvements in connection therewith shall be laid out, constructed, opened or
dedicated for public use or travel, or for the common use of occupants of
buildings abutting thereon within the borough, except in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter; and no landowner shall sell, transfer or enter into
an agreement to sell any land in a subdivision or land development located
within the borough, whether by reference to or by other use of a plat of such
or otherwise, or erect any building thereon, unless or until a final plat has
been prepared in full compliance with the provisions of this chapter and such
has been finally approved and recorded as provided herein. The authority for
the control and regulation of subdivision and land development with the borough
shall be as follows.
   (A)   Approval by the Borough Council. The Borough Council, hereinafter
referred to as the Council, shall be vested with the authority to approve or
disapprove all subdivision and land development plans.
   (B)   Review by the Borough Planning Commission. The Borough Planning
Commission, hereinafter referred to as the Planning Commission, shall be vested
with the review of subdivision and land development plans.
   (C)   Review by the County Planning Commission. Plans for subdivision and
land development located within the borough shall be forwarded upon receipt by
the borough to the County Planning Commission for review and report together
with a fee sufficient to cover the costs of the review and report. The borough
shall not approve such plans until the county report is received or until the
expiration of 30 days from the date the application was forwarded to the
county.
(Ord. 178, passed 7-15-1974, Art. I, § 103; Ord. 1993-1, passed 2-16-1993, § 1;
Ord. 1997-03, passed 3-18-1997)
PART 2: DEFINITIONS
Section
   
22-200   Intent
   
22-201   General usage
   
22-202   Specific words and phrases
§ 22-200 INTENT.
   The words, terms and phrases set forth in this Part are defined in order to
facilitate the interpretation of this chapter for administrative purposes and
in carrying out of duties by appropriate borough officials.
(Ord. 178, passed 7-15-1974, Art. II, § 200; Ord. 1997-03, passed 3-18-1997)
§ 22-201 GENERAL USAGE.
   Unless otherwise expressly stated:
   (A)   Words used in the present tense also imply the future tense;
   (B)   Words used in the singular also imply the plural;
   (C)   The words PERSON, SUBDIVIDER, LANDOWNER, DEVELOPER and APPLICANT
include a partnership, a corporation, a company, an incorporated association of
persons such as a club or an individual;
   (D)   The words SHOULD and MAY are permissive; the words SHALL and WILL are
mandatory and directive; and
   (E)   The word REGULATIONS means “in these regulations”.
(Ord. 178, passed 7-15-1974, Art. II, § 201; Ord. 1997-03, passed 3-18-1997)
§ 22-202 SPECIFIC WORDS AND PHRASES.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCESS DRIVE. A private drive, other than a driveway, which provides for
vehicular access between a street and a parking area, loading area, drive-in
service window or other facility within a land development.
   ACCESSORY BUILDING. A building subordinate to and detached from the
principal building on the same lot and used for purposes customarily incidental
to the principal building.
   ADD-ON LOT. A type of subdivision in which two or more lots, tracts or
parcels of land are combined into one lot, tract or parcel.
   APPLICANT. A landowner or developer who has filed an application for
approval of a subdivision or land development including his or her heirs,
successors and assigns. (See also DEVELOPER.)
   APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT. Every application, whether preliminary or
final, required to be filed and approved prior to start of construction or
development including, but not limited to, an application for a building
permit, for the approval of a subdivision plat or plan or for the approval of
land development plan.
   APPOINTING AUTHORITY. The Dillsburg Borough Council.
   BLOCK. An area bounded, but not traversed, by streets or other physical
barriers on all sides.
   BOND. Any form of security, including a cash deposit, surety bond,
collateral, property or instrument of credit in an amount and form satisfactory
to Borough Council.
   BOROUGH. Dillsburg Borough, York County, Pennsylvania, as represented by the
Borough Council or its duly authorized agents.
   BUILDING. Any structure on a lot, having a roof supported by columns or
walls and intended for the shelter, housing or enclosure of persons, animals or
chattels.
   CLEAR SIGHT TRIANGLE. An area of unobstructed vision at street intersections
defined by the centerlines of the streets and by a line of sight between points
on their centerlines at a given distance from the intersection of the
centerlines. Specific distances vary with street function.
   CONTOUR LINE. A line on a topographic map connecting points of like
elevation.
   COST OF IMPROVEMENTS. The amount which the Borough Engineer estimates that
the borough would be required to expend in order to complete the improvements
proposed by a subdivider or land developer in a subdivision or land development
plan, as provided for in § 509 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code, as reenacted and amended.
   COUNCIL. The Borough Council of the Borough of Dillsburg.
   COUNTY. The County of York, Pennsylvania.
   DEVELOPER. Any landowner, agents of such landowner or tenant with the
permission of such landowner, who makes or causes to be made a subdivision of
land or land development.
   DRAINAGE EASEMENT. Permanent or limited right-of-use which substantially
conforms to the existing alignment of a watercourse, stream, channel or other
drainageway.
   DRIVEWAY. A private minor vehicular right-of-way, other than a street, which
provides access between a street and a garage, carport, or other parking space
for a single-family or two-family dwelling.
   DWELLING. A building containing one or more dwelling units.
   DWELLING UNIT. One or more rooms used for living and sleeping purposes,
having a kitchen with fixed cooking facilities and a bathroom with a toilet and
bathtub or shower, arranged for occupancy by one family.
   EASEMENT. A limited right of use granted on private land for public use or
private use by another party or parties and within which the owner of the
property shall not erect any permanent structures.
   ELEVATION. A vertical distance to a point above or below a known datum line.
   ENGINEER. A professional engineer licensed as such in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
   EROSION. The wearing away of soil or rock fragments, or the wearing away of
the land surface, by the action of natural elements such as water, ice, wind
and gravity.
   ESCROW. A deposit of cash with the local government in lieu of an amount
required and still in force on a performance or maintenance bond.
   FILL. Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other material is
placed, pushed, dumped, pulled, transported or moved to a new location above
the natural surface of the ground or on top of the stripped surface and shall
include the condition resulting therefrom. The difference in elevation between
a point on the original ground and as designated point of higher elevation on
the final grade. The material used to make a FILL.
   GRADING. All construction operations between site clearing and paving.
GRADING includes all excavating, hauling, spreading and compacting operations.
   HARDSHIP. A condition not caused by the subdivider for which he or she may
request a modification.
   IMPROVEMENTS. Physical additions and changes to the land, including, but not
limited to, paving, curbs, gutters, water mains, sanitary sewers, storm sewers,
sidewalks and street signs, that may be necessary to produce usable and
desirable lots.
   LAND DEVELOPMENT. Any of the following activities:
      (1)   The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts
or parcels of land for any purpose involving:
         (a)   A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings,
whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single nonresidential building
on a lot or lots regardless of the number of occupants or tenure; or
         (b)   The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially
or cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or prospective occupants
by means of, or for the purpose of streets, common areas, leaseholds,
condominiums, building groups or other features.
      (2)   A subdivision of land; and
      (3)   The following activities are excluded from the definition of LAND
DEVELOPMENT only when such land development involves:
         (a)   The conversion of an existing single-family detached dwelling or
single- family semi-detached dwelling into not more than three residential
units, unless such units are intended to be a condominium; or
         (b)   The addition of an accessory building, including farm buildings
on a lot or lots subordinate to an existing principal building.
   LANDOWNER. The legal or beneficial owner or owners of land including the
holder of an option or contract to purchase (whether or not such option or
contract is subject to any condition), a lessee if he or she is authorized
under the lease to exercise the rights of the landowner, or other person having
a proprietary interest in land, shall be deemed to be a LANDOWNER for the
purpose of this chapter.
   LOT. A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat or
otherwise as permitted by law and to be used, developed or built upon as a
unit.
      (1)   CORNER LOT. A lot at the junction of and abutting on two
intersecting streets or at the point of abrupt change of a single street, where
the interior angle is less than 135 degrees and the centerline radius of the
street is less than 100 feet.
      (2)   INTERIOR LOT. A lot having frontage on one street and adjoined on
the sides and rear by other lots.
      (3)   REVERSE FRONTAGE LOT. A through lot having frontage on a minor
street and either an arterial street or collector street with vehicular access
solely from the minor street.
      (4)   THROUGH LOT. A lot fronting on two streets, other than a corner
lot. Vehicular access can be from either street. Also referred to as a DOUBLE
FRONTAGE LOT. THROUGH LOTS are not permitted.
      (5)   TRIPLE FRONTAGE LOT. A lot fronting on three streets.
   MOBILE HOME. A transportable, single-family dwelling intended for permanent
occupancy, contained in one unit, or in two or more units designed to be joined
into one integral unit capable of again being separated for repeated towing,
which arrives at a site complete and ready for occupancy except for minor and
incidental unpacking and assembly operations, and constructed so that it can be
used without a permanent foundation.
   MOBILE HOME LOT. A parcel of land in a mobile home park, improved with the
necessary utility connections and other appurtenances necessary for the
erection thereon of a single mobile home.
   MOBILE HOME PARK. A parcel or contiguous parcels of land which has been so
designated and improved that it contains two or more mobile home lots for the
placement thereon of mobile homes.
   MUNICIPAL-MUNICIPALITY. Of or the Borough of Dillsburg.
   OWNER. The owner of record of a lot, parcel or tract of land.
   PAVEMENT. That portion of a street improved, designed or ordinarily used for
vehicular travel, exclusive of the sidewalk or shoulder. The centerline of the
pavement shall be synonymous with the centerline of the right-of-way for that
street.
   PLAN. The map of a subdivision or land development, including all
supplementary data, whether sketch, preliminary or final.
      (1)   FINAL PLAN. A complete and exact subdivision or land development
plan, prepared as for official recording, to define property rights, proposed
streets and other improvements.
      (2)   PRELIMINARY PLAN. A subdivision or land development plan showing
the salient existing features of a tract or parcel of land and its
surroundings, as well as the proposed street and lot layout as a basis for
consideration prior to preparation of a final plan.
      (3)   RECORDED PLAN. An exact copy of the approved final plan prepared
for necessary signatures and recording with the York County Recorder of Deeds.
      (4)   SKETCH PLAN. An informal plan, not necessarily to scale, indicating
the salient features of a tract or parcel and its surroundings, as well as the
general layout of the proposed subdivision or land development for discussion
purposes only and not to be presented for approval.
   PLANNING CODE. The Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act of July
31, 1968, P.L. 805, Act 247, 53 P.S. 10101, ff., as reenacted and amended.
   PLANNING COMMISSION. The Dillsburg Borough Planning Commission (unless
otherwise noted).
   PLAT. The map or plan of a subdivision or land development, whether
preliminary or final.
   PROPERTY LINES. The lines bounding as lot as described in the recorded
title. Also referred to as LOT LINES.
   PUBLIC GROUNDS. Includes parks, playgrounds, trails, paths and other
recreational areas and other public areas; sites for schools, sewage treatment,
refuse disposal and other publicly owned or operated facilities; and publicly
owned or operated scenic or historic sites.
   PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT. Any street, sidewalk, curb, gutter, storm sewer, water
supply facility, sanitary sewer facility, off-street parking area, lot
improvement or other facility for which the local government may ultimately
assume the responsibility for maintenance and operation, or which may affect an
improvement for which local government responsibility is established.
   PUBLIC WATER OR SEWER SYSTEM. A water supply or sewage disposal system which
is owned and operated by a local government authority or by a local public
utility company adequately controlled by a government authority.
   RADIUS. The distance from the center of a circle to the circumference of
that circle.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. A right of passage across land occupied or intended to be
occupied by a street, crosswalk, railroad, electric transmission line, oil or
gas pipeline, water main, sanitary or storm sewer, or for another special use.
If the RIGHT-OF-WAY involves maintenance by a public agency, it shall be
dedicated to public use by the maker of the plat on which such right-of-way is
established.
   SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM. A system of piping and appurtenances, whether
municipally or privately owned, designed for the collection and transmission of
liquid and water carried wastes from residential and nonresidential uses to a
wastewater treatment plant for treatment and discharge. It does not include
individual on-lot sewage disposal systems.
   SECRETARY. The Secretary of Dillsburg Borough.
   SEDIMENTATION. The process by which mineral or organic matter is accumulated
or deposited by moving wind, water, gravity or other natural means as a product
of erosion. Once this matter is deposited (or remains suspended in water), it
is usually referred to as SEDIMENT.
   SETBACK LINE. A line within a property and parallel to a property or street
line which delineates the required minimum distance between a structure or
building and an adjacent street line or property line.
   SIDEWALK. A paved walkway constructed solely for use by pedestrians.
   SIGHT DISTANCE. The length of street visible to a driver.
   SLOPE. The face of an embankment or cut section; any ground whose surface
makes an angle with the plan of the horizon. SLOPES are usually expressed in a
percentage based upon vertical difference in feet per 100 feet of horizontal
distance.
   STORM SEWER. A large pipe or small structure used to carry to an outlet, the
water collected by surface drainage.
   STREET. Includes street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway, freeway, parkway,
land, alley, viaduct and any other ways used or intended to be used by
vehicular traffic or pedestrians whether public or private and for the purpose
of this chapter shall be classified as follows.
      (1)   ARTERIAL STREET. A street which is used primarily for through, fast
or heavy traffic.
      (2)   CUL-DE-SAC STREET. A street with one end open for public vehicular
and pedestrian access and the other end terminating in a vehicular turnaround.
      (3)   COLLECTOR STREET. A street which carries traffic from minor streets
to the major system of arterial streets, including principal entrance streets
of a residential development and streets for major circulation within such
developments.
      (4)   DEAD END STREET. A street or portion of a street with only one
vehicular traffic outlet and no vehicular turnaround.
      (5)   HALF OR PARTIAL STREET. A street parallel and adjacent to a
property line having a lesser right-of-way than required for a satisfactory
improvement and use of the street.
      (6)   MARGINAL ACCESS STREET. A minor street which is parallel to and
adjacent to arterial streets and which provide access to abutting properties
and protection from through traffic.
      (7)   MINOR STREETS. A street used primarily for access to the abutting
properties and which discourages through traffic.
      (8)   PRIVATE STREET. A street not offered for dedication to the borough
or Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
      (9)   SERVICE DRIVE. A minor right-of-way which is used to provide
secondary vehicular access to the rear or side of two or more properties whose
frontage is on some other street. Also referred to as a LANE or ALLEY.
   STRUCTURE. Any human-made object having an ascertainable stationary location
on or in land or water, whether or not affixed to the land.
   SUBDIVIDER. See DEVELOPER.
   SUBDIVISION. The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel of land by
any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other division of land
including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether immediate or
future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs or devisees,
transfer of ownership or building or lot development; provided, however, that
the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into parcels of more
than ten acres, not involving any new street or easement of access, or
residential dwellings, shall be exempted.
   SUBDIVISION, MINOR. Any subdivision abutting an existing public street or
road involving not more than five lots, parcels of land, or other division of
land which does not require a new street, the installation of sanitary sewers,
storm sewers, water mains or pipes, or other public improvements.
   SUBSTANTIALLY COMPLETED. Where in the judgment of the Borough Engineer, at
least 90% (based on the cost of the required improvements for which financial
security was posted) of those improvements required as a condition for final
approval have been completed in accordance with the approved plan, so that the
project will be able to be used, occupied or operated for its intended use.
   WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM. A system of piping and appurtenances, whether
municipally or privately owned, designed for the transmission and distribution
of safe, potable water from a centralized water supply or source to residential
and nonresidential properties. It does not include individual on-lot wells.
   WATERCOURSE. A channel of conveyance of surface water having defined bed and
banks, whether natural or artificial, with perennial or intermittent flow.
(Ord. 178, passed 7-15-1974, Art. II, § 202; Ord. 1993-1, passed 2-16-1993, §
1; Ord. 1997-03, passed 3-18-1997)
PART 3: MODIFICATIONS
Section
   
22-300   Modifications
§ 22-300 MODIFICATIONS.
   (A)   Where a provision of this chapter would cause unique and undue
hardship as it applies to a particular property, or if a developer shows that
an alternative proposal will allow for equal or better results, the Borough
Council may grant a modification from the strict application of the terms of
this chapter if the variation will not be detrimental to the general welfare,
nullify the objectives of these regulations or conflict with the comprehensive
plan. In granting the modification, the Borough Council may impose conditions
which will substantially secure compliance with the purposes of this chapter.
   (B)   All requests for modifications shall be made in writing and shall be
submitted to the Secretary with copies of the plan. The request shall state in
full the grounds and facts of unreasonableness or hardship on which the request
is based, the provision(s) of the ordinance involved and the minimum
modification necessary.
   (C)   The Borough Planning Commission shall have the right to recommend to
the Borough Council modifications to the regulations in individual cases as may
be necessary in the public interest, provided, however, that such modifications
and the specific reasons for such change shall be entered in the minutes of the
Planning Commission, and a copy of this entry shall be transmitted to the
Borough Council. The Borough Council may then alter the land development plans
and specify changes or modifications therein, which it deems necessary and make
its approval subject to such alterations, changes or modifications.
   (D)   If a modification(s) is approved by the Borough Council, said
modifications shall be clearly defined and entered on the final plan and signed
by the Borough Council.
(Ord. 178, passed 7-15-1974, Art. III, § 300; Ord. 1993-1, passed 2-16-1993, §
1; Ord. 1997-03, passed 3-18-1997)
PART 4: PLAN REQUIREMENTS AND PROCESSING PROCEDURES
Section
   
22-400   General
   
22-401   Optional sketch plans
   
22-402   Preliminary plans, plan requirements
   
22-403   Preliminary plans, procedures
   
22-404   Final plans, plan requirements
   
22-405   Final plans, procedures
   
22-406   Completion of improvements or guarantee thereof prerequisite to final
plan approval
   
22-407   Remedies to effect completion of improvements
   
22-408   Offers of dedication
   
22-409   Land reservation
   
22-410   Effect of plan recording on dedication and reservation
   
22-411   Maintenance guarantee
   
22-412   Recording of final plan
   
22-413   Fees
§ 22-400 GENERAL.
   The plan requirements and processing procedures shall be followed by the
developer as set forth herein and all proposed subdivisions and land
developments shall be submitted for review and approval as provided by this
Part.
(Ord. 178, passed 7-15-1974, Art. IV, § 400; Ord. 1997-03, passed 3-18-1997)
§ 22-401 OPTIONAL SKETCH PLANS.
   (A)   Prior to the filing of an application for review and approval, the
developer may submit a sketch plan, but is not required to do so, to the
Council for advice on the requirements necessary to achieve conformity to the
standards of these regulations as well as to alert the developer to factors
which must be considered in the design of the subdivision or land development
such as pertinent elements of any county or municipal land use, thoroughfare
and community facilities plans.
   (B)   Sufficient information should be included in the sketch plan to
clearly indicate the character and extent of the proposed subdivision or land
development and its relationship to existing conditions and facilities within
the area in which the same is to be located. It is recommended that sketch plan
submissions include a map covering sufficient area to establish the location of
the site and an informal plan of an existing or proposed streets, lotting,
utilities, natural features and other elements within the subdivision or land
development including topographic contours.
(Ord. 178, passed 7-15-1974, Art. IV, § 401; Ord. 1997-03, passed 3-18-1997)
§ 22-402 PRELIMINARY PLANS, PLAN REQUIREMENTS.
   The following shall be submitted in application for review and approval of a
preliminary plan:
   (A)   Application form and 11 copies including one reproducible copy on a
stable base of a map or series of maps or sheets 24sp- x 36sp- drawn to scale
not smaller than 100 feet to the inch unless otherwise specified herein and
showing the following:
      (1)   Name or identifying title of the proposed subdivision or land
development;
      (2)   North point, scale (written and graphic), date plan prepared, and
date for each revision, if any;
      (3)   Municipality in which the proposed subdivision or land development
will be located;
      (4)   Zoning district in which the proposed subdivision or land
development is located as identified on the zoning map of the Borough of
Dillsburg;
      (5)   A location map, at a scale not smaller than 2,000 feet to the inch,
covering sufficient area to establish the location of the site within the
borough;
      (6)   Notarized signature(s) of the legal and/or equitable owner(s)
certifying that the application is approved by the owner(s) as submitted and
recording data of the owner(s) of the property;
      (7)   The names and recording data of owners of all abutting unplotted
land and the names and recording data of all abutting subdivisions;
      (8)   Name and address of the registered engineer, surveyor or other
qualified professional responsible for the plan;
      (9)   Tract boundaries with bearings and distance;
      (10)   All existing property lines, easements and rights-of-way and the
purpose for which the easements or rights-of-way have been established;
      (11)   All existing streets on or adjacent to the tract, including name,
right-of-way width and pavement width;
      (12)   All existing buildings, sanitary and storm sewers, water mains,
culverts, fire hydrants and other significant human-made features on or within
no less than 20 feet of the tract;
      (13)   Watercourses, marshes, rock outcrops and wooded areas. If the
tract includes area which are subject to flooding, a drainage and flood control
plan shall be submitted;
      (14)   Existing and, when deemed necessary by the Council, proposed
contours at vertical intervals of five feet or, in the case of land have a
slope of 2% or less, at such lesser interval as may be necessary for
satisfactory study and planning of the tract. Datum to which contour elevations
refer shall be U.S. Coast and Geodetic Survey datum or such other source
approved by the Borough Engineer;
      (15)   Total acreage, number of lots, and number of dwelling units and/or
structures in tabular form and lot numbers;
      (16)   Location, width and approximate grade of all proposed streets,
alleys, rights-of-way and easements; proposed lot lines with approximate
dimensions; proposed minimum setback line for each street: playgrounds, public
buildings, public areas and parcels of land proposed to be dedicated or
reserved for public use;
      (17)   Location of any proposed site improvements such as curbs,
sidewalks, driveways or access drives, street trees and, when the proposed
development includes other than individual residences, the type of land use,
residential density, and the location of structures and parking facilities;
      (18)   An indication of the general location of proposed water mains,
sanitary sewers and stormwater catch basins and lines. The preliminary size of
each line should be shown as well as the locations of or distances to any
existing line to be connected to, with the size of such existing lines
indicated;
      (19)   General plans for the collection or run-off of surface water and
its outfall together with stormwater management design analysis and any other
supporting data;
      (20)   In cases where the preliminary plan covers only a portion of the
developer’s tract, a key map at a scale not smaller than 400 feet to the inch,
showing the entire tract with metes and bounds, its topography at contour
intervals of at least 20 feet, its natural features, and the proposed street
system for the entire tract; abutting streets and names of abutting property
owners; and the portion of the tract included in the preliminary plan
submission; and
      (21)   Traffic impact study or analysis as may be required. Requirements
for such studies shall be developed as a scope of work following consultation
with PennDOT and the Borough Engineer.
   (B)   Engineering feasibility reports for proposed water and/or sewer
systems; and
   (C)   Such other plans and information as may be required by the Council in
order to review and ascertain the workability of the preliminary plans
including any existing or proposed deed restriction and protective covenants.
(Ord. 178, passed 7-15-1974, Art. IV, § 402; Ord. 1997-03, passed 3-18-1997)
§ 22-403 PRELIMINARY PLANS, PROCEDURES.
   The following procedures shall be followed in the submission and processing
of preliminary plans for proposed subdivisions and land developments.
   (A)   The developer has the two following alternatives regarding the
submission of a preliminary plan:
      (1)   (a)   In the case of a minor subdivision or land development plan
(as defined), request the Council to waive the requirement that a preliminary
plan be submitted and approved before consideration of a final plan. If the
Council grants the waiver, he or she may begin the final plan preparation and
procedure as required by §§
22-404 and
22-405; and
         (b)   After two minor subdivisions have taken place within any given
tract, the developer shall be required to submit a complete preliminary plan
for the entire tract on the next subsequent application unless the size,
frequency and interrelationships of prior subdivisions clearly do not warrant
such.
      (2)   Prepare a preliminary plan in accordance with the requirements of §
22-402.
   (B)   The developer shall submit the required preliminary plan documentation
and fees to the Borough Secretary at least 15 business days prior to the
regularly scheduled meeting of the Planning Commission.
   (C)   At the next regularly scheduled meeting, the Planning Commission shall
first review the submission in respect to completeness.
      (1)   If the submission is found to be in accordance with the
requirements of this Part the submission shall be accepted with said acceptance
to constitute official plan filing by the developer as of that meeting date,
and the Commission may proceed with plan review.
      (2)   If the submission is found to be incomplete in respect to the
requirements of this Part, the Planning Commission shall suspend review and the
plan shall not be considered as filed. Within five days thereafter, the
Planning Commission shall notify the developer of the additional information
required.
   (D)   Upon the filing of a preliminary plan as determined above, the
Planning Commission shall forward a copy of all documents to the County
Planning Commission for review and report. In addition, the Planning Commission
shall refer the plan to the following as appropriate:
      (1)   Borough Engineer for review of required improvements;
      (2)   Pennsylvania Department of Transportation when the subdivision or
land development will front on an existing or proposed state route or will have
a proposed street requiring access to such a route;
      (3)   Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection for any
necessary report in respect to sewer and water facilities; and
      (4)   York County Conservation District for review in respect to
drainage, erosion and any other related consideration.
   (E)   At a scheduled public meeting the Borough Council shall render its
decision on the preliminary plan and communicate its decision to the applicant
not later than 90 days following the date of the regular meeting of the
borough’s Planning Commission next following the date the application is filed
or after a final order of the court remanding an application, provided that
should said next regular meeting occur more than 30 days following the filing
of the application or the final order of the court, the said 90 day period
shall be measured from the thirtieth day following the day the application has
been filed. The developer or representative should attend the Council and
Planning Commission meetings in order to answer any questions that may arise.
If there are questions, and the developer or representative is not in
attendance, the plan may be tabled or rejected. The decision of the Borough
Council concerning preliminary plan approval shall be in writing and shall be
communicated to the applicant personally or mailed to him or her at his or her
last known address not later than 15 days following the decision.
      (1)   When the plan is not approved in terms as filed, the decision shall
specify the defects found in the plan, shall describe the requirements which
have not been met, and shall cite the sections of these regulations relied
upon.
      (2)   Failure of the Borough Council to render a decision and communicate
it to the applicant within the time and in the manner required herein shall be
deemed as approval of the application in terms as presented unless the
applicant has agreed in writing to an extension of time or change in the
prescribed manner of presentation or communication of the decision, in which
case, failure to meet the extended time or change in manner of presentation or
communication shall have like effect.
   (F)   Approval of the preliminary plan constitutes approval of the proposed
subdivision or land development in respect to the general design, the
approximate dimensions and other planned features. Preliminary approval binds
the developer to the general scheme of the plan as approved and permits the
developer to begin preparation of the final plan. Preliminary approval does not
authorize the recording, sale or transfer of lots nor installation of
improvements.
   (G)   Changes in the ordinance shall affect plats as follows.
      (1)   From the time an application for approval of a plat, whether
preliminary or final, is duly filed as provided in the subdivision and land
development ordinance, and while such application is pending approval or
disapproval, no change or amendment of the zoning, subdivision or other
governing ordinance or plan shall affect the decision on such application
adversely to the applicant and the applicant shall be entitled to a decision in
accordance with the provisions of the governing ordinances or plans as they
stood at the time the application was duly filed. In addition, when a
preliminary application has been duly approved, the applicant shall be entitled
to final approval in accordance with the terms of the approved preliminary
application as hereinafter provided. However, if an application is properly and
finally denied, any subsequent application shall be subject to the intervening
change in governing regulations.
      (2)   When an application for approval of a plat, whether preliminary or
final, has been approved without conditions or approved by the applicant’s
acceptance of conditions, no subsequent change or amendment in the zoning,
subdivision or other governing ordinance or plan shall be applied to affect
adversely the right of the applicant to commence and to complete any aspect of
the approved development in accordance with the terms of such approval within
five years from such approval. The five-year period shall be extended for the
duration of any litigation, including appeals, which prevent the commencement
or completion of the development and for the duration of any sewer or utility
moratorium or prohibition which was imposed subsequent to the filing of an
application for preliminary approval of a plat. In the event of an appeal filed
by any party from the approval or disapproval of a plat, the five-year period
shall be extended by the total time from the date the appeal was filed until a
final order in such matter has been entered and all appeals have been concluded
and any period for filing appeals or requests for reconsideration have expired;
provided, however, that no extension shall be based upon any water or sewer
moratorium which was in effect as of the date of the filing of a preliminary
application. (Amended June 22, 2000, P.L. No.68)
      (3)   Where final approval is preceded by preliminary approval, the
aforesaid five-year period shall be counted from the date of the preliminary
approval. In the case of any doubt as to the terms of a preliminary approval,
the terms shall be construed in the light of the provisions of the governing
ordinances or plans as they stood at the time when the application for such
approval was duly filed.
      (4)   Where the landowner has substantially completed the required
improvements as depicted upon the final plat within the aforesaid five-year
limit, or any extension thereof as may be granted by the governing body, no
change of municipal ordinance or plan enacted subsequent to the date of filing
of the preliminary plat shall modify or revoke any aspect of the approved final
plat pertaining to zoning classification or density, lot, building, street or
utility location.
      (5)   In the case of a preliminary plat calling for the installation of
improvements beyond the five-year period, a schedule shall be filed by the
landowner with the preliminary plat delineating all proposed sections as well
as deadlines within which applications for final plat approval of each section
are intended to be filed. Such schedule shall be updated annually by the
applicant on or before the anniversary of the preliminary plat approval, until
final plat approval of the final section has been granted and any modification
in the aforesaid schedule shall be subject to approval of the governing body in
its discretion.
      (6)   Each section in any residential subdivision or land development,
except for the last section, shall contain a minimum of 25% of the total number
of dwelling units as depicted on the preliminary plan, unless a lesser
percentage is approved by the governing body in its discretion. Provided the
landowner has not defaulted with regard to or violated any of the conditions of
the preliminary plat approval, including compliance with landowner’s aforesaid
schedule of submission of final plats for the various sections, then the
aforesaid protections afforded by substantially completing the improvements
depicted upon the final plat within five years shall apply and for any section
or sections, beyond the initial section, in which the required improvements
have not been substantially completed within said five-year period the
aforesaid protections shall apply for an additional term or terms of three
years from the date of final plat approval for each section.
      (7)   Failure of landowner to adhere to the aforesaid schedule of
submission of final plats for the various sections shall subject any such
section to any and all changes in zoning, subdivision and other governing
ordinance enacted by the municipality subsequent to the date of the initial
preliminary plan submission.
(Ord. 178, passed 7-15-1974, Art. IV, § 403; Ord. 1993-1, passed 2-16-1993, §
1; Ord. 1997-03, passed 3-18-1997)
§ 22-404 FINAL PLANS, PLAN REQUIREMENTS.
   The following shall be submitted with the application for review and
approval of a final plan. Final plans shall conform in all important details
with preliminary plans as previously approved, except that the final plan may
cover only a portion of the total subdivision shown in the preliminary plan,
and any conditions specified in the approval of preliminary plans shall be
incorporated in the final plans. Application form and nine copies including one
reproducible copy on a stable base of the final plan in the form of a map or
series of maps on sheets 24sp- x 36sp- drawn to a scale not smaller than 100
feet to the inch. When more than one sheet is required, an index sheet of the
entire subdivision or land development shall be shown on a sheet of the same
size. The final plan shall be drawn in ink on a durable material and shall show
the following:
   (A)   Information required under §
22-402(A). In the case of the waiver of the preliminary plan submission for a
minor subdivision by the Council, the information required under §
22-402(B) shall also be provided;
   (B)   Primary control points, or description and “ties” to such control
points, to which all dimensions, angles, bearings and similar data on the
subdivision plan shall be referred;
   (C)   Location and description of survey monuments;
   (D)   Location, dimensions and purpose of easements;
   (E)   Final tract boundary lines, right-of-way lines of streets, easements
and other rights-of-way, and property lines of residential lots and other sites
with accurate dimension, bearing or deflection angles, and radii, arc and
central angles of all curves; and building setback lines;
   (F)   Statement by owner offering the dedication of any streets, rights-of-
way and any sites for public uses;
   (G)   Locations and types of erosion and sediment control measures;
   (H)   Final plans and profiles of streets showing grades approved by the
Borough Engineer;
   (I)   Cross-sections of streets showing the type of construction, the width
of rights-of-way, width of cartway, curb construction, location and width of
sidewalks and location and size of utility mains as applicable;
   (J)   Plans and profiles of proposed sanitary and/or stormwater sewers, with
grades and pipe sizes indicated, and a plan of any proposed water distribution
system showing pipe sizes and location of valves and fire hydrants as
applicable;
   (K)   Street lighting facilities as applicable;
   (L)   Proposed address numbering system;
   (M)   Certification of the surveyor or engineer certifying to the accuracy
of the survey and plat;
   (N)   Evidence that any required performance guarantee has been deposited
with the borough or that improvements have been completed as required;
   (O)   Certification that all plans are in conformity with all applicable
state, county and borough regulations. In any instances where such plans do not
conform, evidence shall be presented that an exception has been officially
authorized;
   (P)   Provisions for proof that the County Planning Commission has reviewed
the plan, or that 30 days have transpired as noted in §
22-103(C) of this chapter; and
   (Q)   No plan which will require access to a highway under the jurisdiction
of the state’s Department of Transportation shall be finally approved unless
the plan contains a notice that a highway occupancy permit is required pursuant
to § 420 of the Act of June 1, 1945 (P.L. 1242, No. 428), known as the State
Highway Law, before driveway access to a state highway is permitted.
(Ord. 178, passed 7-15-1974, Art. IV, § 404; Ord. 1993-1, passed 2-16-1993, §
1; Ord. 1997-03, passed 3-18-1997)
§ 22-405 FINAL PLANS, PROCEDURES.
   The following procedures shall be followed in the submission and processing
of the final plans for proposed subdivision and land developments.
   (A)   The developer shall submit the required final plan documentation and
fees to the Borough Secretary at least 15 business days prior to a regularly
scheduled meeting of the Planning Commission. An application for final plan
approval may be for all land included in the preliminary plan approval or for a
section thereof. If the final plan is to be submitted in sections or phases,
each section or phase in any residential subdivision or land development,
except for the last section or phase, shall contain a minimum of 25% of the
total number of dwelling units as depicted on the preliminary plan, unless a
lesser percentage is approved by the Borough Council after reviewing a written
request from the developer. In such cases, the applicant shall submit a
tentative schedule for the development of the balance of the tract. The final
plan submission requirements as set forth herein and procedures must be
followed for each subsequent section prior to recording and sale or transfer of
lots within such sections.
   (B)   (1)   The filing, review and action upon the final plan shall proceed
in accordance with §
24-403(C), (D), (E) and (F), Preliminary Plan - Procedures, herein. Approval of
the final plan by the Borough Council constitutes final approval of the land
development as to the character and intensity of development, the layout and
the dimensions of streets, lots and other planned features. This approval binds
the developer to the scheme shown on the final plan.
      (2)   Final plan approval authorizes the developer to proceed with the
recording of the final plan which must be accomplished before the developer can
proceed with the sale of any lots or the construction of buildings or
structures.
   (C)   At the time of approval by the Council, the original final plan
drawings shall be made available for authentication and signing by said bodies.
   (D)   Original approved final plans for the subdivision of land not intended
for development shall be clearly marked “NOT APPROVED FOR DEVELOPMENT” and no
permit shall be issued for the erection or placement thereon of any building or
structure intended for human occupancy (residential or otherwise), nor shall
any improvement under the jurisdiction of this chapter be installed thereon,
unless and until appropriate plans and related documents are submitted and
approved in accordance with the requirements of this Part.
   (E)   No changes, erasures, modifications or revisions may be made on any
final plan after having been formally approved by the Council, unless the plan
is first resubmitted to the borough.
(Ord. 178, passed 7-15-1974, Art. IV, § 405; Ord. 1993-1, passed 2-16-1993, §
1; Ord. 1997-03, passed 3-18-1997)
§ 22-406 COMPLETION OF IMPROVEMENTS OR GUARANTEE THEREOF PREREQUISITE TO FINAL
PLAN APPROVAL.
   The following regulations shall apply in respect to the installation and
completion of improvements.
   (A)   Approval. No plan shall be finally approved unless the streets shown
on such plan have been improved as may be required by this Part, and any
walkways, curbs, gutters, street lights, fire hydrants, shade trees, water
mains, sanitary sewers, storm drains and other improvements as may be required
have been installed in accordance with this Part. In lieu of the completion of
any improvements required as a condition for the final approval of a plan, the
developer shall deposit with the Borough Council a corporate bond or other
financial security in an amount sufficient to cover the costs of any
improvements which may be required. Such financial security may include, among
others, a lending institution’s irrevocable letter of credit or a restrictive
or escrow account in a lending institution. Such bond, or other security, shall
provide for, and secure to the public, the completion of any improvements which
may be required. In the case where development is projected over a period of
years, Borough Council may authorize submission of final plans by sections or
stages of development subject to such requirements or guarantees to
improvements in future sections or stages of development as it finds essential
for the protection of any finally approved section of the development.
      (1)   The amount of financial security or bond to be posted for the
completion of the required improvements shall be equal to 110% of the cost of
the completion estimate as of 90 days following the date scheduled for
completion by the developer.
      (2)   Annually the borough may adjust the amount of financial security by
comparing the actual cost of the improvements which have been completed and the
estimated cost for the completion of the remaining improvements as of the
expiration of the ninetieth day after either the original date scheduled for
completion or a rescheduled date for completion. Subsequent to said adjustment,
the Council may require the developer to post additional security in order to
assure that the financial security equals 110% of the cost of completion. The
procedures for securing the appropriate securities or bonds and related
requirements shall be as outlined in § 509 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, Act 247, as reenacted and amended, being 53 P.S. §§ 10101 et
seq.
      (3)   If financial security has been provided in lieu of the completion
of improvements required as a condition for the final approval of a plan as set
forth in this section, the borough shall not condition the issuance of
building, grading or other permits relating to the erection or placement of
improvements, including buildings, upon the lots or land as depicted upon the
final plan upon actual completion of the improvements depicted upon the
approved final plan. Moreover, if said financial security has been provided,
occupancy permits for any buildings to be erected shall not be withheld
following the improvement of the streets providing access to and from existing
public roads to such building or buildings to a mud-free or otherwise
permanently passable condition, as well as the completion of all other
improvements as depicted upon the approved plan, either upon the lot or lots or
beyond the lot or lots in question if such improvements are necessary for the
reasonable use of or occupancy of the building or buildings.
   (B)   Notice of intent to initiate improvements. Prior to the initiation of
any required improvement, the developer shall notify the Council, in writing,
by certified or registered mail, five days in advance of the date of the
initiation of such improvement and shall send a copy thereof to the Borough
Engineer. Such notification shall include an estimate of the time required to
complete the improvement. All costs incurred in the inspection of improvements
by the Borough Engineer shall be paid by the developer.
   (C)   Release from improvement bond.
      (1)   When the developer has completed all of the necessary and
appropriate improvements, he or she shall notify the Council, in writing, by
certified or registered mail, of the completion of the aforesaid improvements
and shall send a copy thereof to the Borough Engineer. The Council shall,
within ten days after receipt of such notice, direct and authorize the Borough
Engineer to inspect all of the aforesaid improvements. The Borough Engineer
shall, thereupon, file a report, in writing, with the Council, and shall
promptly mail a copy of the same to the developer by certified or registered
mail. The report shall be made and mailed within 30 days after receipt by the
Borough Engineer of the aforesaid authorization from the Council; said report
shall be detailed and shall indicate approval or rejection of said
improvements, either in whole or in part, and if said improvements, or any
portion thereof, shall not be approved or shall be rejected by the Borough
Engineer, said report shall contain a statement of reasons for such nonapproval
or rejection.
      (2)   The Council shall notify the developer, within 15 days of receipt
of the Borough Engineer’s report, in writing by certified or registered mail,
of the action of the Council with relation thereto.
      (3)   If the Council or the Borough Engineer fail to comply with the time
limitation provisions contained herein, all improvements will be deemed to have
been approved and the developer shall be released from all liability, pursuant
to its performance guaranty bond or other security agreement.
      (4)   If any portion of the said improvements shall not be approved or
shall be rejected by the Council, the developer shall proceed to complete the
same and, upon completion, the same procedure of notification, as outlined
herein, shall be followed:
      (5)   Nothing herein, however, shall be construed in limitation of the
developer’s right to contest or question by legal proceedings or otherwise, any
determination of the Borough Council or the Borough Engineer.
      (6)   Where herein reference is made in this Part to the Borough
Engineer, he or she shall either be a staff employee thereof or be engaged as a
consultant thereto.
      (7)   To cover inspection costs, the developer must pay a fee to be
established by the Borough Council. Any unused portion of this fee will be
refunded to the developer upon completion of the inspections.
(Ord. 178, passed 7-15-1974, Art. IV, § 406; Ord. 1993-1, passed 2-16-1993, §
1; Ord. 1997-03, passed 3-18-1997)
§ 22-407 REMEDIES TO EFFECT COMPLETION OF IMPROVEMENTS.
   In the event that any improvements which may be required have not been
installed as provided in this Part or in accordance with the approved final
plan, the Borough Council is hereby granted the power to enforce any corporate
bond, or other security by appropriate legal and equitable remedies. If
proceeds of such bond, or other security are sufficient to pay the cost of
installing or making repairs or corrections to all the improvements covered by
said security, the Borough Council may, at its option, install part of such
improvements in all or part of the subdivision or land development and may
institute appropriate legal or equitable action to recover the monies necessary
to complete the remainder of the improvements. All of the proceeds, whether
resulting from the security or from any legal or equitable action brought
against the developer, or both, shall be used solely for the installation of
the improvements covered by such security, and not for any other purpose.
(Ord. 178, passed 7-15-1974, Art. IV, § 407; Ord. 1993-1, passed 2-16-1993, §
1; Ord. 1997-03, passed 3-18-1997)
§ 22-408 OFFERS OF DEDICATION.
   (A)   The offer to dedicate streets, or other areas or portions of them,
does not impose any duty upon the borough concerning maintenance or improvement
until the proper authorities of the borough have made actual appropriation by
ordinance or resolution or by entry or improvement. No right-of-way, easement,
public grounds, streets or other public improvement shall be accepted by the
borough, authority, utility or other public entity, until such has been
provided and/or installed and approved in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter.
   (B)   If the land is dedicated for a public site and its use for this
purpose is not imminent, the developer may be permitted to dedicate the land
with the privilege of using the surface rights until the borough is ready to
use the land. Such dedication with the temporary privilege of use must be noted
on the final plan.
(Ord. 178, passed 7-15-1974, Art. IV, § 408; Ord. 1993-1, passed 2-16-1993, §
1; Ord. 1997-03, passed 3-18-1997)
§ 22-409 LAND RESERVATION.
   On sites reserved for eventual public acquisition, no building development
is permitted during the period of reservation, said period of time not to
extend more than 18 months without consent of the developer. Such land
reservations shall be noted on the final plan.
(Ord. 178, passed 7-15-1974, Art. IV, § 409; Ord. 1993-1, passed 2-16-1993, §
1; Ord. 1997-03, passed 3-18-1997)
§ 22-410 EFFECT OF PLAN RECORDING ON DEDICATION AND RESERVATION.
   Recording the final plan after approval of the Borough Council has the
effect of an irrevocable offer to:
   (A)   Dedicate all streets and other public ways to public use;
   (B)   Dedicate all public areas to public use; and
   (C)   Reserve for possible future public acquisition such additional areas
as may be required by the borough.
(Ord. 178, passed 7-15-1974, Art. IV, § 410; Ord. 1993-1, passed 2-16-1993, §
1; Ord. 1997-03, passed 3-18-1997)
§ 22-411 MAINTENANCE GUARANTEE.
   Where the Borough Council accepts dedication of all or some of the required
improvements following completion, the Borough Council may require the posting
of financial security to secure structural integrity of said improvements as
well as the functioning of said improvements in accordance with the design and
specifications as depicted on the final plan for a term not to exceed 18 months
from the date of acceptance of dedication. Said financial security shall be of
the same type as otherwise required in §
22-406 with regard to installation of such improvements, and the amount of the
financial security shall not exceed 15% of the actual cost of installation of
said improvements. Defective improvements include any defect in material or
workmanship that was latent in character and not discernible at the time of
final inspection or acceptance by the borough and/or any damage to improvements
by reason of the settling of ground, base or foundation thereof. However, any
damage to the street surface caused by tire chains, snow removal equipment or
utility cuts by others are not the responsibility of the developer.
(Ord. 178, passed 7-15-1974, Art. IV, § 411; Ord. 1993-1, passed 2-16-1993, §
1; Ord. 1997-03, passed 3-18-1997)
§ 22-412 RECORDING OF FINAL PLAN.
   Within 90 days after the date of final approval or the date the approval of
the borough is noted on the plan, whichever is later, the final plan shall be
recorded in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of the county. Within ten days
thereafter, the developer shall furnish the Borough Council a Recorder’s
certificate upon a copy of the plan certifying that said plan is properly
recorded. The developer shall also furnish the Council a reproducible copy of
the final plan on a stable base with recording data included.
   (A)   After the subdivision or land development plan is officially recorded,
the streets, public grounds and other public improvements shown thereon shall
be considered a part of the official map of the borough.
   (B)   Streets, public grounds, easements and other public improvements may
be offered for dedication to the borough by formal notation on the final plan.
   (C)   Streets and public grounds shown on a recorded final plan shall be
deemed private until offered for dedication to the borough and accepted by
ordinance or resolution; or until condemned for use by the public.
   (D)   Upon completion of the streets and the like, the developer shall
petition the Council to accept or adopt. If such petition is not presented
within a reasonable time after completion, Council may adopt the streets as
improved on the basis of the offer of dedication on the plan at any time after
30 days notice to the developer.
   (E)   The recording of the plan shall not constitute grounds for assessment
increases until such time as lots are sold or improvements are installed on the
land included within the subject plan.
(Ord. 178, passed 7-15-1974, Art. IV, § 412; Ord. 1993-1, passed 2-16-1993, §
1; Ord. 1997-03, passed 3-18-1997)
§ 22-413 FEES.
   (A)   The Borough Council shall by resolution create a schedule of filing
fees to be paid by the applicant at the time of plan submission to defray the
cost of administering and processing plans. Filing fees shall be required for
the following:
      (1)   Preliminary plan;
      (2)   Final plan;
      (3)   Land development plan;
      (4)   Mobile home park permit;
      (5)   County Planning Commission; and
      (6)   Recording fee, if plan is to be recorded by the borough.
   (B)   In addition to such filing fees, the developer shall pay the cost of:
      (1)   Reviewing the subdivision or land development plan and engineering
details;
      (2)   Inspecting the site for conformance to survey;
      (3)   Preparing cost estimates of required improvements during
installation;
      (4)   Inspection of required improvements during installation;
      (5)   Final inspection for completion of installation of required
improvements;
      (6)   Legal services necessary for the processing of the land development
plan;
      (7)   Any tapping fees and/or connection charge for connection to a
municipal water system; and
      (8)   Any tapping fees and/or any required charge for reservation of
sewage capacity in a municipal sewage system.
   (C)   These costs will be billed to the developer by the borough. No
building permits shall be issued nor shall subdivision or land development
plans be approved for any parcel of land for which fees as outlined are
outstanding.
(Ord. 178, passed 7-15-1974, Art. IV; Ord. 1993-1, passed 2-16-1993, § 1; Ord.
1997-03, passed 3-18-1997)
PART 5: DESIGN STANDARDS AND REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
Section
   
22-500   General
   
22-501   Blocks and lots
   
22-502   Streets, curbs and sidewalks
   
22-503   Utilities
   
22-504   Monuments and markers
   
22-505   Local recreation sites
   
22-506   Site planning requirements
§ 22-500 GENERAL.
   (A)   Suitability of land. Land subject to hazards of life, health or
property as may arise from fire, floods, severe stormwater runoff, disease or
other dangers shall not be subdivided for development or developed for purposes
susceptible to such hazards unless they have been eliminated or the subdivision
or land development plan provides adequate safeguards against such.
   (B)   Physiography considerations. The standards of this Part may be
increased, or the modification of the design of a proposed subdivision or land
development may be required, on the recommendation of the Borough Engineer and/
or the designated borough planning consultant, when such is deemed necessary as
a result of topographic and other natural or human-made physical features
within or adjoining a particular site to assure public safety, health and
welfare; the provision of public services; and the maintenance of public
facilities.
   (C)   Natural and historic features. Every measure shall be taken to ensure,
insofar as possible, the preservation of natural and historic features, areas
and structures determined to be worthy of such preservation by the Council and
to ensure public access to such where appropriate.
   (D)   Coordination of development.
      (1)   The design of proposed subdivision and land developments shall be
coordinated with existing nearby development and physiography to that the
entire area may be developed harmoniously.
      (2)   Each land development plan shall describe the proposed exterior
building materials, or range of materials, for each building facade that is
visible from a public street, residential district boundary, residence or
residential use. In addition, the following guidelines must be achieved.
         (a)   Long, unbroken facades are discouraged.
         (b)   Deed restrictions shall be imposed to require that at least 50%
of the front facades of buildings that face a public street, residential
district boundary, residence or residential use be constructed of glass and/or
decorative masonry (such as brick). The intent is to allow the use of metal,
cinder block and other materials on the nonpublic street and nonresidential
facades of buildings, and allow 50% on the facades fronting on public streets,
residential districts, residences or residential uses.
         (c)   The front entrances of buildings should be placed relatively
close to a public street to promote pedestrian access.
         (d)   New or expanded loading areas that accommodate two or more
tractor- trailer trucks shall be located and landscaped, or screened by
decorative masonry walls, in a manner that will minimize their visibility from
any public street, residential district or primarily residential use. To the
maximum extent feasible, new loading docks for tractor-trailer trucks shall be
located along the rear facade of buildings along a public street.
      (3)   For the purpose of this subsection (D), the word FACADE shall mean
the front or principle face of a building which faces any public roadway.
Buildings existing on corner lots or other lots facing two or more roadways
shall, for the purpose of this chapter, contain multiple facades, one for each
public roadway for which the building faces.
   (E)   Conformance. The design of proposed subdivisions and land developments
shall conform to applicable borough and county comprehensive plan elements,
applicable development regulation, or official map and to any applicable
regulation of the Commonwealth.
(Ord. 178, passed 7-15-1974, Art. V, § 500; Ord. 1997-03, passed 3-18-1997;
Ord. 2008-3, passed 4-9-2008)
§ 22-501 BLOCKS AND LOTS.
   (A)   General layout.
      (1)   (a)   In general the lengths, depths, and shapes of blocks and lots
must be determined with regard to:
            1.   Provision of adequate building sites suitable to the special
need of the type of use contemplated;
            2.   Zoning requirements as to lot sizes, dimensions, yards and
other open areas;
            3.   Needs for convenient access, circulation, control, safety of
street traffic; and
            4.   Limitations and opportunities of topography.
         (b)   Normally, block length may not exceed 1,600 feet nor be less
than 500 feet. In blocks exceeding 1,200 feet in length, a pedestrian crosswalk
having minimum width of ten feet and an all-weather surface at least five feet
wide, shall be provided. Blocks shall be wide enough for two tiers of lots,
except where reverse frontage lots are necessary and in the case of “cluster”
layouts.
      (2)   In nonresidential areas, the block and lot layout must be designed
with consideration of site conditions:
         (a)   To permit the most efficient arrangement of space for present
use and future expansion; and
         (b)   To permit adequate, safe worker and patron access, circulation
and parking as well as loading and unloading.
   (B)   Access.
      (1)   Every lot shall abut a public street.
      (2)   No lot may have a primary access onto an alley or street with a
cartway width less than 20 feet.
   (C)   Through lots. Double frontage lots shall not be platted, except that
where desired along limited access and other arterial highways, lots may face
on an interior street and back on such thoroughfares to which direct access
shall not be permitted.
   (D)   Lot lines. Lot lines shall be approximately at right angles or radial
to the street line so long as reasonably shaped lots result.
   (E)   Corner lots. Corner lots shall be proportionally larger than other
lots in order to meet required building setbacks from both streets and such
shall be provided with radius corners or diagonal cutoffs substantially
concentric with or parallel to the chord of the required cartway radius
corners.
   (F)   Building setback lines. The building setback lines shall conform to
the requirements of the borough zoning ordinance (
Chapter 27 of this code of ordinances) provided, however, that no building line
shall be less than 60 feet from the centerline of any existing street
classified as a collector under the borough’s comprehensive plan, which is a
component of the Northern York County Regional Plan. The straight alignment of
dwellings along established minimum setback lines is not recommended,
therefore, varying setbacks shall be encouraged.
   (G)   Street address. Address numbers shall be assigned to each lot by the
Borough Manager in accordance with Chapter 4, Buildings, Part 1, §
4-101.
(Ord. 178, passed 7-15-1974, Art. V § 501; Ord. 1997-03, passed 3-18-1997)
§ 22-502 STREETS, CURBS AND SIDEWALKS.
   (A)   General.
      (1)   Proposed streets shall be planned with regard to topographic
conditions (diagonally across contours where slopes are steep); public safety
and convenience in terms of vehicular and pedestrian movement, maintenance, and
fire protection; probable traffic volumes; and existing and proposed uses of
land on abutting properties.
      (2)   The proposed street system shall extend existing or recorded
streets at the same width, but in no case at less than the required minimum
width.
      (3)   Where, in the opinion of the Council, it is desirable to provide
for street access to adjoining property, streets shall be extended by
dedication to the boundary of such property.
      (4)   New minor streets shall be so designed as to discourage through
traffic, but the developer shall give adequate consideration to provisions for
the extension and continuation of major and collector streets into and from
adjoining properties.
      (5)   Where a subdivision or land development abuts or is traversed by an
existing street of improper width or alignment, the dedication of land
sufficient to widen the street or correct the alignment is recommended.
      (6)   Private streets (streets not to be offered for dedication) are
prohibited.
      (7)   Whenever the proposed subdivision or land development contains or
is adjacent to an arterial highway, provision for a marginal access street may
be required. Rear service alleys, reverse frontage lots or such other treatment
which will provide protection for abutting properties, reduction in the number
of intersections with major streets, and separation of local and through
traffic may also be required.
      (8)   Where the lots in a subdivision are large enough for resubdivision,
or where a portion of tract is not subdivided, suitable access to these areas
shall be provided.
      (9)   Proposed streets which are aligned with existing streets shall bear
the name of the existing street. In the event a proposed street is not aligned
with an existing street, it shall not bear a name similar to any existing
street located within the municipality and/or the same postal service area,
irrespective of the suffix: street, avenue, boulevard, drive, place, court and
the like.
      (10)   Dead-end streets shall be prohibited, except when designed and
constructed as permanent cul-de-sac streets, or as stubs to permit future
street extension into adjoining tracts (in such cases, a temporary turn-around
having at least a stabilized surface and an outside diameter of 80 feet shall
be provided). In the design and construction of such streets, an area for snow
disposal must be provided. Alternative designs to the circular cul-de-sac
turnaround will be considered, provided that they meet the requirements of Act
655, being 53 P.S. §§ 10101 et seq. for obtaining liquid fuels tax allocations.
      (11)   Half or partial streets are permitted only where needed to
complete existing half streets.
      (12)   Reserve strips, including those controlling access to streets, are
prohibited except along legal limited access thoroughfares or along other
arterial streets when approved by the borough.
      (13)   Design standards for arterial streets are to be determined after
consultation with the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation. In any case
the design criteria for such streets shall not be less than as required herein
for collector streets.
   (B)   Street design standards.
Street Type Collectors Minor Streets Cul-De-Sacs 2 Marginal Service Drives
                                                   Access
Street Type    Collectors Minor Streets Cul-De-Sacs 2 Marginal  Service Drives
                                                      Access
Minimum right- 60 ft.     52 ft.        52 ft.        36—52 ft30 ft.
of-way width
Minimum        40 ft.     32 ft.        32 ft.        26 ft.    24 ft.
pavement width
Maximum grade  7%3        10%4          10%4          10%4      12%4
Minimum grade  0.75%      0.75%         0.75%         0.75%     0.75%
Minimum radius
of curve at    300 ft.    150 ft.       100 ft.       100 ft.
centerline1
Minimum
tangent length 100 ft.    -             -             -         -
between curves
Minimum
stopping sight 275 ft.    200 ft.       200 ft.       -         -
distance
NOTES:
1   Where street lines deflect from each other more than ten degrees.
2   Cul-de-sac streets shall be at least 250 feet in length and may not exceed
1,500 feet in length; however, length greater than 500 feet shall be avoided
whenever possible. Such streets must be provided with a paved turnaround with
a minimum diameter of 80 feet to the outside edge of pavement and 100 feet to
the legal right-of-way. Dead end streets with no turnaround are prohibited. In
the design and construction of such streets, an area for snow disposal must be
provided. In addition, alternative designs to the circular cul-de-sac
turnaround will be considered, provided that they meet the requirements of Act
655 for obtaining liquid fuels tax allocations.
3   May be increased by 1% for grades not more than 300 feet long when
recommended by the Borough Engineer.
4   May be increased by 2% for grades not more than 150 feet long when
recommended by the Borough Engineer.
 
   (C)   Intersection design standards.
Type Intersection Arterial with Collector with Collector with Minor with Minor
                  Collector     Collector      Minor
Type             Arterial with Collector with Collector with Minor with Minor
Intersection     Collector     Collector      Minor
Maximum number
of intersecting  2             2              2              2
streets at each
junction
Minimum distance
between          800 ft.       500 ft.        500 ft. B/L    500 ft. B/L
centerlines of
intersections
                                             250 ft. B/W    250 ft. B/W
Minimum
centerline
offset of        400 ft.       250 ft.        125 ft.        125 ft.
adjacent
intersections
Angle of
intersection of  90 degrees    90 degrees     75—105 degree75—105 degrees
street
centerlines
Length and
maximum grade of
approaches to
intersections    100 ft./4%    75 ft./4%      75 ft./4%      50 ft./4%
where general
grade is 6% or
more
   (Measured from the intersecting street lines)
Minimum radius   35 ft.        30 ft.         25 ft.         20 ft.
of curbs
Minimum
intersection     220 ft.       130 ft.        130 ft.        130 ft.
sight distance
along centerline
Intersection
clear sight      200 ft.       130 ft.        130 ft.        130 ft.
distance along
centerline
Intersection
clear sight
triangle - each  150 ft.       75 ft.         75 ft.         75 ft.
centerline
length
B/L - along                    B/W - along
block leg                      block width
 
   (D)   Street surfacing. Streets must be surfaced to the grades and
dimensions drawn on plans, profiles and cross-sections submitted by the
developer and approved by the borough. Before paving the street the developer
must install required utilities and provide, where necessary adequate
subsurface drainage for the streets. The pavement base and wearing surface must
be constructed according to borough specifications. In addition the following
requirements shall apply.
      (1)   Urban or suburban developments. All street construction materials
and methods shall be in accordance with the state’s Department of
Transportation Specifications Publication 408, as amended. In addition, all
streets shall be constructed in accordance with any additional standards
required by the Borough Engineer, when in the opinion of the Engineer
conditions such as traffic volume, or expected weight of proposed traffic
justify alternate specifications.
         (a)   Minor streets and collector streets.
            1.   Subgrade.
               a.   Remove topsoil, organic or otherwise unstable material.
Material and compaction used for fill shall be specified on the plan and shall
be subject to approval of the Borough Engineer. Any fill shall be constructed
in accordance with PennDOT Publication 408.
               b.   Fine grade and roll subgrade with borough approved rolling
equipment.
               c.   Following compaction the surface tolerance shall be
checked. Irregularities of more than 0.05 feet shall be corrected to the
satisfaction of the Borough Engineer.
               d.   Where conditions dictate, and as recommended by the Borough
Engineer, a geofabric shall be installed on top of finished subgrade. Geofabric
materials and installation shall be as recommended by the Borough Engineer.
               e.   Any springy or spongy areas shall be provided with a proper
underdrain system, which is connected to the storm sewer system.
               f.   Subgrade that has been disturbed by trenching shall be
backfilled and compacted in eight-inch layers and inspected by the Borough
Engineer or his or her designated agent.
               g.   Subgrade shall be inspected by the Borough Engineer or his
or her designated agent prior to the placement of the subbase course. This may
include appropriate compaction testing where deemed to be necessary by the
Engineer.
            2.   Subbase course.
               a.   Subbase course shall consist of a minimum of six inches of
PA 2A coarse aggregate. Depth shall be measured in place after compaction.
Coarse aggregate shall be in accordance with PennDOT Publication 408 as most
recently amended and shall be supplied from a certified PennDOT supplier.
Compaction shall be with borough approved equipment.
               b.   Subbase course shall be tested by digging one test hole for
each 3,000 square yards or as directed by the Borough Engineer.
            3.   Base course.
               a.   Base course shall consist of a minimum of 3% inches of
bituminous concrete base course (BCBC). Depth shall be measured in place after
compaction. BCBC shall be in accordance with PennDOT Publication 408 as most
recently amended and shall be supplied by a PennDOT certified supplier.
               b.   Base course shall be tested by drilling three six-inch test
cores per 1,000 square yards of pavement or as directed by the Borough
Engineer. Pavement more than one-fourth inch deficient shall be repaired to the
satisfaction of the borough.
            4.   Binder course.
               a.   Binder course shall consist of a minimum of two inches of
PA Type ID2 binder or superpave equivalent mixture. Depth shall be measured in
place after compaction binder course shall be in accordance with PennDOT
Publication 408 as most recently amended and shall be supplied by a PennDOT
certified supplier.
               b.   Binder course shall be tested by drilling three six-inch
test cores per 1,000 square yards of pavement or as directed by the Borough
Engineer. Pavement more than one-fourth inch deficient shall be repaired to the
satisfaction of the borough.
            5.   Pavement surface course.
               a.   No final wearing course shall be placed on streets which
are to be dedicated to the borough until 80% of proposed building construction
is complete or as otherwise determined by the borough following consultation
with the Engineer.
               b.   Pavement wearing course shall consist of one and one-half
inches of PA Type ID2 wearing. Thickness shall be measured in place after
compaction. ID2 wearing course shall be in accordance with PennDOT Publication
408 as most recently amended and shall be supplied by a PennDOT certified
supplier.
               c.   Surface course shall be sealed wherever it comes in contact
with another structure (i.e., curb, manhole, inlet and the like). This work
shall be done in accordance with the specifications set forth in PennDOT
Publication 408 as most recently amended.
               d.   Compaction shall be with borough approved rolling
equipment.
               e.   Quality control.
                  1.   Remedy irregularities in the base course prior to
placement of wearing surface. Base course surface must be cleaned and tack
coated prior to placement of wearing surface.
                  2.   As directed by the Borough Engineer drill three six-inch
test cores per 1,000 square yards of pavement. Pavement more than one-fourth
inch deficient shall be repaired to the satisfaction of the Borough Engineer.
            6.   Minimum alternate standards. Alternate pavement types and
depths will be considered pending review and approval of the Borough Engineer.
The minimum alternate standards shall be as follows:
               a.   Sub-base course: eight inch PennDOT 2A coarse aggregate;
               b.   Binder course: three inch PennDOT ID2 binder; and
               c.   Wearing course: one and one-half inch PennDOT ID2 wearing.
         (b)   Arterial streets. The depth and type of materials shall be as
recommended by the borough following consultation with Pennsylvania Department
of Transportation.
      (2)   Inspection. The borough shall inspect roadway construction to
determine compliance with standards of the chapter and conformance to approved
plans. At a minimum each course shall be approved prior to placement of each
successive course.
      (3)   Reservation of right. The borough shall reserve the right to
require additional depth of materials or to deviate from type of material
specified where, in the opinion of the Borough Engineer, it is necessary to
withstand projected traffic loads or adverse environmental conditions.
      (4)   Binder. When required by the borough to protect the pavement course
from potential excessive damage, the wearing course shall only be applied
following improvement of 80% of the lots which the street will service or as
otherwise determined by the Borough Engineer. In this case, the borough may
require an alternate type of binder course to be used.
      (5)   Subsurface drainage systems. The borough may, when deemed necessary
by the Borough Engineer, require the installation of subsurface drainage
systems which may consist of subgrade and/or subbase drains. Construction
standards shall be in accordance with PennDOT Publication 408 and Roadway
Construction Standards. This requirement may occur as a result of field
inspections or compaction testing during construction.
   (E)   Curbs. Curbs shall be provided and constructed in accordance with
borough ordinances and/or specifications governing the same.
   (F)   Gutters. Gutters shall be provided and constructed in accordance with
borough ordinances and/or specifications governing the same.
   (G)   Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be provided and shall be constructed in
accordance with borough ordinances and/or specifications governing the same.
   (H)   Street signs and lighting. Street name signs shall be placed at all
intersections and, a street lighting system shall be installed. The design and
location of signs and light fixtures shall be as approved by the Council.
   (I)   Street lighting installation. Where electric service is supplied by
underground methods, the subdivision shall provide and install the facilities
for a street lighting system consisting of cables, ducts and light standards.
Such system will comply with the specifications of the appropriate public
utility and be approved by the borough so that upon dedication of the
improvements, the borough can enter into a street lighting contract with said
public utility.
   (J)   Additional street design standards. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the
following additional design standards shall be utilized in the MU-C Mixed Use
Center District:
      (1)   Minimum planting strip width in right-of-way: five feet;
      (2)   Minimum sidewalk width in the right-of-way: five feet; and
      (3)   Street tree placement shall be at 40-foot intervals.
(Ord. 178, passed 7-15-1974, Art. V, § 502; Ord. 1997-03, passed 3-18-1997;
Ord. 2002-2, passed 5-9-2000, § 2)
§ 22-503 UTILITIES.
   (A)   Water supply.
      (1)   Evidence that the subdivision or land development is to be supplied
by a certificated public utility, a bona fide cooperative association of lot
owners, or by a municipal corporation, authority or utility shall be submitted
to the Council. A copy of a certificate of public convenience from the
Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission or an application for such certificate,
a cooperative agreement, or a commitment or agreement to serve the area in
question, whichever is appropriate, shall be acceptable.
      (2)   Fire hydrants shall be installed as a integral part of any common
water supply system in accordance with Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection standards and shall be reviewed by the local fire company with
jurisdiction.
      (3)   Plans for the installation of the water mains shall be prepared
with the cooperation of the borough or water supply agency, and approved by its
engineer. Evidence that the subdivision or land development is to be supplied
by a certificated public utility, a bona fide cooperative association of lot
owners, or by a municipal corporation, authority or utility shall be submitted
to the Council. A copy of a certificate of public convenience from the
Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission or an application for such certificate,
a cooperative agreement, or a commitment or agreement to serve the area in
question, whichever is appropriate, shall be acceptable.
   (B)   Sanitary sewerage.
      (1)   The subdivision or land development shall be provided with a
complete sanitary sewerage collection system in accordance with this code.
      (2)   Plans for the installation of sewer mains shall be prepared with
the cooperation of the borough sanitary sewerage agency and approved by its
Engineer. Certification of such approval shall be submitted to the Council.
Upon the completion of the system, one copy of all related plans and drawings
shall be filed with the borough.
   (C)   Stormwater drainage.
      (1)   Storm sewers. Storm sewers separate from any sanitary sewer system
shall be installed when, in the opinion of the Council, such is deemed
necessary to provide proper drainage for the subdivision or land development
with such system subject to the approval of the Council. When adequate existing
storm sewers are readily accessible, the developer shall connect his or her
stormwater facilities to such existing sewers, subject to the approval of the
authority having jurisdiction over the existing system.
      (2)   Open drainage ways. When open drainage ways are furnished for the
collection and/or disposal of stormwater, the Council shall review the design
of such in relation to adequacy, safety, erosion and stagnation.
         (a)   Prior written agreements shall be obtained by the developer for
any drainage ways (or storm sewers) which are to discharge upon another
property from the affected adjoining owners.
         (b)   Easements of sufficient width shall be established for any
drainageway not located within a public right-of-way.
   (D)   Utility line installation. Electric, telephone and all other utility
facilities shall be installed underground unless in the opinion of the Borough
Council special conditions require otherwise. The subdivider shall also be
required, prior to borough approval, to obtain a letter from the appropriate
public utility confirming that the subdivider has entered into an agreement to
provide for an underground electric system in accordance with the Pennsylvania
Public Utility Commission Investigation Docket #99, as amended from time to
time, or has obtained a waiver from said Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission
to allow overhead electric facilities.
   (E)   Utility easements.
      (1)   Width; location. When easements are required for any utility
serving a subdivision or land development, they must be a minimum of 25 feet
wide for underground utility lines and 20 feet wide for others, and must, to
the fullest extent possible, be adjacent to, or centered on, rear or side lot
lines.
      (2)   Gas lines. All gas lines must be installed in compliance with all
applicable federal, state and local codes. The minimum distance from a natural
gas line to a dwelling unit or other structure must be as required by the
applicable transmission or distributing company.
      (3)   Petroleum lines. Between a proposed dwelling unit or other
structure and the centerline of a petroleum or petroleum products transmission
line which may traverse the subdivision or land development, there must be a
minimum distance of 100 feet measured in the shortest distance.
(Ord. 178, passed 7-15-1974, Art. V, § 503; Ord. 1993-1, passed 2-16-1993; Ord.
1997-03, passed 3-18-1997)
§ 22-504 MONUMENTS AND MARKERS.
   (A)   Material and size. Monuments and markers shall be constructed as
follows:
 
                Construction                     Minimum Size
Monument         Concrete or stone                4 in. x 4 in. x 36 in.
Monument housing In conformance with borough
                 standards
Marker           Iron pipes or iron or steel bars 36 in. x 3/4 in. diameter
 
   (B)   Placement; marking. Monuments and markers must be placed by a surveyor
so that the scored or marked point coincides exactly with the point of
intersection of the lines being monumented. They must be set so that the top of
the monument or marker is level with the surface of the surrounding ground.
Monuments must be marked on top with a copper or brass dowel. Each lot shall
have at least one monument.
   (C)   Monument; location of. Monuments must be set:
      (1)   At the intersection of lines forming angles in the boundaries of
the tract;
      (2)   At the intersection of street right-of-way which such are
perpendicular or angular; or at the beginning and ending of street intersection
right-of-way curves or chord diagonals when such are so formed;
      (3)   At such other points and locations as determined necessary by the
Borough Engineer; and
      (4)   One monument per two lots shall be placed on a common property
line.
   (D)   Markers; location of. Markers must be set:
      (1)   At the beginning and ending of curves along street property lines
if not monumented;
      (2)   At points where lot lines intersect curves either front or rear;
      (3)   At angles in property lines of lots; and
      (4)   At all other lot corners.
   (E)   Removal. Any monuments or markers that are removed must be replaced by
a surveyor at the expense of the person removing them.
(Ord. 178, passed 7-15-1974, Art. V § 504; Ord. 1997-03, passed 3-18-1997)
§ 22-505 LOCAL RECREATION SITES.
   In any proposal that will result in the creation of five or more new
dwelling units, the applicant or developer shall either dedicate land to the
borough, reserve land for private recreational facilities that will be
permanently devoted to recreation and adequately secured for such use,
construct recreation facilities, pay a fee in lieu of dedication or
construction, or provide some combination thereof for recreational purposes, in
accordance with the following standards.
   (A)   The land to be dedicated or reserved must be of suitable size,
dimension, topography, access, location and general character for the proposed
use. Such land shall also be readily accessible to all existing and proposed
inhabitants of the development.
   (B)   The amount of land to be dedicated or reserved shall be not less than
0.05 acres per dwelling unit as determined on the final subdivision or land
development plan.
   (C)   Where the application of the area standards of subsection (B) above
would result in a site too small to be useable, or where there is not an
identified need for additional land for recreational purposes in the area of
the borough in which the subdivision or land development is located, or where
the applicant and Borough Council agree for any other reason, the applicant or
developer shall pay to the borough a fee per dwelling unit established annually
by resolution of the Borough Council for the purpose of providing park or
recreational facilities accessible to the development.
   (D)   In lieu of such fees, the applicant and Borough Council may agree that
the applicant will construct recreational facilities at an existing borough
recreational site accessible to the development. The applicant and the Borough
Council may also agree in a written agreement, upon any combination of
dedication of site, construction of facilities and/or payment of a fee that
will meet the intent of the Northern York County Regional Plan; the 2005
Carroll Township/Dillsburg Borough Comprehensive Recreation, Park, and Open
Space Plan; and this chapter.
   (E)   The fee in lieu of dedication or facilities to be constructed shall be
substantially equal in value to the value of the land that would be dedicated
if the standards of subsection (B) above were applied and shall be based on the
prevailing average value of development land in the borough.
   (F)   A fee established by this section shall be paid to the borough prior
to recording of the final plan. Such fee, upon its receipt by the borough,
shall be deposited in an interesting bearing account, clearly identifying the
specific recreational facilities for which the fee was received. The interest
earned on the account shall become funds of that account. Funds from such
account shall be expended only in properly allocable portions of the cost
incurred to construct the specific recreation facilities for which the funds
were collected.
   (G)   Funds collected under this section shall be expended within three
years of the date of receipt, or the borough shall refund such fee, together
with interest accumulated thereon, to the developer who remitted that payment,
upon receipt from the developer of a written request for refund.
(Ord. 178, passed 7-15-1974, Art. V, § 505; Ord. 1993-6, passed 10-19-1993, §
13; Ord. 1997-03, passed 3-18-1997)
§ 22-506 SITE PLANNING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Accessibility. Generally, the development of sites not located on a
public thoroughfare of sufficient width and alignment in respect to the traffic
to be generated is discouraged. When proposed subdivisions or land developments
are not located directly upon an adequate thoroughfare, the developer may be
required to participate with the borough, through negotiation, in the
improvement of the service road between the site and the nearest adequate
thoroughfare as a condition precedent to final plan approval. Where necessary
to access to public or common land, a pedestrian and/or limited use vehicular
easement shall be provided with a width of no less than ten feet for pedestrian
and no less than 12 feet for vehicular traffic. Additional width may be
required by the borough depending upon the purpose and use of the easement.
   (B)   Grading. In order to provide more suitable sites for building and
other uses, improve surface drainage and control erosion, the following
requirements shall be met.
      (1)   All lots, tracts or parcels shall be graded to provide proper
drainage away from buildings and dispose of the runoff without ponding, and all
land within a development shall be graded to drain and dispose of surface water
without ponding, except where other arrangements are approved by the Council.
      (2)   All drainage provisions shall be of such design to adequately
handle the surface runoff and carry it to the nearest suitable outlet such as a
curbed street, storm drain or natural watercourse. Where drainage swales are
used to divert surface waters away from buildings, they shall be sodded or
planted and shall be of such slope, shape and size as to conform with the
requirements of the borough.
      (3)   Concentration of surface water runoff shall only be permitted in
swales or watercourses.
      (4)   Excavations and fills.
         (a)   Cut and fill slopes shall not be steeper than 2:1 for cuts and
3:1 for fills (horizontal:vertical). A steeper slope may be permitted for
special conditions, if stabilized by a retaining wall or cribbing and approved
by the Borough Engineer.
         (b)   Adequate provisions shall be made to prevent surface water from
damaging the cut face of excavations or the sloping surfaces of fills.
         (c)   Cut and fills shall not endanger adjoining property.
         (d)   Fill shall be placed and compacted so as to minimize sliding or
erosion of the soil.
         (e)   Fills shall not encroach on natural watercourses or constructed
channels.
         (f)   Fills placed adjacent to natural watercourses or constructed
channels shall have suitable protection against erosion during periods of
flooding.
      (5)   Grading will not be done in such a way so as to divert water onto
the property of another landowner without the expressed consent of the borough
and the affected landowner.
      (6)   During grading operations, necessary measures for dust control will
be exercised.
      (7)   Top soil shall be preserved and redistributed as cover and shall be
expeditiously planted with perennial grass or ground cover.
      (8)   Tree guards during construction and grading, and limitations as to
cuts and fills, both temporary and permanent near trees shall be provided as
necessary to give reasonable assurance of their continued healthy growth.
      (9)   Grading equipment will not be allowed to cross live streams.
Provision will be made for the installation of culverts or bridges.
   (C)   Pedestrian circulation.
      (1)   Pedestrian walkways shall be physically separated from all streets
and, insofar as possible, from vehicle circulation ways within nonresidential
developments.
      (2)   Parking lots shall be designed so as to minimize the necessity for
pedestrians to walk within and across vehicle circulation ways.
      (3)   Commercial developments should be designed so as to allow
pedestrians to browse and pause in areas removed and otherwise protected from
vehicular circulation and parking areas.
      (4)   Insofar as possible, common open areas and other residential
service areas shall be located at the interior of dwelling sites to minimize
the necessity for pedestrians to cross streets.
   (D)   Storage areas.
      (1)   Outdoor storage areas of any type should be located to the rear of
structures and should be screened by natural vegetation or fencing.
      (2)   In group developments, it is recommended that remote, screened
storage areas be provided for items infrequently used such as recreation
vehicles.
   (E)   Structure orientation.
      (1)   Structure sites should be grouped whenever possible as such
provides larger, more usable open space without decreasing the overall density
of development.
      (2)   Extra building setbacks are recommended at all street intersections
in order to increase sight distances and to make the presence of an
intersection more apparent.
      (3)   Insofar as possible, commercial structures should be relatively
central in respect to their parking areas in order to minimize requiring
walking distance for safety and convenience. (Protected pedestrian accessways
shall be provided in commercial developments adjacent to residential
neighborhoods.)
   (F)   Vegetation.
      (1)   Conservations. Development shall be planned so as to minimize the
removal of existing trees, shrubs and ground cover and to minimize the amount
of land covered by structures and paving.
      (2)   Noise control. Street trees along arterial and collector streets in
residential areas are recommended to absorb traffic noise.
      (3)   Screening. Wherever natural screening is being provided to meet a
screening requirement of the borough zoning ordinance (Chapter 27 of this code
of ordinances) such shall consist of 50% evergreen or evergreen type hedges and
50% shrubs interplanted and of a variety and size at the time of planting that
such will attain a height of at least six feet within three years thereafter
and spaced at intervals of not more than four feet. Furthermore, subdivision
and land development plans shall provide such screening:
         (a)   Where commercial or industrial uses abut residential uses;
         (b)   Where residential uses abut any railroad or limited access
highway, or any other arterial highway in the case of reverse frontage or where
marginal or rear access is provided;
         (c)   Around all open sides of any common utility yard and any outdoor
equipment or refuse storage area in group residential developments; and
         (d)   Elsewhere as deemed necessary by the Council.
      (4)   Windbreaks. The use of planting rows to serve as windbreaks to
control the drifting of snow across public and private thoroughfares as well as
for general comfort is recommended.
      (5)   Street trees. Street trees of a caliper not less than one and one-
half inches shall be planted 40 to 60 feet apart. The location of street trees
shall be as deemed, appropriate by the Council but in no case shall be planted
within the right-of-way. The provision of street trees may be waived where, in
the opinion of the Council, sufficient trees exist and will remain. In no
circumstances will any of the following trees be permitted either to remain or
to be planted as street trees:
         (a)   Poplars; all varieties;
         (b)   Willows; all varieties;
         (c)   White or silver maple (Acer Saccharinum);
         (d)   Aspen; all varieties;
         (e)   Common black locust;
         (f)   Norway spruce; and
         (g)   Bradford pear.
      (6)   Obstructions to vision. No bushes or shrubs exceeding 30 inches in
height, or at such lesser height which due to ground elevations would obstruct
the vision of motorists, shall be permitted within any required clear-sight-
triangle nor within ten feet of the right-of-way line adjacent to access
drives.
   (G)   Vehicles provisions.
      (1)   Driveway/access drives. Whenever required and/or provided under the
provisions of this chapter or the borough zoning ordinance (Chapter 27 of this
code of ordinances), all driveways/access drives shall be designed according to
the following standards.
         (a)   Layout. Except in the case of single-family and two-family
dwellings, the general layout shall be such that there will be no need for
motorists to back into public rights-of-way.
         (b)   Width. Access drives for multi-family dwellings and
nonresidential uses shall not be less than 18 feet in width nor exceed 35 feet
in width within 12 feet of the street right-of-way line, excepting as increased
by the curb radii.
         (c)   Surfacing. All driveways/access drives shall be paved with a
concrete or bituminous paving material.
         (d)   Number. The number of driveways/access drives shall not exceed
one per lot on any street frontage. The Council may grant permission for
additional driveways/access drives where required to meet exceptional
circumstances and where frontage of unusual length exists.
         (e)   Location. Driveways/access drives shall not cross the street
right-of-way lines:
            1.   Within 40 feet of the street right-of-way line of an
intersecting street and in no case less than ten feet from the point of
tangency when the intersecting street lines are joined by a curve. When deemed
reasonably necessary for safety by the Council, this dimension shall be
increased for access drives to shopping centers, other commercial, industrial,
public or institutional uses. Such access drives shall be located on major
streets when practical, in a manner to permit safe ingress and egress;
            2.   Within ten feet of a fire hydrant, catch basin or drain inlet;
            3.   Within 40 feet of another driveway/access drive; and
            4.   Within three feet of a property line unless two adjoining
owners mutually agree to a common driveway/access drive.
         (f)   General safety requirement. Access to the public highway or
street shall be controlled in the interest of public safety. Off-street
parking, loading and service areas on all properties used for purposes other
than single-family residences shall be physically separated from the highway or
street by a curb, pipe rail, or fence and a planting strip.
         (g)   Sight distance. Driveways/access drives shall be located in safe
relationship to sight distance and barriers to vision, and shall not exceed a
slope of 7% within 12 feet of the street right-of-way line. Where driveways/
access drives enter a bank through a cut, unless a retaining wall is used, the
side slopes of the cut shall be graded to not more than one-half foot vertical
to one foot horizontal within ten feet of the point the driveway/access drive
intersects with the right-of-way line.
      (2)   Off-street parking facilities. Whenever required and/or provided
under the provisions of this chapter or the borough zoning ordinance (Chapter
27 of this code of ordinances), all off-street parking facilities shall be
designed according to the following standards.
         (a)   Size. All parking spaces shall be ample in size for the vehicles
for which use is intended; however, each parking space per vehicle shall be not
less than ten feet wide and 20 feet long. Such outdoor spaces shall be deemed
to be part of the open space of the lot on which it is located. Where five or
more parking spaces are required or provided, the total parking area, including
access drives and interior aisles, must average 300 square feet of gross
parking area per parking space.
         (b)   Surfacing. All off-street parking areas, service drives and
access drives shall be paved with a concrete or bituminous paving material,
shall be graded for proper drainage, shall be stabilized sufficiently to
accommodate the anticipated traffic, and shall be so arranged as to provide for
orderly and safe parking and storage of self-propelled vehicles.
         (c)   Lighting. Adequate lighting shall be provided if the parking
area is to be used after-dark. Any lighting used to illuminate an off-street
parking area shall be so arranged as to reflect the light away from adjoining
residential use premises, as well as away from vehicles moving upon a public
thoroughfare. There shall be no more than 0.25 foot candles shining off the
site, as measured vertically between five and ten feet off the ground.
      (3)   Off-street loading and unloading facilities. Whenever required and/
or provided under the provisions of this chapter or the borough zoning
ordinance (Chapter 27 of this code of ordinances), all off-street loading and
unloading facilities shall be designed according to the following standards.
         (a)   Size. The minimum size of the loading and unloading space shall
be 50 feet in depth, 12 feet in width, with an overhead clearance of 14 feet.
         (b)   Surfacing and lighting. As per subsection (G)(2)(c) above.
(Ord. 178, passed 7-15-1974, Art. V, § 506; Ord. 1997-03, passed 3-18-1997;
Ord. 2000-2, passed 5-9-2000, §§ 3, 4)
PART 6: MOBILE HOME PARKS
Section
   
22-600   General provisions
§ 22-600 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   Mobile home parks shall be developed and maintained in compliance with this
chapter and the borough’s zoning ordinance (Chapter 27 of this code of
ordinances).
(Ord. 178, passed 7-15-1974, Art. VI, § 600; Ord. 1997-03, passed 3-18-1997)
PART 7: ADMINISTRATION
Section
   22-700   Enforcement, preventive remedies
   22-701   Enforcement remedies
   22-702   Amendments
   22-703   Appeals
   22-704   Municipal liability
   22-705   Repealer
   22-706   Interpretation
   22-707   Severability clause
   22-708   Erroneous permit
§ 22-700 ENFORCEMENT, PREVENTIVE REMEDIES.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the Borough Council or the duly authorized
representative of the Borough Council to enforce the provisions of this
chapter. The Enforcement Officer shall require that the application for a
building permit contain all information necessary to enable him or her to
ascertain whether the proposed building, alteration or use is located in an
approved land development.
   (B)   (1)   The borough or its zoning or building permit officer may refuse
to issue any permit or grant any approval necessary to further improve or
develop any real property which has developed or which has resulted from a
subdivision of real property in violation of this chapter. This authority to
deny such a permit or approval shall apply to any of the following applicants:
         (a)   The owner of record at the time of violation;
         (b)   The vendee or lessee of the owner of record at the time of such
violation without regard as to whether such vendee or lessee had actual or
constructive knowledge of the violation;
         (c)   The current owner of record who acquired the property subsequent
to the time of violation without regard as to whether such current owner had
actual or constructive knowledge of the violation; and
         (d)   The vendee or lessee of the current owner of record who acquired
the property subsequent to the time of violation without regard as to whether
such vendee or lessee had actual or constructive knowledge of the violation.
      (2)   As an additional condition for issuance of a permit or granting of
an approval to any such owner, current owner, vendee or lessee for the
development of any such real property, the applicant shall comply with the
conditions that would have been applicable to the property at the time he or
she acquired an interest in the real property.
   (C)   In addition to other remedies, the borough may institute and maintain
appropriate actions by law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate
violations, to prevent unlawful construction, to recover damages and to prevent
illegal occupancy of a building, structure of premises. The description by
metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other documents used in the
process of selling or transferring land shall not exempt the seller or
transferor from such penalties or from the remedies provided in this chapter.
(Ord. 178, passed 7-15-1974, Art. VII, § 700; Ord. 1993-1, passed 2-16-1993, §
1; Ord. 1997-03, passed 3-18-1997)
§ 22-701 ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES.
   (A)   Any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity who or
which has violated the provisions of this chapter shall, upon being found
liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced by the borough
before magisterial district judge, pay a judgment of not more than $500 plus
all court costs, including reasonable attorney fees incurred by the borough as
a result thereof. No judgment shall commence or be imposed, levied or be
payable until the date of determination of a violation by the magisterial
district judge. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment,
the borough may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable rules of civil
procedure. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate
violation, unless magisterial district judge determines that there was a good
faith basis for the person, partnership or corporation violating the ordinance
to have believed that there was no such violation, in which case there shall be
deemed to have been only one such violation until the fifth day following the
date of the determination of a violation by a magisterial district judge and
thereafter each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate
violation. All fines collected for such violations shall be paid over to the
borough.
   (B)   The Court of Common Pleas of the county, upon petition, may grant an
order to stay, upon cause shown, tolling the per diem judgment pending a final
adjudication of the violation and judgment.
   (C)   Nothing in this section shall be construed or interpreted to grant to
any person or entity other than the borough the right to commence any action
for enforcement pursuant to this section.
(Ord. 178, passed 7-15-1974, Art. VII, § 701; Ord. 1993-1, passed 2-16-1993, §
1; Ord. 1997-03, passed 3-18-1997)
§ 22-702 AMENDMENTS.
   (A)   (1)   The Borough Council may on its own motion, or upon
recommendation of the Planning Commission amend, supplement or repeal any
portion of this chapter.
      (2)   Amendments to this chapter shall become effective only after a
public hearing is held pursuant to public notice in the manner prescribed for
enactment of a proposed amendment in § 506 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, Act 247, as reenacted and amended, being 53 P.S. §§ 10101 et
seq.
      (3)   In addition, in case of an amendment other than that prepared by
the Borough Planning Commission, the Borough Council shall submit each such
amendment to the Planning Commission for recommendations at least 30 days prior
to the date fixed for the public hearing on such proposed amendment.
   (B)   At least 30 days prior to Borough Council’s public hearing on the
amendment, the borough shall submit the proposed amendment to the County
Planning Commission for recommendations.
   (C)   Within 30 days after adoption, the Borough Council shall forward a
certified copy of the amendment to the County Planning Commission.
(Ord. 178, passed 7-15-1974, Art. VII, § 702; Ord. 1993-1, passed 2-16-1993, §
1; Ord. 1997-03, passed 3-18-1997)
§ 22-703 APPEALS.
   The procedures for securing review and any ordinance, decision or
determination are set forth in Article X-A of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, Act 247, as reenacted and amended, being 53 P.S. §§ 10101 et
seq.
(Ord. 178, passed 7-15-1974, Art. VII, § 703; Ord. 1993-1, passed 2-16-1993, §
1; Ord. 1997-03, passed 3-18-1997)
§ 22-704 MUNICIPAL LIABILITY.
   The grant or permit or approval of a subdivision and/or land development
plan shall not constitute a representation, guarantee, or warranty of any kind
by the borough or by any officials or employee thereof as to the practicability
or safety of the proposed use; and, shall create no liability upon the borough,
its officials or employees.
(Ord. 178, passed 7-15-1974, Art. VII, § 704; Ord. 1993-1, passed 2-16-1993, §
1; Ord. 1997-03, passed 3-18-1997)
§ 22-705 REPEALER.
   All ordinances or part of ordinances in conflict with this subdivision and
land development ordinance or inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter
are hereby repealed to the extent necessary to give this chapter full force and
effect.
(Ord. 178, passed 7-15-1974, Art. VII, § 705; Ord. 1993-1, passed 2-16-1993, §
1; Ord. 1997-03, passed 3-18-1997)
§ 22-706 INTERPRETATION.
   The provisions of this chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements to
meet the purposes of this chapter. When provisions this chapter impose greater
restrictions than those of any statute, other ordinance or regulations, the
provisions of this chapter shall prevail. When provisions of any statute, other
ordinance or regulation impose greater restrictions than those of this chapter,
the provisions of such statute, ordinance or regulation shall prevail.
(Ord. 178, passed 7-15-1974, Art. VII, § 706; Ord. 1993-1, passed 2-16-1993, §
1; Ord. 1997-03, passed 3-18-1997)
§ 22-707 SEVERABILITY CLAUSE.
   If any section, clause, provision or portion of this chapter shall be held
invalid or unconstitutional by a recognized court of the Commonwealth, such
decision shall not affect the legality of the remaining sections, clauses,
provisions or portions of this chapter.
(Ord. 178, passed 7-15-1974, Art. VII, § 707; Ord. 1993-1, passed 2-16-1993, §
1; Ord. 1997-03, passed 3-18-1997)
§ 22-708 ERRONEOUS PERMIT.
   A building permit or other permit or authorization issued or approved in
violation of the provisions of this chapter, is void without the necessity of
any proceedings for revocation. Any work undertaken or use established pursuant
to such permit or other authorization is unlawful. No action may be taken by a
board, agency or employee of the borough purporting to validate such a
violation.
(Ord. 178, passed 7-15-1974, Art. VII, § 708; Ord. 1993-1, passed 2-16-1993, §
1; Ord. 1997-03, passed 3-18-1997)
CHAPTER 23: RESERVED
CHAPTER 24: TAXATION; SPECIAL
      Part
         
1.   EARNED INCOME TAX
         
2.   PER CAPITA TAX
         
3.   REALTY TRANSFER TAX
         
4.   LOCAL SERVICES TAX
         
5.   LOCAL TAXPAYERS BILL OF RIGHTS
         
6.   TAX COLLECTOR
PART 1: EARNED INCOME TAX
Section
   
24-101   Short title
   
24-102   Intent and applicable rules
   
24-103   Definitions
   
24-104   Imposition of tax
   
24-105   Declaration and payment of tax
   
24-106   Registration
   
24-107   Filing and payment of tax by employer; withholding
   
24-108   Powers and duties of Tax Officer
   
24-109   Suit for collection of tax
   
24-110   Interest and penalties
   
24-111   Violations and penalties
   
24-112   Applicability
   
24-113   Severability
   
24-114   Purpose/amendment and restatement/repeal
§ 24-101 SHORT TITLE.
   This Part shall be known as the “Dillsburg Borough Earned Income and Net
Profits Tax Ordinance”, referred to herein as “ordinance” or “Part”.
(Ord. 2011-4, passed 11-7-2011)
§ 24-102 INTENT AND APPLICABLE RULES.
   (A)   It is the intent and purpose of this Part to include all of the
applicable language and provisions of 53 P.S. §§ 6924.501 et seq., the Act of
General Assembly of July 2, 2008 (P.L. 197) and known as Act No. 32, as may be
amended and supplemented from time to time. In all enforcement of the
administration of this Part, the language and intent of the Act, as amended,
shall take precedence.
   (B)   (1)   The tax imposed by this Part shall be collected and administered
in accordance with:
         (a)   All applicable laws and regulations; and
         (b)   Regulations, policies and procedures adopted by the TCC or Tax
Officer.
      (2)   This includes any regulations, policies and procedures adopted in
the future to the maximum extent allowed by 1 Pa.C.S.A. § 1937.
(Ord. 2011-4, passed 11-7-2011)
§ 24-103 DEFINITIONS.
   All words and phrases shall have the meanings as set forth in Act 32, as
amended. For the purpose of this Part, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BUSINESS. An enterprise, activity, profession or any other undertaking of an
unincorporated nature conducted for profit or ordinarily conducted for profit,
whether by a person, partnership, association or any other entity.
   BUSINESS ENTITY. A sole proprietorship, corporation, joint-stock association
or company, partnership, limited partnership, limited liability company,
association, business trust, syndicate or other commercial or professional
activity organized under the laws of this Commonwealth or any other
jurisdiction.
   CORPORATION. A corporation or joint-stock association organized under the
laws of the United States, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or any other state,
territory, foreign country or dependency. This term shall include an entity
which is classified as a corporation for federal income tax purposes.
   CURRENT YEAR. The calendar year for which the tax is levied.
   DEPARTMENT. The Pennsylvania Department of Community and Economic
Development or successor agency charged with any duties under the Act, as may
be amended and supplemented.
   DOMICILE. The place where one lives and has his or her permanent home and to
which he or she has the intention of returning whenever he or she is absent.
Actual residence is not necessarily DOMICILE, for DOMICILE is the fixed place
of abode which, in the intention of the taxpayer, is permanent rather than
transitory. DOMICILE is the place in which a human has voluntarily fixed the
habitation of himself or herself and his or her family, not for a mere special
or limited purpose, but with the present intention of making a permanent home,
until some event occurs to induce him or her to adopt some other permanent
home. In the case of businesses or associations, the DOMICILE is that place
considered as the center of business affairs and the place where its functions
are discharged.
   EARNED INCOME. The compensation as required to be reported to or as
determined by the Pennsylvania Department of Revenue under § 303 of the Act of
March 4, 1971 (P.L. 6, No. 2), known as the Tax Reform Code of 1971, being 72
P.S. §§ 7101 et seq., and rules and regulations promulgated under that section.
For purposes of earned income, employee business expenses are allowable
deductions as determined under Article III of the Tax Reform Code of 1971. The
term does not include offsets for business losses. The amount of any housing
allowance provided to a member of the clergy shall not be taxable as EARNED
INCOME.
   EARNED INCOME AND NET PROFITS TAX. The tax levied herein by municipality on
earned income and net profits. Also referred to as TAX herein.
   EMPLOYER. A person, business entity or other entity employing one or more
persons for a salary, wage, commission or other compensation. The term includes
the Commonwealth, a political subdivision and an instrumentality or public
authority of either. For purposes of penalties hereunder, this term includes a
corporate officer.
   MUNICIPALITY. A city of the second class, city of the second class A, city
of the third class, borough, town, township of the first class or township of
the second class. For purposes of this Part, such term shall mean the Borough
of Dillsburg, York County, Pennsylvania.
   NET PROFITS.
      (1)   The net income from the operation of a business, except
corporations as required to be reported to or as determined by the Department
of Revenue under § 303 of the Act of March 4, 1971 (P.L. 6, No. 2), known as
the Tax Reform Code of 1971, and rules and regulations in promulgated under
such section.
      (2)   The term does not include income:
         (a)   Which is not paid for services provided; and
         (b)   Which is in the nature of earnings from an investment.
      (3)   Further, the term shall not include:
         (a)   Any gain on the sale of farm machinery;
         (b)   Any gain on the sale of livestock held 12 months or more for
draft, breeding or dairy purposes; and
         (c)   Any gain on the sale of other capital assets of the farm.
   NONRESIDENT. A person, partnership, association or other entity domiciled
outside of the municipality.
   PERSON or INDIVIDUAL. A natural person.
   PRECEDING YEAR. The calendar year before the current year.
   RESIDENT. A person, partnership, association or other entity domiciled in
the municipality.
   SUCCEEDING YEAR. The calendar year following the current year.
   TAX BUREAU. A public nonprofit entity established by a TCC for the
administration and collection of earned income and net profits tax.
   TAX COLLECTION COMMITTEE (TCC). The committee established to govern each tax
collection district for the purpose of income tax collection. This term shall
include a joint tax collection committee.
   TAX COLLECTION DISTRICT (TCD). The York Tax Collection District as
established under the Act.
   TAXPAYER. A person or business required hereunder to file a return of earned
income or net profits or to pay a tax thereon.
   TAX OFFICER. A political subdivision, public employee, tax bureau, county,
excluding a county of the first class, or private agency which administers and
collects earned income and net profits for one or more tax collection district.
Unless otherwise specifically provided, for purposes of the obligations of an
employer, the term shall mean the TAX OFFICER or Tax Collector for the tax
collection district within which the employer is located, or if an employer
maintains workplaces in more than one tax collection district, the TAX OFFICER
for each such tax collection district with respect to employees principally
employed therein.
(Ord. 2011-4, passed 11-7-2011)
§ 24-104 IMPOSITION OF TAX.
   (A)   A tax of 1% for general revenue purposes is hereby imposed on earned
income and net profits earned by residents of the municipality.
   (B)   A tax of 1% for general revenue purposes is hereby imposed on earned
income and net profits earned by nonresidents, exclusive of domestic servants
and state residents.
   (C)   (1)   The earned income and net profits tax levied under this Part
shall be applicable to earned income received and to net profits earned during
the period beginning January 1 of the current year and ending December 31 of
the current year or for taxpayer fiscal years beginning in the current year.
      (2)   The earned income and net profits tax shall continue in force on a
calendar year or taxpayer fiscal year basis without the need for annual
enactment or re-enactment, unless the rate of the tax is subsequently changed.
      (3)   For a taxpayer whose fiscal year is not a calendar year, the Tax
Officer shall establish deadlines for filing, reporting and payment of taxes
which provide time periods equivalent to those provided for a calendar year
taxpayer.
(Ord. 2011-4, passed 11-7-2011)
§ 24-105 DECLARATION AND PAYMENT OF TAX.
   (A)   Application.
      (1)   Income taxes shall be applicable to taxable income earned or
received based on the method of accounting used by the taxpayer in the period
beginning January 1 of the current year and ending December 31 of the current
year; except that taxes imposed for the first time and changes to existing tax
rates shall become effective on January 1 or July 1, as specified in this Part,
and the tax shall continue in force on a calendar year or taxpayer fiscal year
basis, without annual reenactment, unless the rate of the tax is subsequently
changed.
      (2)   For a taxpayer whose fiscal year is not a calendar year, the Tax
Officer shall establish deadlines for filing, reporting and payment of taxes
which provide time periods equivalent to those provided for a calendar year
taxpayer.
   (B)   Partial domicile. The taxable income subject to tax of a taxpayer who
is domiciled in a political subdivision for only a portion of the tax year
shall be an amount equal to the taxpayer’s taxable income multiplied by a
fraction, the numerator of which is the number of calendar months during the
tax year that the individual is domiciled in the political subdivision, and the
denominator of which is 12. A taxpayer shall include in the numerator any
calendar month during which the taxpayer is domiciled for more than half the
calendar month. A day that a taxpayer’s domicile changes shall be included as a
day the individual is in the new domicile and not the old domicile. If the
number of days in the calendar month in which the individual lived in the old
and new domiciles are equal, the calendar month shall be included in
calculating the number of months in the new domicile.
   (C)   Declaration and payment. Except as provided in subsection (A)(2)
above, taxpayers shall declare and pay income taxes as follows.
      (1)   Every taxpayer shall, on or before April 15 of the succeeding year,
make and file with the resident Tax Officer, a final return showing the amount
of taxable income received during the period beginning January 1 of the current
year and ending December 31 of the current year, the total amount of tax due on
the taxable income, the amount of tax paid, the amount of tax that has been
withheld under § 24-107 and the balance of tax due. All amounts reported shall
be rounded to the nearest whole dollar. At the time of filing the final return,
the taxpayer shall pay the Tax Officer the balance of the tax due or shall make
demand for refund or credit in the case of overpayment.
      (2)   (a)   Every taxpayer making net profits shall, by April 15 of the
current year, make and file with the Tax Officer a declaration of the
taxpayer’s estimated net profits during the period beginning January 1 and
ending December 31 of the current year, and shall pay to the Tax Officer in
four equal quarterly installments the tax due on the estimated net profits. The
first installment shall be paid at the time of filing the declaration, and the
other installments shall be paid on or before June 15 of the current year,
September 15 of the current year and January 15 of the succeeding year,
respectively.
         (b)   Any taxpayer who first anticipates any net profit after April 15
of the current year, shall make and file the declaration required on or before
June 15 of the current year, September 15 of the current year or December 31 of
the current year, whichever date next follows the date on which the taxpayer
first anticipates such net profit, and shall pay to the Tax Officer in equal
installments the tax due on or before the quarterly payment dates that remain
after the filing of the declaration.
         (c)   Every taxpayer shall, on or before April 15 of the succeeding
year, make and file with the Tax Officer a final return showing the amount of
net profits earned or received based on the method of accounting used by the
taxpayer during the period beginning January 1 of the current year, and ending
December 31 of the current year, the total amount of tax due on the net profits
and the total amount of tax paid. At the time of filing the final return, the
taxpayer shall pay to the Tax Officer the balance of tax due or shall make
demand for refund or credit in the case of overpayment. Any taxpayer may, in
lieu of paying the fourth quarterly installment of the estimated tax, elect to
make and file with the Tax Officer on or before January 31 of the succeeding
year, the final return.
         (d)   The Department, in consultation with the Department of Revenue,
shall provide by regulation for the filing of adjusted declarations of
estimated net profits and for the payments of the estimated tax in cases where
a taxpayer who has filed the declaration required under this subsection (C)
anticipates additional net profits not previously declared or has overestimated
anticipated net profits.
         (e)   Every taxpayer who discontinues business prior to December 31 of
the current year, shall, within 30 days after the discontinuance of business,
file a final return as required under this Part and pay the tax due.
      (3)   Every taxpayer who receives any other taxable income not subject to
withholding under § 512(3) of the Act, being 72 P.S. §§ 7101 et seq., shall
make and file with the resident Tax Officer a quarterly return on or before
April 15 of the current year, June 15 of the current year, September 15 of the
current year, and January 15 of the succeeding year, setting forth the
aggregate amount of taxable income not subject to withholding by the taxpayer
during the threemonth periods ending March 31 of the current year, June 30 of
the current year, September 30 of the current year, and December 31 of the
current year, respectively, and subject to income tax, together with such other
information as the Department may require. Every taxpayer filing a return
shall, at the time of filing the return, pay to the Tax Officer the amount of
income tax due. The Department shall establish criteria under which the Tax
Officer may waive the quarterly return and payment of the income tax and permit
a taxpayer to file the receipt of taxable income on the taxpayer’s annual
return and pay the income tax due on or before April 15 of the succeeding year.
      (4)   The TCC may, by regulation, waive the requirements for a quarterly
return and payment of income tax under specified circumstances, including those
instances where a taxpayer’s annual taxable income is less than a specified
amount.
(Ord. 2011-4, passed 11-7-2011)
§ 24-106 REGISTRATION.
   (A)   Every employer having an office, factory, workshop, branch, warehouse
or other place of business within the municipality, having imposed a tax on
earned income or net profits within its municipal boundaries who employs one or
more persons, other than domestic servants, for a salary, wage commission or
other compensation who has not previously registered shall within 15 days after
becoming an employer, register with the Tax Officer or other designated Tax
Officer, his or her or its name and address and such other information as the
Department or Tax Officer may require.
   (B)   Every employer shall require each new employee to complete a
certificate of residency form, which form shall be an addendum to the federal
employee’s withholding allowance certificate (Form W-4 or successor form). An
employer shall also require any employee who changes his or her address or
domicile to complete a certificate of residency form, which forms are available
from the Department or the Tax Officer upon request. The purpose of said form
shall be to help identify the political subdivision where an employee lives and
works.
(Ord. 2011-4, passed 11-7-2011)
§ 24-107 FILING AND PAYMENT OF TAX BY EMPLOYER; WITHHOLDING.
   (A)   Every employer having an office, factory, workshop, branch, warehouse
or other place of business within the municipality imposing a tax on earned
income or net profits within the municipality who employs one or more persons,
exclusive of domestic servants and state residents, for a salary, wage,
commission or other compensation shall deduct at the time of payment thereof
the greater of the employee’s resident tax or the employee’s nonresident tax
imposed by this Part on the earned income due to his or her employee or
employees and shall, on or before April 30 of the current year, July 31 of the
current year, October 31 of the current year and January 31 of the succeeding
year, file a quarterly return and pay to the Tax Officer the amount of taxes
deducted during the preceding quarterly periods ending March 31 of the current
year, June 30 of the current year, September 30 of the current year and
December 31 of the current year, respectively. Such return, unless otherwise
agreed upon between the Tax Officer and employer, shall show the name and
social security number of each such employee, the compensation of such employee
during such preceding three-month period, the tax deducted therefrom, the
political subdivisions imposing the tax upon such employee, the total
compensation of all such employees during such preceding quarterly period and
the total tax deducted therefrom and paid with the return as well as any other
information prescribed by the Department or the Tax Officer.
   (B)   Any employer who, for two of the preceding four quarterly periods, has
failed to deduct the proper tax or any part thereof or who has failed to pay
over the proper amount of tax to the Tax Officer may be required by the Tax
Officer to file his or her return and pay the tax monthly. In such cases,
payments of tax shall be made to the Tax Officer on or before the last day of
the month succeeding the month for which the tax was withheld.
   (C)   Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (A) above, the provisions
of this subsection (C) shall apply if any employer has more than one place of
employment in more than one tax collection district. Within 30 days following
the last day of each month, the employer may file the return required by
subsection (A) above and pay the total amount of tax due from employees in all
work locations during the preceding month to the Tax Officer for either the tax
collection district in which the employer’s payroll operations are located or
as determined by the Department. The return and tax deducted shall be filed and
paid electronically. The employer must file a notice of intention to file
combined returns and make combined payments with the Tax Officer for each place
of employment at least one month prior to filing its first combined return or
making its first combined payment. This subsection (C) shall not be construed
to change the location of an employee’s place of employment for purposes of
nonresident tax liability.
   (D)   On or before February 28 of the succeeding year, every employer shall
file with the Tax Officer or other designated Tax Officer to whom tax, which
has been deducted, has been remitted as required herein:
      (1)   An annual return showing the total amount of compensation paid, the
total amount of tax deducted, the total amount of tax paid to the Tax Officer
for the period beginning January 1 of the current year and ending December 31
of the current year, and any other information prescribed by the Department;
and
      (2)   An individual withholding statement which may be integrated with
the federal wage and tax statement (Form W-2 or successor form), for each
employee employed during all or any part of the period beginning January 1 of
the current year and ending December 31 of the current year, setting forth the
employee’s name, address and social security number, the amount of compensation
paid to the employee during said period, the amount of tax deducted, the
numerical code prescribed by the Department representing the tax collection
district where payments required herein were remitted and any other information
required by the Department or the Tax Officer and the amount of tax paid to the
Tax Officer. Every employer shall furnish two copies of the individual return
to the employee for whom it is filed.
   (E)   Every employer who discontinues business prior to December 31 of the
current year shall, within 30 days after the discontinuance of business, file
the returns and withholding statements hereinabove required and pay the tax
due.
   (F)   Except as otherwise provided for in § 511 of the Act, being 72 P.S. §§
7101 et seq., every employer who willfully or negligently fails or omits to
make the deductions required by this section shall be liable for payment of the
taxes which the employer is required to withhold to the extent that such taxes
have not been recovered from the employee. The failure or omission of any
employer to make the deductions required by this section shall not relieve any
employee from the payment of the tax of from complying with the requirements of
this Part relating to the filing of declarations and returns.
   (G)   No employer shall be required to deduct or withhold taxes, file
returns or pay taxes with regard to residents of the state.
(Ord. 2011-4, passed 11-7-2011)
§ 24-108 POWERS AND DUTIES OF TAX OFFICER.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the Tax Officer to collect and receive the
taxes, fines and penalties imposed by this Part. It shall also be the Tax
Officer’s duty to keep a record showing the amount of tax received from each
taxpayer paying the tax and the date of such receipt.
   (B)   Each Tax Officer, before entering upon official duties, shall give and
acknowledge a bond to the TCC appointing such Tax Officer. The bond provided
shall be subject to the requirements set forth in the Act.
   (C)   The Tax Officer shall comply with all resolutions, policies and
procedures adopted by the Tax Collection Committee and shall comply with all
regulations adopted by the Department under the Act.
   (D)   The Tax Officer shall refund, on petition of and proof by the
taxpayer, earned income tax paid on the taxpayer’s ordinary and necessary
business expenses to the extent that such expenses are not paid by the
taxpayer’s employer.
   (E)   The Tax Officer and agents designated by him, her or it are hereby
authorized to examine the books, papers and records of any employer or of any
taxpayer or of any person whom the Tax Officer reasonably believes to be an
employer or taxpayer in order to verify the accuracy of any declaration or
return or, if no declaration or return was filed, to ascertain the tax due.
Every employer and every taxpayer and every person whom the Tax Officer
reasonably believes to be an employer or taxpayer is hereby directed and
required to give to the Tax Officer or to any agent designated by him or her
any means, facilities and opportunity for such examination and investigations
as are hereby authorized. Such examination or audits shall be conducted by the
Tax Officer and any agents designated by the Tax Officer shall be conducted in
accordance with 53 Pa.C.S.A. Chapter 84, Subchapter C (relating to the local
taxpayers bill of rights).
   (F)   Any information gained by the Tax Officer, his, her or its agents or
by any other official or agent of the taxing district as a result of any
declarations, returns, investigations, hearings or verifications required or
authorized by this Part shall be and remain confidential, except for official
purposes and except in accordance with a proper judicial order or as otherwise
provided by law.
   (G)   The Tax Officer is authorized to establish different filing, reporting
and payment dates for taxpayers whose fiscal years do not coincide with the
calendar year, provided that any filing, reporting or payment dates shall
provide time periods equivalent to those time periods set forth for taxpayers
whose fiscal year coincides with a calendar year.
(Ord. 2011-4, passed 11-7-2011)
§ 24-109 SUIT FOR COLLECTION OF TAX.
   (A)   The Tax Officer may sue in the name of the political subdivision
within the TCD for the recovery of taxes due and unpaid under this Part.
   (B)   Any suit brought to recover the tax imposed by this Part shall be
begun within three years after:
      (1)   Such tax is due;
      (2)   The declaration or return has been filed; or
      (3)   A redetermination of compensation or net profits by the
Pennsylvania Department of Revenue whichever date is later; provided, however,
that this limitation shall not prevent the institution of a suit for the
collection of any tax due or determined to be due in the following cases:
         (a)   Where no declaration or return was filed by any person although
a declaration or return was required to be filed by him or her under provisions
of this Part, there shall be no limitation;
         (b)   Where an examination of the declaration or return filed by any
person or of other evidence relating to such declaration or return in the
possession of the Tax Officer reveals a fraudulent evasion of taxes, there
shall be no limitation;
         (c)   Where any person has deducted taxes under the provisions of this
Part and has failed to pay the amounts so deducted to the Tax Officer or where
any person has willfully failed or omitted to make the deductions required by
this Part, there shall be no limitation;
         (d)   Where an employer has intentionally failed to make deductions
required by this Part; and
         (e)   In the case of substantial understatement of tax liability of
25% or more and no fraud, suit shall be begun within six years.
   (C)   The Tax Officer may sue for recovery of an erroneous refund, provided
that such suit is begun two years after making such refund, except that the
suit may be brought within five years if it appears that any part of the refund
was induced by fraud or misrepresentation of material fact.
   (D)   This section shall not be construed to limit the municipality from
recovering delinquent taxes by any other means provided by the Act. Further,
nothing set forth herein shall be construed to limit a Tax Officer, a tax
collection district or political subdivision from recovering delinquent taxes
by any other means provided by the Act.
(Ord. 2011-4, passed 11-7-2011)
§ 24-110 INTEREST AND PENALTIES.
   (A)   Except as may be provided for in subsection (B) below, in the event
any tax imposed in this Part is not paid when due, interest shall accrue at the
same rate a taxpayer is required to pay to the Commonwealth as provided in §
806 of the Act of April 9, 1929 (P.L. 343, No. 176), known as the Fiscal Code,
being 72 P.S. §§ 1 et seq., or such successor legislation, on the amount of
said tax and an additional penalty of 1% of the unpaid tax for each month or
fraction thereof during which the tax remains unpaid shall be added and
collected but the amount of penalty shall not exceed 15% in the aggregate.
Where an action is brought for the recovery of tax, the taxpayer liable for the
tax shall, in addition, be liable for the costs of collection, interest and
penalties, including, but not limited to court costs and attorney fees.
   (B)   Pursuant to the Act, the Department may establish conditions under
which a Tax Officer, with the concurrence of the TCC, may abate interest or
penalties that would otherwise be imposed for the nonreporting or
underreporting of income tax liabilities or for nonpayment of taxes previously
imposed and due if the taxpayer files delinquent returns and pays the tax in
full.
   (C)   (1)   The provisions of subsection (B) above shall not affect or
terminate any petitions, investigations, prosecutions or other proceedings
pending under this Part, or prevent the commencement of further prosecution of
any proceedings by the appropriate authorities for violations of this Part.
      (2)   However, no proceedings shall be commenced on the basis of
delinquent returns filed pursuant to this section if the returns are determined
to be substantially true and correct and the tax due is paid within the
prescribed time.
(Ord. 2011-4, passed 11-7-2011)
§ 24-111 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
   (A)   Any person who fails, neglects or refuses to make any declaration or
return required by this Part, any employer who fails, neglects or refuses to
register or to pay the tax deducted from his or her employees or fails,
neglects or refuses to deduct or withhold the tax from his or her employees,
any person who refuses to permit the Tax Officer or any agent designated by him
or her to examine his or her books, records, papers and any person who
knowingly makes any incomplete, false or fraudulent return or attempts to do
anything whatsoever to avoid the full disclosure of the amount of his or her
net profits or earned income in order to avoid the payment of the whole or any
part of the tax imposed by this Part shall, upon conviction thereof, be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $2,500 for each offense and costs and,
in default of payment of said fine and costs, to be imprisoned for a period not
exceeding six months.
   (B)   Any employer who is required under this Part to collect, account for
and distribute taxes and who willfully fails to collect or truthfully account
for and distribute such tax, commits a misdemeanor and shall, upon conviction,
be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding $25,000 or to imprisonment not
exceeding two years or both.
   (C)   Any person who divulges any information which is confidential under
the provisions of this Part shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay
a fine of not more than $2,500 for each offense and costs or to imprisonment
for not more than one year, or both.
   (D)   The penalties imposed under this section shall be in addition to any
other penalty imposed by any other section of this Part.
   (E)   The failure of any person to receive or procure forms required for
making the declaration or returns required by this Part shall not excuse him or
her from making such declaration or return.
   (F)   The borough hereby approves and adopts the cost of collection
schedule, attached hereto and made a part hereof as if set out in full, to be
imposed by the designated Tax Officer for the collection of taxes on earned
income and net profits, upon any taxpayer whose taxes are or become delinquent
and/or remain due and unpaid; provided, however, that the TCC may approve
amendments to said fee schedule by resolution from time to time. Amendments to
the collection schedule shall become effective upon adoption by the TCC. The
designated Tax Officer is hereby authorized to retain such costs of collection
as set forth in the attached schedule, as may be amended and supplemented from
time to time, in recovering delinquent taxes and as permitted to be assessed to
delinquent taxpayers pursuant to law.
(Ord. 2011-4, passed 11-7-2011)
§ 24-112 APPLICABILITY.
   This Part shall not apply to any person or property as to whom or which it
is beyond the legal power of the municipality to levy, assess and impose the
tax or duties as herein provided.
(Ord. 2011-4, passed 11-7-2011)
§ 24-113 SEVERABILITY.
   The provisions of the Part are severable and if any of its provisions are
determined by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid or
unconstitutional, such determination shall not affect or impair any of the
remaining provisions of this Part. It is hereby declared to be the intention of
the Borough Council that this Part would have been adopted is such invalid or
unconstitutional provision had not been included.
(Ord. 2011-4, passed 11-7-2011)
§ 24-114 PURPOSE/AMENDMENT AND RESTATEMENT/REPEAL.
   The primary purpose of this Part is to conform the local income tax
currently levied on earned income and net profits by the municipality with the
Act and to do so within the time frame set forth in the Act. Any prior
ordinance levying such tax is hereby amended and restated in its entirety to
read as set forth in this Part. To the extent that any previous ordinance or
portion thereof is inconsistent or conflicts with this Part, such ordinance(s)
or portion thereof shall be repealed to the extent of such inconsistency and/or
conflict. To the extent the same or any prior ordinance levying such tax in
force immediately prior to enactment of this Part, this Part is intended as a
continuation of such prior ordinance and not as the enactment of an ordinance
imposing a new tax. In the event this Part or any portion thereof is determined
to be unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, the prior ordinance, or portion
thereof, levying a similar tax shall remain in full force and effect and shall
not be affected by the adoption of this Part. Nothing contained herein shall
affect, impair or otherwise abrogate any act done or liability incurred, nor
shall any provision of this Part affect, impair or preclude any suit or
prosecution pending, whether or not currently initiated, to enforce any right,
penalty or violation under the authority of any previous ordinance in force
prior to adoption of this Part.
(Ord. 2011-4, passed 11-7-2011)
PART 2: PER CAPITA TAX
Section
   
24-201   Authority for enactment
   
24-202   Resident defined
   
24-203   Imposition of tax
   
24-204   Collection
   
24-205   Penalty
§ 24-201 AUTHORITY FOR ENACTMENT.
   This ordinance is enacted under authority of the Local Tax Enabling Act,
P.L. 1257, No. 511, December 31, 1965, 53 P.S.§§ 6901 et seq., as hereafter
amended, supplemented, modified or reenacted by the General Assembly of
Pennsylvania.
§ 24-202 RESIDENT DEFINED.
   The word RESIDENT as used in this Part shall mean every adult 18 years of
age or older who lives within the borough.
§ 24-203 IMPOSITION OF TAX.
   Every resident shall pay $10 for the present calendar year and each year
hereafter; (provided, the tax hereby imposed shall not be levied upon any
resident whose total income during the taxable year is any figure less than or
equal to $10,000).
§ 24-204 COLLECTION.
   All taxes, interests, costs and penalties imposed by this Part shall be
collected by the Borough Tax Collector.
§ 24-205 PENALTY.
   Any resident or inhabitant who fails or refuses to pay the tax or to render
accurate information to an assessor concerning his or her residence or age,
shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine not more than $1,000
and in default of payment, to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 30 days.
PART 3: REALTY TRANSFER TAX
Section
   
24-301   Short title
   
24-302   Authority
   
24-303   Definitions
   
24-304   Imposition of tax; interest
   
24-305   Exempt parties
   
24-306   Excluded transactions
   
24-307   Documents relating to associations, corporations and members,
partners, stockholders or shareholders thereof
   
24-308   Acquired company
   
24-309   Credits against tax
   
24-310   Extension of lease
   
24-311   Proceeds of judicial sale
   
24-312   Duties of Recorder of Deeds
   
24-313   Statement of value
   
24-314   Civil penalties
   
24-315   Lien
   
24-316   Enforcement
   
24-317   Regulations
§ 24-301 SHORT TITLE.
   This Part shall be known as the “Realty Transfer Tax Ordinance of the
Borough of Dillsburg”.
§ 24-302 AUTHORITY.
   A realty transfer tax for general revenue purposes is hereby imposed upon
the transfer of real estate or interest in real estate situated within the
borough, regardless of where the documents making the transfer are made,
executed or delivered, or where the actual settlements on such transfer took
place, as authorized by Article XI-D, Local Real Estate Transfer Tax, 72 P.S.
§§ 8101-D et seq.
§ 24-303 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this Part, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ASSOCIATION. A partnership, limited partnership or any other form of
unincorporated enterprise owned or conducted by two or more persons other than
a private trust or decedent’s estate.
   BOROUGH. The Borough of Dillsburg, York County, Pennsylvania.
   CORPORATION. A corporation, joint-stock association, business trust or
banking institution which is organized under the laws of this Commonwealth, the
United States or any other state, territory, foreign country or dependency.
   DOCUMENT. Any deed, instrument or writing which conveys, transfers, demises,
vests, confirms or evidences any transfer or demise of title of real estate,
but does not include wills, mortgages, deeds of trust or other instruments of
like character given as security for a debt and deeds of release thereof to the
debtor, land contracts whereby the legal title does not pass to the grantee
until the total consideration specified in the contract has been paid or any
cancellation thereof unless the consideration is payable over a period of time
exceeding 30 years, or instruments which solely grant, vest or confirm a public
utility easement. DOCUMENT shall also include a declaration of acquisition
required to be presented for recording under § 24-302.
   FAMILY FARM CORPORATION. A corporation of which at least 75% of its assets
are devoted to the business of agriculture and at least 75% of each class of
stock of the corporation is continuously owned by members of the same family.
The business of agriculture shall not be deemed to include:
      (1)   Recreational activities such as, but not limited to, hunting,
fishing, camping, skiing, show competition or racing;
      (2)   The raising, breeding or training of game animals or game birds,
fish, cats, dogs or pets or animals intended for use in sporting or
recreational activities;
      (3)   Fur farming;
      (4)   Stockyard and slaughterhouse operations; and
      (5)   Manufacturing or processing operations of any kind.
   MEMBERS OF THE SAME FAMILY. Any individual, such individual’s brothers and
sisters, the brothers and sisters of such individual’s parents and
grandparents, the ancestors and lineal descendants of any of the foregoing, a
spouse of any of the foregoing, and the estate of any of the foregoing.
Individuals related by the half-blood or legal adoption shall be treated as if
they were related by the wholeblood.
   PERSON. Every natural person, association or corporation, whenever used in
any clause prescribing and imposing a fine or imprisonment, or both. The term
PERSON as applied to associations, shall include the responsible members or
general partners thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers thereof.
   REAL ESTATE.
      (1)   All lands, tenements or hereditaments within this borough,
including without limitation, buildings, structures, fixtures, mines, minerals,
oil, gas, quarries, spaces with or without upper or lower boundaries, trees and
other improvements, immovables or interests which by custom, usage or law pass
with a conveyance of land, but excluding permanently attached machinery and
equipment in an industrial plant.
      (2)   A condominium unit; and
      (3)   A tenant-stockholder’s interest in a cooperative housing
corporation, trust or association under a proprietary lease or occupancy
agreement.
   REAL ESTATE COMPANY. A corporation or association which is primarily engaged
in the business of holding, selling or leasing real estate, 90% or more of the
ownership interest in which is held by 35 or fewer persons and which:
      (1)   Derives 60% or more of its annual gross receipts from the ownership
or disposition of real estate; and
      (2)   Holds real estate, the value of which comprises 90% or more of the
value of its entire tangible asset holdings exclusive of tangible assets which
are freely transferable and actively traded on an established market.
   TITLE TO REAL ESTATE.
      (1)   Any interest in real estate which endures for a period of time, the
termination of which is not fixed or ascertained by a specific number of years
including, without limitation, an estate in fee simple, life estate or
perpetual leasehold.
      (2)   Any interest in real estate enduring for a fixed period of years
but which, either by reason of the length of the term or the grant of a right
to extend the term by renewal or otherwise, consist of a group of rights
approximating those of an estate in fee simple, life estate or perpetual
leasehold including, without limitation, a leasehold interest or possessory
interest under a lease or occupancy agreement for a term of 30 years or more or
a leasehold interest or possessory interest in real estate in which the lessee
has equity.
   TRANSACTION. The making, executing, delivering, accepting or presenting for
recording of a document.
   VALUE.
      (1)   In the case of any bona fide sale of real estate at arm’s length
for actual monetary worth, the amount of the actual consideration therefor,
paid or to be paid, including liens or other encumbrances thereon existing
before the transfer and not removed thereby, whether or not the underlying
indebtedness is assumed, and ground rents, or a commensurate part thereof where
such liens or other encumbrances and ground rents also encumber or are charged
against real estate: provided, that where such documents shall set forth a
nominal consideration, the VALUE thereof shall be determined from the price set
forth in or actual consideration for the contract of sale.
      (2)   In the case of a gift, sale by execution upon a judgment or upon
the foreclosure of a mortgage by a judicial officer, transactions without
consideration or for consideration less than the actual monetary worth of the
real estate, a taxable lease, an occupancy agreement, a leasehold or possessory
interest, any exchange of properties, or the real estate of an acquired
company, the actual monetary worth of the real estate determined by adjusting
the assessed value of the real estate for local real estate tax purposes for
the common level ratio factor developed by the Pennsylvania Department of
Revenue for the state realty transfer tax base calculations.
      (3)   In the case of an easement or other interest in real estate, the
VALUE of which is not determinable under subsections (1) or (2) above, the
actual monetary worth of such interest.
      (4)   The actual consideration for or actual monetary worth of any
executory agreement for the construction of buildings, structures or other
permanent improvements to real estate between the grantor and other persons
existing before the transfer and not removed thereby or between the grantor,
the agent or principal of the grantor of a related corporation, association or
partnership and the grantee existing before or effective with the transfer.
§ 24-304 IMPOSITION OF TAX; INTEREST.
   (A)   Every person who makes, executes, delivers, accepts or presents for
recording any document or in whose behalf any document is made, executed,
delivered, accepted or presented for recording, shall be subject to pay for and
in respect to the transaction or any part thereof, a tax at the rate of 1% of
the value of the real estate represented by such document, which tax shall be
payable at the earlier of the time the document is presented for recording or
within 30 days of acceptance of such document or within 30 days of becoming an
acquired company.
   (B)   The payment of the tax imposed herein shall be evidenced by the
affixing of an official stamp or writing by the Recorder of Deeds whereon the
date of the payment of the tax, amount of the tax and the signature of the
collecting agent shall be set forth.
   (C)   It is the intent of this Part that the entire burden of the tax
imposed herein on a person or transfer shall not exceed the limitations
prescribed in the Local Tax Enabling Act, Act of December 31, 1965, P.L. 1257,
53 P.S. §§ 6924.101 et seq., so that if any other political subdivision shall
impose or hereafter shall impose such tax on the same person or transfer then
the tax levied by the Borough Council under the authority of that Act shall
during the time such duplication of the tax exists, except as hereinafter
otherwise provided, be one-half of the rate and such one-half shall become
effective without any action on the part of the Borough Council provided,
however, that the borough and any other political subdivision which impose such
tax on the same person or transfer may agree that, instead of limiting their
respective rates to one-half of the rate herein provided, they will impose
respectively different rates, the total of which shall not exceed the maximum
rate permitted under the Local Tax Enabling Act.
   (D)   If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate
in effect at the time the tax is due, shall be added and collected.
§ 24-305 EXEMPT PARTIES.
   The United States, the Commonwealth or any of their instrumentalities,
agencies or political subdivisions shall be exempt from payment of the tax
imposed by this Part. The exemption of such governmental bodies shall not,
however, relieve any other party to a transaction from liability for the tax.
§ 24-306 EXCLUDED TRANSACTIONS.
   (A)   The tax imposed by § 24-304 shall not be imposed upon:
      (1)   A transfer to the Commonwealth, or to any of its instrumentalities,
agencies or political subdivisions, by gift, dedication or deed in lieu of
condemnation or deed or confirmation in connection with condemnation
proceedings, or a reconveyance by the condemning body of the property condemned
to the owner of record at the time of condemnation which reconveyance may
include property line adjustments provided said reconveyance is made within one
year from the date of condemnation;
      (2)   A document which the borough is prohibited from taxing under the
Constitution or statutes of the United States;
      (3)   A conveyance to a municipality, township, school district or county
pursuant to acquisition by the municipality, township, school district or
county of a tax delinquent property at sheriff sale or tax claim bureau sale;
      (4)   A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration which corrects or
confirms a transfer previously recorded, but which does not extend or limit
existing record legal title or interest;
      (5)   A transfer or division in kind for no or nominal actual
consideration of property passed by testate or intestate succession and held by
co-tenants; however, if any of the parties take shares greater in value than
their undivided interest, tax is due on the excess;
      (6)   A transfer between husband and wife, between persons who were
previously husband and wife who have since been divorced, provided the property
or interest therein subject to such transfer was acquired by the husband and
wife or husband or wife prior to the granting of the final decree in divorce,
between parent and child or the spouse of such child, between brother or sister
or spouse of a brother or sister, and between a grandparent and grandchild or
the spouse of such grandchild, except that a subsequent transfer by the grantee
within one year shall be subject to tax as if the grantor were making such
transfer;
      (7)   A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration of property
passing by testate or intestate succession from a personal representative of a
decedent to the decedent’s devisee or heir;
      (8)   A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration to a trustee of
an ordinary trust where the transfer of the same property would be exempt if
the transfer was made directly from the grantor to all of the possible
beneficiaries, whether or not such beneficiaries are contingent or specifically
named. No such exemption shall be granted unless the Recorder of Deeds is
presented with a copy of the trust instrument that clearly identifies the
grantor and all possible beneficiaries;
      (9)   A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from a trustee to
a beneficiary of an ordinary trust;
      (10)   A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from trustee to
successor trustee;
      (11)   (a)   A transfer:
            1.   For no or nominal actual consideration between principal and
agent or straw party; or
            2.   From or to an agent or straw party where, if the agent or
straw party were his or her principal, no tax would be imposed under this Part.
         (b)   Where the document by which title is acquired by a grantee or
statement of value fails to set forth that the property was acquired by the
grantee from, or for the benefit of, his or her principal, there is a
rebuttable presumption that the property is the property of the grantee in his
or her individual capacity if the grantee claims an exemption from taxation
under this subsection (A)(11).
      (12)   A transfer made pursuant to the statutory merger or consolidation
of a corporation or statutory division of a nonprofit corporation, except where
the department reasonably determines that the primary intent for such merger,
consolidation or division is avoidance of the tax imposed by this Part;
      (13)   A transfer from a corporation or association of real estate held
of record in the name of the corporation or association where the grantee owns
stock of the corporation or an interest in the association in the same
proportion as his or her interest in or ownership of the real estate being
conveyed and where the stock of the corporation or the interest in the
association has been held by the grantee for more than two years;
      (14)   A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or
authority to a grantee of property conveyed by the grantee to that agency or
authority as security for a debt of the grantee or a transfer to a nonprofit
industrial development agency or authority;
      (15)   A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or
authority to a grantee purchasing directly from it, but only if:
         (a)   The grantee shall directly use such real estate for the primary
purpose of manufacturing, fabricating, compounding, processing, publishing,
research and development, transportation, energy conversion, energy production,
pollution control, warehousing or agriculture; and
         (b)   The agency or authority has the full ownership interest in the
real estate transferred.
      (16)   A transfer by a mortgagor to the holder of a bona fide mortgage in
default in lieu of a foreclosure or a transfer pursuant to a judicial sale in
which the successful bidder is the bona fide holder of a mortgage, unless the
holder assigns the bid to another person;
      (17)   Any transfer between religious organizations or other bodies or
persons holding title for a religious organization if such real estate is not
being or has not been used by such transferor for commercial purposes;
      (18)   A transfer to a conservancy which possesses a tax exempt status
pursuant to § 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, (68 Pa.Stat. 3,
26 U.S.C. § 501(c)(3)) and which has as its primary purpose preservation of
land for historic, recreational, scenic, agricultural or open space
opportunities;
      (19)   A transfer of real estate devoted to the business of agriculture
to a family farm corporation by a member of the same family which directly owns
at least 75% of each class of the stock thereof;
      (20)   A transfer between members of the same family of an ownership
interest in a real estate company or family farm corporation;
      (21)   A transaction wherein the tax is $1 or less; and
      (22)   Leases for the production or extraction of coal, oil, natural gas
or minerals and assignments thereof.
   (B)   In order to exercise any exclusion provided in this section, the true,
full and complete value of the transfer shall be shown on the statement of
value. A copy of the state realty transfer tax statement of value may be
submitted for this purpose. For leases of coal, oil, natural gas or minerals,
the statement of value may be limited to an explanation of the reason such
document is not subject to tax under this Part.
§ 24-307 DOCUMENTS RELATING TO ASSOCIATIONS, CORPORATIONS AND MEMBERS,
PARTNERS, STOCKHOLDERS OR SHAREHOLDERS THEREOF.
   Except as otherwise provided in § 24-306, documents which make, confirm or
evidence any transfer or demise of title to real estate between associations or
corporations and the members, partners, shareholders or stockholders thereof
are fully taxable. For the purposes of this section, corporations and
associations are entities separate from their members, partners, stockholders
and shareholders.
§ 24-308 ACQUIRED COMPANY.
   (A)   A real estate company is an acquired company upon a change in the
ownership interest in the company, however effected; if the change does not
affect the continuity of the company; and of itself or together with prior
changes has the effect of transferring, directly or indirectly, 90% or more of
the total ownership interest in the company within a period of three years.
   (B)   With respect to real estate acquired after February 16, 1986, a family
farm corporation is an acquired company when, because of voluntary or
involuntary dissolution, it ceases to be a family farm corporation or when,
because of issuance or transfer of stock or because of acquisition or transfer
of assets that are devoted to the business of agriculture, it fails to meet the
minimum requirements of a family farm corporation under this Part.
   (C)   Within 30 days after becoming an acquired company, the company shall
present a declaration of acquisition with the Recorder of each county in which
it holds real estate for the affixation of documentary stamps and recording.
Such declaration shall set forth the value of real estate holdings of the
acquired company in such county. A copy of the state realty transfer tax
declaration of acquisition may be submitted for this purpose.
§ 24-309 CREDITS AGAINST TAX.
   (A)   Where there is a transfer of a residential property by a licensed real
estate broker which property was transferred to him or her within the preceding
year as consideration for the purchase of other residential property, a credit
for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the transfer to him or her shall
be given to him or her toward the amount of the tax due upon the transfer.
   (B)   Where there is a transfer by a builder of residential property which
was transferred to the builder within the preceding year as a consideration for
the purchase of new, previously unoccupied residential property, a credit for
the amount of the tax paid at the time of the transfer to the builder shall be
given to the builder toward the amount of the tax due upon the transfer.
   (C)   Where there is a transfer of real estate which is leased by the
grantor, a credit for the amount of tax paid at the time of the lease shall be
given the grantor toward the tax due upon the transfer.
   (D)   Where there is a conveyance by deed of real estate which was
previously sold under a land contract by the grantor, a credit for the amount
of the tax paid at the time of the sale shall be given the grantor toward the
tax due upon the deed.
   (E)   If the tax due upon the transfer is greater than the credit given
under this section, the difference shall be paid. If the credit allowed is
greater than the amount of tax due, no refund or carryover credit shall be
allowed.
§ 24-310 EXTENSION OF LEASE.
   In determining the term of a lease, it shall be presumed that a right or
option to renew or extend a lease will be exercised if the rental charge to the
lessee is fixed or if a method for calculating the rental charge is
established.
§ 24-311 PROCEEDS OF JUDICIAL SALE.
   The tax herein imposed shall be fully paid, and have priority out of the
proceeds of any judicial sale of real estate before any other obligation,
claim, lien, judgment, estate or costs of the sale and of the writ upon which
the sale is made except the state realty transfer tax, and the sheriff, or
other officer conducting said sale, shall pay the tax herein imposed out of the
first monies paid to him or her in connection therewith. If the proceeds of the
sale are insufficient to pay the entire tax herein imposed, the purchaser shall
be liable for the remaining tax.
§ 24-312 DUTIES OF RECORDER OF DEEDS.
   (A)   As provided in 16 P.S. § 11011-6, as amended by Act of July 7, 1983,
(P.L. 40, No. 21), the Recorder of Deeds shall be the collection agent for the
local realty transfer tax, including any amount payable to borough based on a
redetermination of the amount of tax due by the Commonwealth of the state
realty transfer tax, without compensation from the borough.
   (B)   In order to ascertain the amount of the taxes due when the property is
located in more than one political subdivision, the Recorder shall not accept
for recording such a deed unless it is accompanied by a statement of value
showing what taxes are due each municipality.
   (C)   On or before the tenth of each month, the Recorder shall pay over to
the borough all local realty transfer taxes collected, less 2% for use of the
county, together with a report containing the information as is required by the
Commonwealth in reporting collections of the state realty transfer tax. The 2%
commission shall be paid to the county.
   (D)   Upon a redetermination of the amount of realty transfer tax due by the
Commonwealth, the Recorder shall re-record the deed or record the additional
realty transfer tax form only when both the state and local amounts and a re-
recording or recording fee has been tendered.
§ 24-313 STATEMENT OF VALUE.
   Every document lodged with or presented to the Recorder of Deeds for
recording, shall set forth therein and as a part of such document the true,
full and complete value thereof, or shall be accompanied by a statement of
value executed by a responsible person connected with the transaction showing
such connection and setting forth the true, full and complete value thereof or
the reason, if any, why such document is not subject to tax under this Part. A
copy of the state realty transfer tax statement of value may be submitted for
this purpose. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any excludable
real estate transfers which are exempt from taxation based on family
relationship. Other documents presented for the affixation of stamps shall be
accompanied by a certified copy of the document and statement of value executed
by a responsible person connected with the transaction showing such connection
and setting forth the true, full and complete value thereof or the reason, if
any, why such document is not subject to tax under this Part.
§ 24-314 CIVIL PENALTIES.
   (A)   If any part of any underpayment of taxes imposed by this Part is due
to fraud, there shall be added to the tax an amount equal to 50% of the
underpayment.
   (B)   In the case of failure to record a declaration required under this
Part on the date prescribed therefor, unless it is shown that such failure is
due to reasonable cause, there shall be added to the tax 5% of the amount of
such tax if the failure is for not more than one month, with an additional 5%
for each additional month or fraction thereof during which such failure
continues, not exceeding 50% in the aggregate.
§ 24-315 LIEN.
   The tax imposed by this Part shall become a lien upon the lands, tenements
or hereditaments, or any interest therein, lying, being situated, wholly or in
part within the boundaries of the borough, which lands, tenements,
hereditaments or interest therein, are described in or conveyed by or
transferred by the deed which is the subject of the tax imposed, assessed and
levied by this Part, said lien to begin at the time when the tax under this
Part is due and payable, and continue until discharged by payment, or in
accordance with the law, and the Solicitor is authorized to file a municipal or
tax claim in the Court of Common Pleas of the county, in accordance with the
provisions of the Municipal Claims and Liens Act of 1923, 53 P.S. §§ 7101 et
seq., its supplements and amendments.
§ 24-316 ENFORCEMENT.
   All taxes imposed by this Part together with interest and penalties
prescribed herein, shall be recoverable as other debts of like character are
recovered.
§ 24-317 REGULATIONS.
   The Recorder of Deeds of the county is charged with enforcement and
collection of tax and is empowered to promulgate and enforce reasonable
regulations for enforcement and collection of the tax. The regulations which
have been promulgated by the Pennsylvania Department of Revenue under 72 P.S.
§§ 8107-C et seq. are incorporated into and made a part of this Part.
PART 4: LOCAL SERVICES TAX
Section
   
24-401   Title
   
24-402   Authority
   
24-403   Purpose
   
24-404   Definitions
   
24-405   Levy
   
24-406   Restricted use
   
24-407   Duty of employer
   
24-408   Returns
   
24-409   Dates for determining tax liability and payment
   
24-410   Individuals engaged in more than one occupation
   
24-411   Exemptions to the local services tax
   
24-412   Self-employed individuals
   
24-413   Employees and self-employed individuals residing beyond the limits of
the borough
   
24-414   Administration of tax
   
24-415   Suit for collection
   
24-416   Fine and penalty
   
24-417   Repealer and severability
   
24-418   Effective date
§ 24-401 TITLE.
   This Part shall be known and may be cited as the “Borough of Dillsburg Local
Services Tax Ordinance”.
(Ord. 2007-8, passed - -2007)
§ 24-402 AUTHORITY.
   This Part is enacted under the authority of the Local Tax Enabling Act, as
amended by Act No. 7 of 2007, being 53 P.S. §§ 6924.101 et seq.
(Ord. 2007-8, passed - -2007)
§ 24-403 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this Part is to provide revenue for police, fire and
emergency services; road construction and maintenance; the reduction of
property taxes and for such other purposes as may be specified for such tax
from time to time by the laws of the Commonwealth.
(Ord. 2007-8, passed - -2007)
§ 24-404 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this Part, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BOROUGH. The area within the jurisdictional limits of the Borough of
Dillsburg.
   COLLECTOR. The person or firm, from time to time, designated by resolution
of the Council of the Dillsburg Borough to collect and administer the provision
of this Part and collect the tax levied by this Part. Until changed by
subsequent resolution, the Collector shall be the same person or firm last
designated to collect the emergency and municipal services tax for the Borough
of Dillsburg.
   COUNCIL. The governing body of the Borough of Dillsburg.
   EARNED INCOME. Compensation as determined under § 303 of the Act of March 4,
1971 (P.L. 6, No. 2), known as the Tax Reform Code of 1971, and regulations in
61 Pa. Code Pt. I Subpt. B Art. V (relating to personal income tax) not
including, however, wages or compensation paid to individuals on active
military service. Employee business expenses are allowable deductions as
determined under Article III of the Tax Reform Code of 1971. Any housing
allowance provided to a member of the clergy shall not be taxable as EARNED
INCOME.
   EMPLOYER. An individual, partnership, association, corporation, governmental
body, agency or other entity employing one or more persons on a salary, wage,
commission, fee or other compensation basis, including a self-employed person.
   HE, HIS or HIM. Includes singular and plural number and male, female and
neuter gender.
   INDIVIDUAL. Any person engaged in any occupation, trade or profession within
the jurisdictional limits of the Borough of Dillsburg whose total earned income
and net profits within the Borough of Dillsburg are greater than $12,000 per
calendar year.
   NET PROFITS. The net income from the operation of a business, profession or
other activity, (except from corporations), determined under § 303 of the Act
of March 4, 1971 (P.L. 6, No. 2) known as the Tax Reform Code of 1971, and
regulations in 61 Pa. Code Pt. 1 Subpt. B Art. V (relating to personal income
tax). The term does not include income which is not paid for services provided
and which is in the nature of earnings from an investment. For taxpayers
engaged in the business, profession or activity of farming the term shall not
include:
      (1)   Any interest generated from monetary accounts or investment
instruments of the farming business;
      (2)   Any gain on the sale of farming machinery;
      (3)   Any gain on the sale of livestock held 12 months or more for draft,
breeding or dairy purposes; and
      (4)   Any gain on the sale of other capital assets of the farm.
   OCCUPATION. Any trade, profession, business or undertaking of any type, kind
or character including services, domestic or other, carried on or preformed
within the jurisdictional limits of the borough for which compensation is
charged and/or received, whether by salary, wages, commissions, fees or net
profits for services rendered.
   RESERVE COMPONENT OF THE ARMED FORCES. The United States Army Reserve,
United States Navy Reserve, United States Marine Corps Reserve, United States
Coast Guard Reserve, United States Air Force Reserve, the Pennsylvania Army
National Guard or the Pennsylvania Air National Guard.
   TAX. The local services tax levied in this Part.
   YEAR. A calendar year.
(Ord. 2007-8, passed - -2007)
§ 24-405 LEVY.
   The borough hereby levies and imposes on every individual engaging in an
occupation within the jurisdictional limits of the borough a tax in the amount
of $52 per annum, beginning the first day of January, 2008 and continuing on a
calendar basis annually thereafter, until modified or repealed by subsequent
ordinance. This tax is in addition to all other taxes of any kind or nature
heretofore levied by the borough.
(Ord. 2007-8, passed - -2007)
§ 24-406 RESTRICTED USE.
   (A)   The borough shall use the revenue derived from this tax for the
following purposes:
      (1)   Emergency services, which shall include emergency medical services,
police services and/or fire services;
      (2)   Road construction and/or maintenance;
      (3)   Reduction of property taxes; and
      (4)   Property tax relief through implementation of a homestead and
farmstead exclusion in accordance with 53 Pa.C.S. Chapter 85 Subchapter F
(relating to homestead property exclusion).
   (B)   The borough shall use no less than 25% of the funds derived from the
local services tax for emergency services.
(Ord. 2007-8, passed - -2007)
§ 24-407 DUTY OF EMPLOYER.
   (A)   Each employer within borough and each employer situated outside the
borough who engages in business within the borough, is hereby charged with the
duty of collecting the tax from each of the employees engaged by the employer
and performing work for the employer within the borough. Each person subject to
the tax shall be assessed a pro rata share of the tax for each payroll period
in which the person is engaging in an occupation.
   (B)   The pro rata share of the tax assessed on the person for a payroll
period shall be determined by dividing the combined rate of the local services
tax levied for the calendar year by the number of payroll periods established
by the employer for the calendar year. For purposes of determining the pro rata
share, an employer shall round down the amount of the tax collected each
payroll period to the nearest one-hundredth of a dollar.
   (C)   Employer collection of the local services tax shall be made on a
payroll period basis for each payroll period, beginning with the first payroll
period in which the person is engaging in an occupation.
No employer shall be held liable for failure to withhold the local services tax
or for the payment of the withheld tax money to a political subdivision if the
failure to withhold taxes arises from incorrect information submitted by the
employee as to the employee’s place or places of employment, the employee’s
principal office or where the employee is principally employed.
(Ord. 2007-8, passed - -2007)
§ 24-408 RETURNS.
   Employers are required to make and file a local services tax quarterly
return 30 days after the end of each quarter of a calendar year. The local
services tax quarterly return shall list the name, address, social security
number of the employee; the physical address of the employee’s place of
employment; the number of payroll periods for which the local services tax was
withheld and the amount of local services tax being remitted for each employee.
(Ord. 2007-8, passed - -2007)
§ 24-409 DATES FOR DETERMINING TAX LIABILITY AND PAYMENT.
   Each employer shall use his or her employment and payroll records from
January 1 to March 31 each year for determining the number of employees from
whom said tax shall be deducted and paid over to the Collector on or before
April 30 of the same calendar year. Supplemental reports shall be made by each
employer on July 30, October 30 and January 31 for new employees as reflected
on his or her employment and payroll records from April 1 to June 30, July 1 to
September 30 and October 1 to December 31, and payments on these supplemental
reports shall be made on July 30, October 30 and January 30, respectively.
(Ord. 2007-8, passed - -2007)
§ 24-410 INDIVIDUALS ENGAGED IN MORE THAN ONE OCCUPATION.
   (A)   In the event a person is engaged in more than one occupation, that is,
concurrent employment, or an occupation which requires the person working in
more than one political subdivision during the payroll period, the priority of
claim to collect the local services tax shall be in the following order:
      (1)   The political subdivision in which a person maintains his or her
principal office or is principally employed;
      (2)   The political subdivision in which the person resides and works, if
the tax is levied by that political subdivision; and
      (3)   The political subdivision in which a person is employed and which
imposes the tax nearest in miles to the person’s home.
   (B)   In the case of concurrent employment, an employer shall refrain from
withholding the local services tax, if the employee provides:
      (1)   A recent pay statement from a principal employer that includes the
name of the employer, the length of the payroll period and the amount of local
services tax withheld; and
      (2)   A statement from the employee that the pay statement is from the
employee’s principal employer and the employee will notify other employers of a
change in principal place of employment within two weeks of its occurrence.
   (C)   The situs of the tax shall be the place of employment on the first day
the person becomes subject to the tax during each payroll period. It is the
intent of this section that no person shall be subject to the payment of the
local services tax by more than one political subdivision during each payroll
period.
(Ord. 2007-8, passed - -2007)
§ 24-411 EXEMPTIONS TO THE LOCAL SERVICES TAX.
   (A)   The local services tax shall be no more than $52 on each person for
each calendar year, irrespective of the number of political subdivisions within
which a person may be employed.
   (B)   The law requires municipalities and school districts who levy the
local services tax at a combined rate exceeding $10 to exempt any person from
the local services tax whose total earned income and net profits from all
sources within the political subdivision is less than $12,000 for the calendar
year in which the local services tax is levied.
   (C)   Each political subdivision levying the local services tax shall exempt
the following persons from the local services tax:
      (1)   Any person who served in any war or armed conflict in which the
United States was engaged and is honorably discharged or released under
honorable circumstances from active service if, as a result of military
service, the person is blind, paraplegic or a double or quadruple amputee or
has a service connected disability declared by the United States Veterans’
Administration or its successor to be a total 100% permanent disability; and
      (2)   Any person who serves as a member of a reserve component of the
Armed Forces and is called to active duty at any time during the taxable year.
A RESERVE COMPONENT OF THE ARMED FORCES shall mean the United States Army
Reserve, United States Navy Reserve, United States Marine Corps Reserve, United
States Coast Guard Reserve, United States Air Force Reserve, the Pennsylvania
Army National Guard or the Pennsylvania Air National Guard.
   (D)   A person seeking to claim an exemption from the local services tax may
annually file an exemption certificate with the Collector of the tax for the
political subdivision levying the tax and file a copy of the certificate with
the person’s employer affirming that the person reasonably expects to receive
earned income and net profits from all sources within the political subdivision
of less than $12,000 in the calendar year for which the exemption certificate
is filed.
   (E)   The exemption certificate shall have attached to it a copy of all of
the employee’s last pay stubs or W-2 forms from employment within the political
subdivision for the year prior to the fiscal year for which the employee is
requesting to be exempted from the local services tax.
   (F)   Upon receipt of the exemption certificate and until otherwise
instructed by the Collector of the tax for the political subdivision levying
the tax the employer shall not withhold the tax from the person during the
calendar year or remainder of the calendar year for which the exemption
certificate applies. With respect to a person who claimed an exemption from the
local services tax, upon notification to an employer by the person or by the
Collector of the tax for the political subdivision, that the person has
received earned income and net profits from all sources within that political
subdivision equal to or in excess of $12,000 in that calendar year or that the
person is otherwise ineligible for the tax exemption for that calendar year, or
upon an employer’s payment to the person of earned income within that political
subdivision in an amount equal to or in excess of $12,000 in that calendar
year, an employer shall withhold the local services tax from the person as
follows:
      (1)   If a person who claimed an exemption for a given calendar year from
the local services tax becomes subject to the tax for the calendar year, the
employer shall withhold the tax for the remainder of that calendar year;
      (2)   The employer shall withhold from the person, for the first payroll
period after receipt of the notification under subsection (F)(1) above, a lump
sum equal to the amount of the tax that was not withheld from the person due to
the exemption certificate filed by the person, plus the per payroll amount due
for that first payroll period;
      (3)   The amount of tax withheld per payroll period for the remaining
payroll periods in that calendar year shall be the same amount withheld for
other employees; and
      (4)   In the event the employment of a person subject to withholding of
the local services tax under this exception is severed in that calendar year,
the person shall be liable for any outstanding balance of tax due and the
political subdivision levying the tax may pursue collection under this Act.
   (G)   Employers shall not be responsible for investigating exemption
certificates, monitoring tax exemption eligibility or exempting any employee
from a local services tax.
   (H)   Employers shall be responsible for retaining a copy of all exemption
certificates filed by employees within a given calendar year for a minimum of
three years. Employers who have failed to withhold the local services tax from
an employee or employees, and do not have copies of the employee exemption
certificate or certificates, will be held responsible for the payment of the
local services tax as if the tax had been originally levied against the
employer.
(Ord. 2007-8, passed - -2007)
§ 24-412 SELF-EMPLOYED INDIVIDUALS.
   (A)   All self-employed individuals and individuals whose employer is not
required to withhold local taxes (certain state and federal agencies) will be
billed quarterly for the local services tax.
   (B)   The full amount of tax must be paid by the date indicated on such
billing.
   (C)   If such taxpayer qualifies for a low-income exemption, the taxpayer
may complete the required exemption certificate or make application for a
refund of the tax paid.
(Ord. 2007-8, passed - -2007)
§ 24-413 EMPLOYEES AND SELF-EMPLOYED INDIVIDUALS RESIDING BEYOND THE LIMITS OF
THE BOROUGH.
   All employers and self-employed individuals residing or having their place
of business outside borough but who engage in any occupation within the
borough, do by virtue thereof agree to be bound by and subject themselves to
the provisions, penalties and regulations promulgated under this Part with the
same force and effect as though they were residents of the borough. Further,
any individual engaged in an occupation within the borough and an employee of a
nonresident employer may for the purpose of this Part be considered a self-
employed person and in the event this tax is not paid, the Collector shall have
the option of proceeding against either the employer or employee for collection
of this tax as hereinafter provided.
(Ord. 2007-8, passed - -2007)
§ 24-414 ADMINISTRATION OF TAX.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the Collector to accept and receive payments
of this tax and keep a record thereof showing the amount received by him or her
from each employer or self employed person, together with the date the tax was
received. It shall be the duty of the Collector to accept and keep a record of
the information submitted by employers relating to the number of employees
subject to the tax, the number of employees exempt from the tax, the employee
exemption certificates and refunds of the tax paid to individuals and
employers.
   (B)   The Collector is hereby charged with the administration and
enforcement of this Part and is hereby empowered to prescribe, adopt,
promulgate and enforce rules and regulations relating to any matter pertaining
to the administration and enforcement of this Part, including provisions for
the examination of the payroll records of any employer subject to this Part;
the examination and correction of any return made in compliance with this Part;
and any payment alleged or found to be incorrect or as to which overpayment is
claimed or found to have occurred. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the
Collector shall have the right to appeal to the Court of Common Pleas of York
or Cumberland County as in other cases provided.
   (C)   The Collector is hereby authorized to examine the books and payroll
records of any employer in order to verify the accuracy of any return made by
an employer; or, if no return was made, to ascertain the tax due. Each employer
is hereby directed and required to give the Collector the means, facilities and
opportunity for such examination.
(Ord. 2007-8, passed - -2007)
§ 24-415 SUIT FOR COLLECTION.
   (A)   In the event any of the tax under this Part remains due or unpaid 30
days after the due date set forth above, the Collector may sue for the recovery
of such tax due or unpaid together with interest and penalty.
   (B)   If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate
of 6% per annum on the amount of said tax, and an additional penalty of 10%
shall be added to the flat rate of said tax for non-payment thereof. Where suit
is brought for the recovery of this tax, the individual liable therefor shall,
in addition, be responsible and liable for the costs of collection, including,
but not limited to, attorney fees.
(Ord. 2007-8, passed - -2007)
§ 24-416 FINE AND PENALTY.
   Whoever makes any false or untrue statement on any return required by this
Part, or who refuses inspection of his or her books, records or accounts in his
or her custody and control in order to determine the number of employees
subject to this tax who are in his or her employment, or who fails or refuses
to file any return required by this Part, or fails or refuses to pay the tax
herein levied shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $600 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, be
sentenced to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. It is further
provided that the action to enforce the fine and penalty herein provided may be
instituted against any person in charge of the business of any employer who has
failed or refused to file a return required by this Part.
(Ord. 2007-8, passed - -2007)
§ 24-417 REPEALER AND SEVERABILITY.
   The provisions of this Part shall be severable. If any of its provisions
shall be held to be unconstitutional, illegal or otherwise invalid, that
decision shall not affect the remaining provisions of this Part or of the
borough’s code of ordinances.
(Ord. 2007-8, passed - -2007)
§ 24-418 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This Part shall become effective in accordance with applicable law, with the
repeal of previous occupational privilege tax and emergency and municipal
services tax ordinances, effective January 1, 2008.
(Ord. 2007-8, passed - -2007)
PART 5: LOCAL TAXPAYERS BILL OF RIGHTS
Section
   
24-501   Short title
   
24-502   Definitions
   
24-503   Disclosure statement
   
24-504   Requirements for requests
   
24-505   Refunds of overpayments
   
24-506   Interest on overpayment
   
24-507   Notice of basis of underpayment
   
24-508   Abatement of certain interest and penalty
   
24-509   Application of payments
   
24-510   Administrative appeals
   
24-511   Petitions
   
24-512   Practice and procedure
   
24-513   Decisions
   
24-514   Appeals
   
24-515   Equitable and legal principles to apply
   
24-516   Installment agreement
   
24-517   Confidentiality of tax information
   
24-518   Taxes on real property
§ 24-501 SHORT TITLE.
   This Part shall be known and may be cited as the “Local Taxpayers Bill of
Rights”.
§ 24-502 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this Part, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ASSESSMENT. The determination by the borough of the amount of underpayment
by a taxpayer.
   BOARD. A board of local tax appeals established under 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 8430
(relating to administrative appeals).
   ELIGIBLE TAX. Any of the following, including interest and penalty provided
by law, when levied by a political subdivision:
      (1)   Any tax authorized or permitted under the Act of December 31, 1965
(P.L. 1257, No. 511, known as the Local Tax Enabling Act), being 53 P.S. §§
6924.101 et seq.;
      (2)   Any per capita tax levied under any Act;
      (3)   Any occupation, occupation assessment or occupation privilege tax
levied under any Act;
      (4)   Any tax on income levied under any Act;
      (5)   Any tax measured by gross receipts levied under any Act;
      (6)   Any tax on a privilege levied under any Act;
      (7)   Any tax on amusements or admissions levied under any Act; and
      (8)   Any tax on earned income and net profits.
   GOVERNING BODY. The Borough Council of the Borough of Dillsburg, York
County, Pennsylvania.
   OVERPAYMENT. Any payment of tax which is determined in the manner provided
by law not to be legally due.
   TAXPAYER. An individual, partnership, association, corporation, limited
liability company, estate, trust, trustee, fiduciary or any other entity
subject to or claiming exemption from any eligible tax or under a duty to
perform an act for itself or for another or pursuant to the authority of an act
providing for an eligible tax.
   UNDERPAYMENT. The amount or portion of any tax determined to be legally due
in the manner provided by law for which payment or remittance has not been
made.
   VOLUNTARY PAYMENT. A payment of an eligible tax made pursuant to the free
will of the taxpayer. The term does not include a payment made as a result of
distraint or levy or pursuant to a legal proceeding in which the borough is
seeking to collect its delinquent taxes or file a claim therefor.
§ 24-503 DISCLOSURE STATEMENT.
   (A)   Contents. The borough shall prepare a statement which sets forth the
following in simple and nontechnical terms:
      (1)   The rights of a taxpayer and the obligation of the borough during
an audit or an administrative review of the taxpayer’s books or records;
      (2)   The administration and judicial procedures by which a taxpayer may
appeal or seek review of any adverse decision of the borough;
      (3)   The procedure for filing and processing refund claim and taxpayer
complaints; and
      (4)   The enforcement procedures.
   (B)   Distribution. The borough shall notify any taxpayer contacted
regarding the assessment, audit, determination, review or collection of an
eligible tax of the availability of the statement under subsection (A) above.
The borough shall make copies of the statement available to taxpayers upon
request at no charge to the taxpayer, including mailing costs. The notification
shall be stated as follows:
      “You are entitled to receive a written explanation of your rights with
regard to the audit, appeal, enforcement, refund and collection of local taxes
by calling the Borough of Dillsburg at (717) 432-9969 during normal business
hours”.
§ 24-504 REQUIREMENTS FOR REQUESTS.
   (A)   Minimum time period for taxpayer response.
      (1)   The taxpayer shall have at least 30 calendar days from the mailing
date to respond to request for information by the borough. The borough shall
grant additional reasonable extensions upon application for good cause. Any
taxpayer who shall violate this provision shall, upon conviction thereof, be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 plus costs. Each day that a
violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
      (2)   The borough shall notify the taxpayer of the procedures to obtain
an extension in its initial request.
      (3)   The borough shall take no lawful action against a taxpayer for the
tax year in question until the expiration of the applicable response period,
including extensions.
   (B)   Requests for prior year returns.
      (1)   Except as provided in subsection (B)(2) below, an initial inquiry
by the borough regarding a taxpayer’s compliance with any eligible tax may
include taxes required to be paid or tax returns required to be filed no more
than three years prior to the mailing date of the notice.
      (2)   (a)   The borough may make a subsequent request for a tax return or
supporting information if, after the initial request, the borough determines
that the taxpayer failed to file a tax return, under-reported income or failed
to pay a tax for one or more of the tax periods covered by the initial request.
         (b)   This subsection (B) shall apply if the borough has sufficient
information to indicate that the taxpayer failed to file a required return or
pay an eligible tax which was due more than three years prior to the date of
the notice.
   (C)   Use of federal tax information. The borough may require a taxpayer to
provide copies of the taxpayer’s federal individual income tax return if the
borough can demonstrate that the federal tax information is reasonably
necessary for the enforcement or collection of an eligible tax and the
information is not available from other available sources or the Department of
Revenue.
§ 24-505 REFUNDS OF OVERPAYMENTS.
   (A)   General rule. A taxpayer who has paid an eligible tax to the borough
may file a written request with the borough for refund or credit of the
eligible tax. A request for refund shall be made within three years of the due
date for filing the report as extended or one year after actual payment of the
eligible tax, whichever is later. If no report is required, the request shall
be made within three years after the due date for payment of the eligible tax
or within one year after actual payment of the eligible tax, whichever is
later.
      (1)   For purposes of this section, a tax return filed by the taxpayer
with the borough showing an overpayment of tax shall be deemed to be a written
request for a cash refund unless otherwise indicated on the tax return.
      (2)   A request for refund under this section shall not be considered a
petition under 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 8340 (relating to petitions).
   (B)   Notice of underpayment. For amounts paid as a result of a notice
asserting or informing a taxpayer of an underpayment, a written request for
refund shall be filed with the borough within one year of the date of the
payment.
§ 24-506 INTEREST ON OVERPAYMENT.
   (A)   General rule. All overpayments of tax due the borough, including taxes
on real property, shall bear simple interest from the date of overpayment until
the date of resolution.
   (B)   Interest rate. Interest on overpayments shall be allowed and paid at
the same rate as the Commonwealth is required to pay pursuant to § 806.1 of the
Act of April 9, 1929 (P.L. 343, No. 176) known as the Fiscal Code, being 72
P.S. §§ 1 et seq.
   (C)   Exceptions.
      (1)   No interest shall be allowed if an overpayment is refunded or
applied against any other tax, interest or penalty due the borough within 75
days after the last date prescribed for filing the report of the tax liability
or within 75 days after the date the return or report of the liability due is
filed, whichever is later.
      (2)   Overpayments of interest or penalty shall not bear any interest.
   (D)   Acceptance of refund check. The taxpayer’s acceptance of the borough
check shall not prejudice any right of the taxpayer to claim any additional
overpayment and interest thereon. Tender of a refund check by the borough shall
be deemed to be acceptance of the check by the taxpayer for purposes of this
section.
   (E)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      DATE OF OVERPAYMENT. The later of the date paid or the date tax is deemed
to have been overpaid as follows:
         (a)   Any tax actually deducted and withheld at the source shall be
deemed to have been overpaid on the last day of filing the report for the tax
period, determined without regard to any extension of time for filing;
         (b)   Any amount overpaid as estimated tax for the tax period shall be
deemed to have been overpaid on the last day for filing the final report for
the tax period, determined without regard to any extension of time for filing;
         (c)   An overpayment made before the last day prescribed for payment
shall be deemed to have been paid on the last day;
         (d)   Any amount claimed to be overpaid with respect to which a lawful
administrative review or appellate procedure is initiated shall be deemed to
have been overpaid 60 days following the date of initiation of the review or
procedure; and
         (e)   Any amount shown not to be due on an amended income or earned
income and net profits tax return shall be deemed to have been overpaid 60 days
following the date of filing of the amended income tax return.
      DATE of RESOLUTION. The date the overpayment is refunded or credited as
follows:
         (a)   For a cash refund, a date preceding the date of the borough’s
refund check by not more than 30 days.
         (b)   For a credit for an overpayment.
            1.   The date of the borough’s notice to the taxpayer of the
determination of the credit; or
            2.   The due date for payment of the tax against which the credit
is applied, whichever first occurs. For a cash refund of a previously
determined credit, interest shall be paid on the amount of the credit from a
date 90 days after the filing of a request to convert the credit to a cash
refund to a date preceding the date of the refund check by not more than 30
days whether or not the refund check is accepted by the taxpayer after tender.
§ 24-507 NOTICE OF BASIS OF UNDERPAYMENT.
   The borough shall notify the taxpayer, in writing, of the basis for any
underpayment that the borough has determined to exist. The notification shall
include:
   (A)   The tax period or periods for which the underpayment is asserted;
   (B)   The amount of the underpayment detailed by tax period;
   (C)   The legal basis upon which the borough has relied to determine that an
underpayment exists; and
   (D)   An itemization of the revisions made by the borough to a return or
report filed by the taxpayer that results in the determination that an
underpayment exists.
§ 24-508 ABATEMENT OF CERTAIN INTEREST AND PENALTY.
   (A)   Errors and delays. In the case of any underpayment, the borough may
abate all or any part of interest for any period for the following:
      (1)   Any underpayment or tax finally determined to be due attributable
in whole or in part to any error or delay by the borough in the performance of
a ministerial act. For purposes of this subsection (A), an error or delay shall
be taken into account only if no significant aspect of the error or delay can
be attributed to the taxpayer and after the borough has contacted the taxpayer,
in writing, with respect to the underpayment of tax finally determined to be
due or payable; and
      (2)   Any payment of a tax to the extent that any error in delay in the
payment is attributable to an officer, employee or agent of the borough being
erroneous or dilatory in performance of a ministerial act. The borough shall
determine what constitutes timely performance of ministerial acts performed
under this subsection (A).
   (B)   Abatement due to erroneous written advice by the borough.
      (1)   The borough shall abate any portion of any penalty or excess
interest attributable to erroneous advice furnished to the taxpayer in writing
by an officer, employee or agent of the borough acting in the officer’s,
employee’s or agent’s official capacity if:
         (a)   The written advice was reasonably relied upon by the taxpayer
and was in response to specific written request of the taxpayer; and
         (b)   The portion of the penalty or addition to tax or excess interest
did not result from a failure by the taxpayer to provide adequate or accurate
information.
      (2)   This subsection (B) shall not be construed to require the borough
to provided written advice to taxpayers.
§ 24-509 APPLICATION OF PAYMENTS.
   Unless otherwise specified by the taxpayer, all voluntary payments of an
eligible tax shall be prioritized by the borough as follows:
   (A)   Tax;
   (B)   Interest;
   (C)   Penalty; and
   (D)   Any other fees or charges.
§ 24-510 ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS.
   (A)   A political subdivision levying an eligible tax shall establish an
administrative process to receive and make determinations on petitions from
taxpayers relating to the assessment, determination or refund of an eligible
tax. The administrative process shall consist of any one of the following:
      (1)   Review and decision by the Borough Council; or
      (2)   A hearing and decision by a Hearing Officer appointed by the
Borough Council.
   (B)   The Borough Council shall determine the qualifications and
compensation, if any, of the Hearing Officer.
(Ord. 2007-7, passed 8-14-2007)
§ 24-511 PETITIONS.
   (A)   Filing. A petition is timely filed if the letter transmitting the
petition is postmarked by the United States Postal Service on or before the
final day on which the petition is required to be filed. Deadlines for filing
petitions are as follows:
      (1)   Refund petitions shall be filed within three years after the due
date for filing the report as extended or one year after actual payment of an
eligible tax, whichever is later. If no report is required, the petition shall
be filed within three years after the due date for payment of an eligible tax
or within one year after actual payment, whichever is later; and
      (2)   Petitions for reassessment of an eligible tax shall be filed within
90 days of the date of the assessment notice.
   (B)   Contents. The Borough Council shall adopt regulations specifying the
form and content of petitions, including the process and deadlines.
§ 24-512 PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE.
   Practice and procedure under this section shall not be governed by 2 Pa.C.S.
Chapter 5 Subchapter B (relating to practice and procedure of local agencies)
and 2 Pa.C.S. Chapter 7 Subchapter B (relating to judicial review of local
agency action). The Borough Council shall adopt regulations governing practice
and procedure under this section.
§ 24-513 DECISIONS.
   Decisions on petitions submitted under this section shall be issued within
60 days of the date a complete and accurate petition is received. Failure to
act within 60 days shall result in the petition being deemed approved.
§ 24-514 APPEALS.
   Any person aggrieved by a decision under this Part who has a direct interest
in the decision shall have the right to appeal to the court vested with the
jurisdiction of local tax appeals by or pursuant to 42 Pa.C.S. (relating to
judiciary and judicial procedure).
§ 24-515 EQUITABLE AND LEGAL PRINCIPLES TO APPLY.
   Decisions under this Part may be made according to principles of law and
equity.
§ 24-516 INSTALLMENT AGREEMENT.
   (A)   Authorization. The borough may enter into written agreements with any
taxpayer under which the taxpayer is allowed to satisfy liability for any
eligible tax in installment payments if the borough determines that the
agreement will facilitate collection.
   (B)   Extent to which agreements remain in effect.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, any agreement entered
into by the borough under subsection (A) above shall remain in effect for the
term of the agreement.
      (2)   The borough may terminate any prior agreement entered into under
subsection (A) if:
         (a)   Information which the taxpayer provided to the borough prior to
the date of the agreement was inaccurate or incomplete; or
         (b)   The borough believes that collection of any eligible tax under
the agreement is in jeopardy.
      (3)   If the borough finds that the financial condition of the taxpayer
has significantly changed, the borough may alter, modify or terminate the
agreement, but only if:
         (a)   Notice of the borough’s finding is provided to the taxpayer not
late than 30 days prior to the date of such action; and
         (b)   The notice contains the reasons why the borough believes a
significant change has occurred.
      (4)   The borough may alter, modify or terminate an agreement entered
into by the borough under subsection (A) above if the taxpayer fails to do any
of the following:
         (a)   Pay any installment at the time the installment is due under
such agreement;
         (b)   Pay any other tax liability at the time liability is due; or
         (c)   Provide a financial condition update as requested by the
borough.
   (C)   Prepayment permitted. Nothing in this section shall prevent a taxpayer
from prepaying in whole or in part any eligible tax under any agreement with
the borough.
§ 24-517 CONFIDENTIALITY OF TAX INFORMATION.
   (A)   Any information gained by the borough as a result of any audit,
return, report, investigation, hearing or verification shall be confidential
tax information. It shall be unlawful, except for official purposes or as
provided by law, for the borough to:
      (1)   Divulge or make known in any manner an confidential information
gained in any return, investigation, hearing or verification to any person;
      (2)   Permit confidential tax information or any book containing any
abstract or particulars thereof to be seen or examined by any person; and
      (3)   Print public or make known in any manner any confidential tax
information.
   (B)   An offense under this section is a misdemeanor of the third degree
and, upon conviction thereof, a fine of not more than $2,500 and cost, or a
term of imprisonment for not more than one year, or both, may be imposed. If
the offender is an officer or employee of the borough, the officer or employee
shall be dismissed from office or discharged from employment.
§ 24-518 TAXES ON REAL PROPERTY.
   Except as provided in § 24-506 (Interest on Overpayment) this Part shall not
apply to any tax on real property.
PART 6: TAX COLLECTOR
Section
   
24-601   Duties and compensation of Tax Collector
   
24-602   Setting fees for additional services
§ 24-601 DUTIES AND COMPENSATION OF TAX COLLECTOR.
   It shall be the duty of the Tax Collector to collect and receive all taxes,
penalties and interest as provided herein, and to issue his or her receipt
therefor. He or she shall keep records showing amounts received by him or her,
and persons paying, and the nature of late payments. Return of taxes collected
shall be made to the Borough Treasurer and Council, in accordance with the law.
The commission to be paid to the Tax Collector shall be set, from time to time,
by resolution of the borough.
(Ord. 1997-2, passed - -1997; Ord. 2000-10, passed 1-9-2001; Ord. 2003-1,
passed 4-8-2003)
§ 24-602 SETTING FEES FOR ADDITIONAL SERVICES.
   Fees to recoup expenses incurred by the Tax Collector and borough shall be
set, from time to time, by resolution of the borough.
(Ord. 1997-2, passed - -1997; Ord. 2003-1, passed 4-8-2003)
CHAPTER 25: RESERVED
CHAPTER 26: WATER
      Part
         
1.   STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
PART 1: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
Section
Article I: General Provisions
   
26-101   Short title
   
26-102   Statement of findings
   
26-103   Purpose
   
26-104   Statutory authority
   
26-105   Applicability
   
26-106   Repealer
   
26-107   Severability
   
26-108   Compatibility with other requirements
   
26-109   Interpretation
   
26-110   Erroneous permit
Article II: Definitions
   
26-201   Definitions
Article III: Stormwater Management Practices
   
26-301   General requirements
   
26-302   Exemptions
   
26-303   Volume controls
   
26-304   Rate controls
   
26-305   Stormwater management facilities for Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation (PennDOT) and Pennsylvania Turnpike Commission (PTC) roadways
and associated facilities
   
26-306   Design and installation standards
Article IV: Stormwater Management (SWM) Site Plan Requirements
   
26-401   Plan requirements
   
26-402   Plan submission
   
26-403   Plan review and approval procedure
   
26-404   Revision of plans
   
26-405   Re-submission of disapproved SWM site plans
   
26-406   Authorization to construct and term of validity
   
26-407   As-built plans, completion certificate and final inspection
Article V: Operation and Maintenance
   
26-501   Responsibilities of developers and landowners
   
26-502   Operation and maintenance agreements
   
26-503   Performance guarantee
Article VI: Fees and Expenses
   
26-601   General
Article VII: Prohibitions
   
26-701   Prohibited discharges and connections
   
26-702   Roof drains
   
26-703   Alteration of SWM BMPs
Article VIII: Enforcement and Penalties
   
26-801   Right of entry
   
26-802   Inspection
   
26-803   Enforcement
   
26-804   Suspension and revocation
   
26-805   Penalties
   
26-806   Appeals
Article IX: References
   
26-901   References
Article X: Enactment
   
26-1001   Enactment
   
Exhibit 1: Computation table for storm sewer design
   
Exhibit 2: Typical composite runoff coefficients by land use
   
Exhibit 3: Rainfall; intensity, duration, frequency curve
   
Appendix A: Disconnected impervious area (DIA)
   
Appendix B: O&M agreement
ARTICLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 26-101 SHORT TITLE.
   This Part shall be known and may be cited as the “Dillsburg Borough
Stormwater Management Ordinance”.
(Ord. 2011-2, passed 10-11-2011)
§ 26-102 STATEMENT OF FINDINGS.
   The governing body of the borough finds that:
   (A)   Inadequate management of accelerated runoff of stormwater resulting
from development throughout a watershed increases flows and velocities,
contributes to erosion and sedimentation, overtaxes the carrying capacity of
streams and storm sewers, greatly increases the cost of public facilities to
carry and control stormwater, undermines floodplain management and flood
control efforts in downstream communities, reduces groundwater recharge,
threatens public health and safety, and increases non-point source pollution of
water resources;
   (B)   A comprehensive program of stormwater management, including reasonable
regulation of development and activities causing accelerated runoff, is
fundamental to the public health, safety and welfare and the protection of
people of the Commonwealth, their resources, and the environment;
   (C)   Stormwater is an important water resource, which provides groundwater
recharge for water supplies and base flow of streams, which also protects and
maintains surface water quality; and
   (D)   Federal and state regulations require certain municipalities to
implement a program of stormwater controls. These municipalities are required
to obtain a permit for stormwater discharges from their separate storm sewer
systems under the national pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES).
(Ord. 2011-2, passed 10-11-2011)
§ 26-103 PURPOSE.
   This Part was created pursuant to and under the authority of the Borough
Code. The purpose of this Part is to minimize the harm and maximize the
benefits described in §
26-102 of this Part, through provisions designed to:
   (A)   Meet legal water quality requirements under state law, including
regulations at 25 Pa. Code 93 to protect, maintain, reclaim and restore the
existing and designated uses of the waters of this Commonwealth;
   (B)   Preserve the natural drainage systems as much as possible;
   (C)   Manage stormwater runoff close to the source;
   (D)   Provide procedures and performance standards for stormwater planning
and management;
   (E)   Maintain groundwater recharge to prevent degradation of surface and
groundwater quality and to otherwise protect water resources;
   (F)   Prevent scour and erosion of stream banks and stream beds;
   (G)   Provide proper operation and maintenance of all SWM BMPs that are
implemented within the municipality; and
   (H)   Require proof of NPDES permit acquisition when applicable.
(Ord. 2011-2, passed 10-11-2011)
§ 26-104 STATUTORY AUTHORITY.
   (A)   Primary authority. The municipality is empowered to regulate land use
activities that affect stormwater impacts by the authority of the Pennsylvania
Borough Code, being 8 Pa.C.S. §§ 101 et seq., and the Act of October 4, 1978,
P.L. 864 (Act 167), 32 P.S. §§ 680.1 et seq., as amended, the Stormwater
Management Act.
   (B)   Secondary authority. The municipality is also empowered to regulate
land use activities that affect runoff by the authority of the Act of July 31,
1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, being
53 P.S. §§ 10101 et seq., as amended.
(Ord. 2011-2, passed 10-11-2011)
§ 26-105 APPLICABILITY.
   All regulated activities and all activities that may affect stormwater
runoff, including land development and earth disturbance activity, are subject
to regulation by this Part.
(Ord. 2011-2, passed 10-11-2011)
§ 26-106 REPEALER.
   Any other ordinance provision or regulation of the municipality inconsistent
with any of the provisions of this Part is hereby repealed to give this Part
full force and effect to the extent of the inconsistency only.
(Ord. 2011-2, passed 10-11-2011)
§ 26-107 SEVERABILITY.
   In the event that a court of competent jurisdiction declares any section,
clause or provision of this Part invalid, such decision shall not affect the
validity of any of the remaining sections, clauses or provisions of this Part.
(Ord. 2011-2, passed 10-11-2011)
§ 26-108 COMPATIBILITY WITH OTHER REQUIREMENTS.
   Approvals issued and actions taken under this Part do not relieve the
applicant of the responsibility to secure required permits or approvals for
activities regulated by any other code, law, regulation or ordinance.
(Ord. 2011-2, passed 10-11-2011)
§ 26-109 INTERPRETATION.
   Unless otherwise expressly stated, the succeeding shall, for the purposes of
this Part, be interpreted in the following manner.
   (A)   Words used in the present tense also imply the future tense.
   (B)   Words used in the singular imply the plural, and vice versa.
   (C)   Words of masculine gender include feminine gender, and vice versa.
   (D)   The words and abbreviation “includes”, “including”, “shall include”,
“such as” and “e.g.” are not limited to the specific example(s) given but are
intended to extend the words’s or words’ meaning(s) to all other instances of
like kind and character.
   (E)   The words “person”, “applicant” or “developer” include, a partnership,
corporation or other legal entity, as well as an individual.
   (F)   The words “shall”, “required” or “must” are mandatory; the words
“may”and “should” are permissive.
(Ord. 2011-2, passed 10-11-2011)
§ 26-110 ERRONEOUS PERMIT.
   Any permit or authorization issued or approved based on false, misleading or
erroneous information provided by an applicant is void without the necessity of
any proceedings for revocation. Any work undertaken or use established pursuant
to such permit or other authorization is unlawful. No action may be taken by a
board, agency or employee of the municipality purporting to validate such a
violation.
(Ord. 2011-2, passed 10-11-2011)
ARTICLE II: DEFINITIONS
§ 26-201 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this Part, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACT 167. The Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864, (Act 167), as amended, and
known as the STORMWATER MANAGEMENT ACT, being 32 P.S. §§ 680.1 et seq.
   AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITY. Activities associated with agriculture such as, but
not limited to, agricultural cultivation, agricultural operations, and animal
heavy use areas. This includes the work of producing crops including tillage,
land clearing, plowing, disking, harrowing, planting, harvesting crops or
pasturing and raising of livestock and installation of conservation measures.
Construction of new buildings or impervious area is not considered an
AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITY.
   APPLICANT. A landowner, developer or other person who has filed an
application to the municipality for approval to engage in any regulated
activity at a project site in the municipality.
   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (BMP). Activities, facilities, designs, measures or
procedures used to manage stormwater impacts from regulated activities, to meet
state water quality requirements, to promote groundwater recharge, and to
otherwise meet the purposes of this Part. STORMWATER BMPs are commonly grouped
into one of two broad categories or measures: STRUCTURAL or NONSTRUCTURAL. In
this Part, NONSTRUCTURAL BMPs or measures refer to operational and/or behavior-
related practices that attempt to minimize the contact of pollutants with
stormwater runoff whereas STRUCTURAL BMPs or measures are those that consist of
a physical device or practice that is installed to capture and treat stormwater
runoff. STRUCTURAL BMPs include, but are not limited to, a wide variety of
practices and devices, from large-scale retention ponds and constructed
wetlands, to small-scale underground treatment systems, infiltration
facilities, filter strips, low impact design, bioretention, wet ponds,
permeable paving, grassed swales, riparian or forested buffers, sand filters,
detention basins and manufactured devices. STRUCTURAL STORMWATER BMPs are
permanent appurtenances to the project site.
   BMP MANUAL. Pennsylvania Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual, as
amended and updated.
   CONSERVATION DISTRICT. The York County Conservation District, which district
is as defined in § 3(c) of the Conservation District Law (3 P.S. § 851(c)) that
has the authority under a delegation agreement executed with DEP to administer
and enforce all or a portion of the regulations promulgated under 25 Pa. Code
102.
   COUNTY. York County Pennsylvania
   DAM. An impoundment structure regulated by the Pennsylvania DEP Chapter 105
regulations.
   DEP. The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
   DESIGN STORM. The magnitude and temporal distribution of precipitation from
a storm event measured in probability of occurrence, e.g., a five-year storm,
and duration, e.g., 24 hours, used in the design and evaluation of stormwater
management systems. Also see RETURN PERIOD.
   DEVELOPER. Any person, partnership, association, corporation or other
entity, or any responsible person therein or agent thereof, that undertakes any
regulated activity.
   DETENTION BASIN. A structure designed to retard stormwater runoff by
temporarily storing and releasing the runoff at a predetermined rate.
   DETENTION VOLUME. The volume of runoff that is captured and released into
the waters of this Commonwealth at a controlled rate.
   DEVELOPMENT SITE (SITE). See PROJECT SITE.
   DISCONNECTED IMPERVIOUS AREA (DIA). An impervious or impermeable surface
that is disconnected from any stormwater drainage or conveyance system and is
redirected or directed to a pervious area, which allows for infiltration,
filtration, and increased time of concentration as specified in Appendix A,
Disconnected Impervious Area of this Part.
   DISTURBED AREA. An unstabilized land area where an earth disturbance
activity is occurring or has occurred.
   EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY. A construction or other human activity which
disturbs the surface of the land, including, but not limited to: clearing and
grubbing; grading; excavations; embankments; road maintenance; building
construction; and the moving, depositing, stockpiling or storing of soil, rock
or earth materials.
   EROSION. The natural process by which the surface of the land is worn away
by water, wind or chemical action.
   E & S MANUAL. Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control Manual, as amended and
updated.
   EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN. A site specific plan consisting of both
drawings and a narrative that identifies BMPs to minimize accelerated erosion
and sedimentation before, during and after earth disturbance activity.
   EXISTING CONDITION. The dominant land cover during the five-year period
immediately preceding a proposed regulated activity.
   FEMA. Federal Emergency Management Agency.
   FLOODPLAIN. Any land area susceptible to inundation by water from any
natural source as delineated by applicable FEMA maps and studies as being a
special flood hazard area.
   FLOODWAY. The channel of the watercourse and those portions of the adjoining
floodplains that are reasonably required to carry and discharge the 100-year
flood. Unless otherwise specified, the boundary of the FLOODWAY is as indicated
on maps and flood insurance studies provided by FEMA. In an area where no FEMA
maps or studies have defined the boundary of the 100-YEAR FLOODWAY, it is
assumed, absent evidence to the contrary, that the FLOODWAY extends from the
stream to 50 feet from the top of the bank of the stream.
   FOREST MANAGEMENT/TIMBER OPERATIONS. Planning and activities necessary for
the management of forest land. These include conducting a timber inventory,
preparation of forest management plans, silvicultural treatment, cutting
budgets, logging road design and construction, timber harvesting, site
preparation and reforestation.
   HYDROLOGIC SOIL GROUP (HSG). Infiltration rates of soils vary widely and are
affected by subsurface permeability as well as surface intake rates. Soils are
classified into four HSGs (A, B, C, and D) according to their minimum
infiltration rate, which is obtained for bare soil after prolonged wetting. The
NRCS defines the four groups and provides a list of most of the soils in the
United States and their group classification. The soils in the area of the
development site may be identified from a soil survey report that can be
obtained from local NRCS offices or conservation district offices. Soils become
less pervious as the HSG varies from A to D (NRCS 3,4).
   IWRP. The York County Integrated Water Resources Plan, which Plan includes
Act 167 Plan elements and requirements.
   IMPERVIOUS SURFACE (IMPERVIOUS AREA). A surface that prevents the
infiltration of water into the ground. IMPERVIOUS SURFACES AND AREAS shall
include, but not be limited to, roofs, additional indoor living spaces, patios,
garages, storage sheds and similar structures, and any new streets and
sidewalks. However, any surface or area designed, constructed and maintained to
permit infiltration as specified herein shall be considered pervious, not
impervious. For the purposes of this Part, a surface or area shall not be
considered impervious if such surface or area does not diminish the capacity
for infiltration of stormwater for storms up to, and including, a two-year 24-
hour storm event.
   INFILTRATION. The entrance of surface water into the soil, usually at the
soil-air interface.
   KARST. A type of topography or landscape characterized by surface
depressions, sinkholes, rock pinnacles/uneven bedrock surface, underground
drainage and caves. KARST LANDSCAPES are formed on carbonate rocks, such as
limestone or dolomite.
   LAND DEVELOPMENT. Includes any of the following activities:
      (1)   The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts
or parcels of land for any purpose involving:
         (a)   A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings,
whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single nonresidential building
on a lot or lots regardless of the number of occupants or tenure; or
         (b)   The division or allocation of land or space between or among two
or more existing or prospective occupants by means of, or for the purpose of
streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building groups or other
features.
      (2)   A subdivision of land; and
      (3)   Development in accordance with § 503(1.1) of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, being 53 P.S. §§ 10101 et seq.
   MUNICIPALITY. Dillsburg Borough, York County, Pennsylvania.
   NPDES. National pollution discharge elimination system.
   NRCS. USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service (previously SCS).
   O & M. Operation and maintenance.
   O & M PLAN. Operation and maintenance plan.
   PCSWMP. Post-construction stormwater management plan.
   PEAK DISCHARGE. The maximum rate of stormwater runoff from a specific storm
event.
   PERCOLATION. The downward movement, under the influence of gravity, of water
under hydrostatic pressure through interstices of the soil or rock.
   PERVIOUS AREA. Any area not defined as impervious.
   PROJECT SITE. The specific area of land where any regulated activities in
the municipality are planned, conducted or maintained.
   QUALIFIED PERSON. Any person licensed by the State of Pennsylvania or
otherwise qualified by law to perform the work required by this Part.
   REGULATED ACTIVITIES. Any earth disturbance activities or any activities
that involve the alteration or development of land in a manner that may affect
stormwater runoff.
   REGULATED EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY. Activity involving earth disturbance
subject to regulation under 25 Pa. Code 92, 25 Pa. Code 102 or the Clean
Streams Law, being 35 P.S. §§ 10101 et seq.
   RETENTION BASIN. An impoundment in which stormwater is stored and not
released during a storm event. Stored water may be released from the basin at
some time after the end of a storm.
   RETENTION VOLUME/REMOVED RUNOFF. The volume of runoff that is captured and
not released directly into the surface waters of this Commonwealth during or
after a storm event.
   RETURN PERIOD. The average interval, in years, within which a storm event of
a given magnitude can be expected to occur one time. For example, the 25-year
return period rainfall would be expected to occur on average once every 25
years; or stated in another way, the probability of a 25-year storm occurring
in any one year is 0.04, i.e., a 4% chance.
   RIPARIAN BUFFER. A best management practice that is an area of permanent
vegetation along surface waters. (Such areas serve as natural vegetative
filters between upland landscapes and waterways.)
   RUNOFF. Any part of precipitation that flows over the land.
   SEDIMENT. Soils or other materials transported by surface water as a product
of erosion.
   SHEET FLOW. Water flow with a relatively thin and uniform depth.
   SPILLWAY. A depression in the embankment of a pond or basin which is used to
pass peak discharge greater than the maximum design storm controlled by the
pond or basin.
   STATE WATER QUALITY REQUIREMENTS. The regulatory requirements to protect,
maintain, reclaim and restore water quality under the Pennsylvania Code Title
25 and the Clean Streams Law, being 35 P.S. §§ 10101 et seq.
   STORM FREQUENCY. The number of times that a given storm event occurs on
average in a stated period of years.
   STORM SEWER. A pipe or conduit, or a system of pipes or conduits, which
intercepts and carries surface stormwater runoff, but excludes sewage,
industrial wastes and similar discharges.
   STORMWATER. Drainage runoff from the surface of the land resulting from
precipitation or snow or ice melt.
   STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITY. Any structure, natural or human-made, that,
due to its condition, design, or construction, conveys, stores or otherwise
affects stormwater runoff. Typical stormwater management facilities include,
but are not limited to, detention and retention basins, open channels; storm
sewers, pipes and infiltration facilities.
   STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN. Parts and/or elements of the York County
Integrated Water Resources Plan which incorporate the requirements of the Act
of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864, (Act 167), as amended, and known as the
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT ACT.
   STORMWATER MANAGEMENT BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES. Is abbreviated as BMPs or
SWM BMPs throughout this Part.
   STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SITE PLAN. The plan prepared by the developer or his
or her representative indicating how stormwater runoff will be managed at the
development site in accordance with this Part. STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SITE PLAN
will be designated as SWM site plan throughout this Part. For all NPDES
permitted sites, the STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SITE PLAN shall include, and be
consistent with, the Erosion and Sediment Control Plan as submitted to the York
County Conservation District (YCCD) and/or DEP.
   SUBDIVISION. The division or re-division of a lot, tract or parcel of land
by any means into two or more lots, tracts or parcels or other divisions of
land including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether immediate
or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs or
devisees, transfer of ownership or building or lot development; provided,
however, that the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into
parcels of more than ten acres, not involving any new street or easement of
access or any residential dwelling, shall be exempted.
   SWM. Stormwater management.
   USDA. United States Department of Agriculture.
   WATERS OF THIS COMMONWEALTH. Any and all rivers, streams, creeks, rivulets,
impoundments, ditches, watercourses, storm sewers, lakes, dammed water,
wetlands, ponds, springs, and all other bodies or channels of conveyance of
surface and underground water, or parts thereof, whether natural or artificial,
within or on the boundaries of this Commonwealth.
   WATERSHED. Region or area drained by a river, watercourse, or other surface
water of this Commonwealth.
   WETLAND. Areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at
a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal
circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life
in saturated soil conditions, including swamps, marshes, bogs and similar
areas.
   YCCD. York County Conservation District.
(Ord. 2011-2, passed 10-11-2011)
ARTICLE III: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PRACTICES
§ 26-301 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   For all regulated activities, unless preparation of an SWM site plan
is specifically exempted in § 
26-302:
      (1)   Preparation and implementation of an approved SWM site plan is
required; and
      (2)   No regulated activities shall commence until the municipality
issues written approval of an SWM site plan which demonstrates compliance with
the requirements of this Part.
   (B)   SWM site plans approved by the municipality, in accordance with §
26-406, shall be on site throughout the duration of the regulated activity.
   (C)   The municipality may, after consultation with DEP, approve measures
for meeting the state water quality requirements other than those in this Part,
provided that they meet the minimum requirements of, and do not conflict with,
state law including, but not limited to, the Clean Streams Law, being 35 P.S.
§§ 691.1 et seq. The municipality shall maintain a record of consultations with
DEP pursuant to this subsection (C).
   (D)   For all regulated earth disturbance activities, erosion and sediment
control BMPs shall be designed, implemented, operated, and maintained during
the regulated earth disturbance activities, i.e., during construction, to meet
the purposes and requirements of this Part and to meet all requirements of an
erosion sedimentation control plan that has been deemed adequate by York County
Conservation District and/or DEP.
   (E)   For all regulated activities, implementation of the volume controls in
§
26-303 is required, unless specifically exempted under subsection (C) above, or
exempted by an approved modification request as specified in §
26-403(B) of this Part.
   (F)   Impervious areas.
      (1)   The measurement of impervious areas shall include all of the
impervious areas in the total proposed development even if development is to
take place in phases.
      (2)   For development taking place in phases, the entire development plan
must be used in determining conformance with this Part.
      (3)   For projects that add impervious area to a parcel, the total
impervious area on the parcel is subject to the requirements of this Part;
except that the volume controls in §
26-303 and the peak rate controls of §
26-304 do not need to be retrofitted to existing impervious areas that are not
being altered by the proposed regulated activity.
   (G)   Stormwater flows shall not be created, increased, decreased to water
features or water resources, relocated, or otherwise altered in a manner which
would affect any adjacent contiguous or nearby properties without demonstrating
that the owners of such affected properties have been made aware of the flow/
direct discharge intended.
   (H)   All regulated activities shall include such measures as necessary to:
      (1)   Protect health, safety and property;
      (2)   Meet the water quality goals of this Part, as stated in §
26-103, by implementing measures to:
         (a)   Minimize disturbance to floodplains, wetlands, wooded areas and
existing vegetation;
         (b)   Maintain or extend riparian buffers;
         (c)   Avoid erosive flow conditions in natural flow pathways;
         (d)   Minimize thermal impacts to waters of this Commonwealth;
         (e)   Disconnect impervious surfaces by directing runoff to pervious
areas, wherever possible; and
         (f)   Minimize soil disturbance and compaction. Topsoil, if removed,
shall be replaced to a minimum depth equal to its depth prior to removal or
four inches, whichever is greater. (Additional topsoil may be needed for
vegetation other than sod.)
      (3)   To the maximum extent practicable, incorporate the techniques for
low impact development practices described in the Pennsylvania Stormwater Best
Management Practices Manual (BMP Manual).
   (I)   The design of all facilities in areas of carbonate geology or karst
topography shall include an evaluation of measures to minimize adverse effects,
including hydro-geologic studies if required by the municipality.
   (J)   Infiltration BMPs shall be spread out, made as shallow as practicable,
and located to maximize use of natural on-site infiltration features while
still meeting the other requirements of this Part. In addition, infiltration
BMPs shall include pre-treatment BMPs where appropriate.
   (K)   Normally dry, open-top storage facilities, designed as such, shall
completely drain both the volume control and rate control capacities over a
period of time not less than 24 hours and not more than 72 hours from the end
of the design storm. However, any designed infiltration at such facilities is
exempt from the minimum 24-hour standard, i.e., may infiltrate in a shorter
period of time, so long as none of the stormwater flowing into the infiltration
facility is discharged directly into the surface waters of the Commonwealth.
(Inordinately rapid infiltration rates may indicate the presence of large
fractures or other conditions for which an additional soil buffer may be
required.)
   (L)   The design storm volumes and precipitation intensities to be used in
the analysis of discharge or runoff shall be obtained from the Precipitation-
Frequency Atlas of the United States, Atlas 14, Volume 2, Version 3.0, U.S.
Department of Commerce, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA),
National Weather Service, Hydrometeorological Design Studies Center, Silver
Spring, Maryland. NOAA’s Atlas 14 can be accessed at: http://hdsc.nws.noaa.gov/
hdsc/pfds/.
   (M)   For all regulated activities, SWM BMPs shall be designed, implemented,
operated and maintained to meet the purposes and requirements of this Part and
to meet all requirements under the Pennsylvania Code Title 25, the Clean
Streams Law and the Stormwater Management Act.
   (N)   Various BMPs and their design standards are listed in the BMP Manual.
(Ord. 2011-2, passed 10-11-2011)
§ 26-302 EXEMPTIONS.
   Any regulated activity that meets the following exemption criteria is exempt
from the part(s) of this Part as specified herein. However, the requirements of
the Part shall otherwise remain in effect. The criteria for exemption in this
section apply to the total development proposed, including instances in which
the development is proposed to take place in phases. The date of enactment of
this Part shall be the starting point from which future development and the
respective proposed impervious surface computations shall be cumulatively
considered and regulated. Exemption shall not relieve an applicant from
implementing such measures as necessary to meet the intent of this Part, or
compliance with any NPDES permit requirements.
   (A)   Regulated activities that create DIAs equal to or less than 1,000
square feet are exempt from the peak rate control and the SWM site plan
preparation requirements of this Part.
   (B)   Regulated activities that create DIAs greater than 1,000 square feet
and equal to or less than 5,000 square feet are exempt only from the peak rate
control requirement of this Part.
   (C)   Agricultural activity is exempt from the rate control and SWM site
plan preparation requirements of this Part provided the activities are
performed according to the requirements of 25 Pa. Code § 102.
   (D)   Forest management and timber operations are exempt from the rate
control and SWM site plan preparation requirements of this Part provided the
activities are performed according to the requirements of 25 Pa. Code 102.
   (E)   Domestic gardening and landscaping are exempt from specific approval
and permitting under this Part so long as those activities are associated with
one, and only one, dwelling unit and the activities comply with all other
applicable ordinances and statutes.
   (F)   Exemptions from certain provisions of this Part shall not relieve the
applicant from the requirements in § 26-301(D) through (L) of this Part.
   (G)   The municipality may deny or revoke any exemption pursuant to this
section at any time for any project that the municipality determines poses a
threat to public health, safety, property or the environment.
(Ord. 2011-2, passed 10-11-2011)
§ 26-303 VOLUME CONTROLS.
   The low impact development practices provided in the BMP Manual shall be
utilized for all regulated activities to the maximum extent practicable. Water
volume controls shall be implemented using the design storm method in
subsection (A) below or the simplified method in subsection (B) below. For
regulated activity areas equal or less than one acre that do not require
hydrologic routing to design the stormwater facilities, this Part establishes
no preference for either methodology; therefore, the applicant may select
either methodology on the basis of economic considerations, the intrinsic
limitations on applicability of the analytical procedures associated with each
methodology, and other factors.
   (A)   The design storm method (CG-1 in the BMP Manual) is applicable to any
size of regulated activity. This method requires detailed modeling based on
site conditions.
      (1)   Do not increase the post-development total runoff volume for all
storms equal to or less than the two-year 24-hour duration precipitation.
      (2)   For modeling purposes:
         (a)   Existing (pre-development) non-forested pervious areas must be
considered meadow.
         (b)   Twenty percent of the existing impervious area of a project
site, when present, shall be considered meadow in the model for existing
conditions.
   (B)   (1)   The simplified method (CG-2 in the BMP Manual) provided below is
independent of site conditions and should be used if the design storm method is
not followed. This method is not applicable to regulated activities greater
than one acre or for projects that require design of stormwater storage
facilities.
      (2)   For new impervious surfaces:
         (a)   Stormwater facilities shall capture at least the first two
inches of runoff from all new impervious surfaces;
         (b)   At least the first one inch of runoff from new impervious
surfaces shall be permanently removed from the runoff flow, i.e., it shall not
be released into the surface waters of this Commonwealth. Removal options for
the first one inch of runoff include reuse, evaporation, transpiration and
infiltration;
         (c)   Wherever possible, infiltration facilities should be designed to
accommodate infiltration of the entire permanently removed runoff; however, in
all cases at least the first one-half inch of the permanently removed
stormwater runoff shall be infiltrated; and
         (d)   This method is exempt from the requirements of §
26-304, Rate Controls.
(Ord. 2011-2, passed 10-11-2011)
§ 26-304 RATE CONTROLS.
   (A)   For computation of pre-development peak discharge rates, 20% of the
existing impervious area of a project site, when present, shall be considered
meadow.
   (B)   Post-development discharge rates shall not exceed the pre-development
discharge rates for the one-, two-, five-, ten-, 25-, 50- and 100-year 24-hour
storms. If it is shown that the peak rates of discharge indicated by the post-
development analysis are less than or equal to the peak rates of discharge
indicated by the pre-development analysis for one-, two-, five-, ten-, 25-, 50-
and 100-year 24-hour storms, then the requirements of this section have been
met. Otherwise, the applicant shall provide additional controls as necessary to
satisfy the peak rate of discharge requirement as outlined in § 
26-306.
   (C)   Pre-existing, pervious or impervious areas, where stormwater
management controls have been previously provided, may be included as existing
conditions in pre-development runoff calculations. However, if stormwater
management controls have not been previously provided, ground cover shall be
considered as meadow.
(Ord. 2011-2, passed 10-11-2011)
§ 26-305 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITIES FOR PENNSYLVANIA DEPARTMENT OF
TRANSPORTATION (PennDOT) AND PENNSYLVANIA TURNPIKE COMMISSION (PTC) ROADWAYS
AND ASSOCIATED FACILITIES.
   (A)   For the purposes of the Act 167 Stormwater Management (Plan) elements,
being 32 P.S. §§ 680.1 et seq., contained within the York County Integrated
Water Resources Plan, and this Part, design policy pertaining to stormwater
management facilities for Pennsylvania Department of Transportation (PennDOT)
and Pennsylvania Turnpike Commission (PTC) roadways and associated facilities
is provided in § 13.7 (Antidegradation and Post Construction Stormwater
Management Policy) of PennDOT Publication No. 13M, Design Manual Part 2 (August
2009), as developed, updated, and amended in consultation with the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Resources (DEP). As stated in DM-2.13.7.D (Act 167
and municipal ordinances), PennDOT and PTC roadways and associated facilities
shall be consistent with Act 167 Plans. DM-2.13.7.B (Policy on Antidegradation
and Post Construction Stormwater Management) was developed as a cooperative
effort between PennDOT and DEP. DM-2.13.7.C (Project Categories) discusses the
anticipated impact on the quality, volume and rate of stormwater runoff.
   (B)   Where standards in the Act 167 elements of the IWRP and this Part are
impractical, PennDOT or the PTC may request assistance from DEP, in
consultation with the county, to develop an alternative strategy for meeting
state water quality requirements and the goals and objectives of the Act 167
elements within the IWRP.
   (C)   For the purposes of the Act 167 elements in the IWRP and this Part,
road maintenance activities are regulated under 25 Pa. Code Chapter 102.
(Ord. 2011-2, passed 10-11-2011)
§ 26-306 DESIGN AND INSTALLATION STANDARDS.
   (A)   Stormwater collection system. The design of stormwater collection and
conveyance facilities shall be governed by the following criteria.
      (1)   Storm drainage system.
         (a)   Rational formula.
            1.   Peak discharge shall be computed using the rational formula:
 
Q = CIA
 
               Where:
         Q = Peak discharge in cubic feet per second;
         C = Runoff coefficient expressed as the ratio of peak runoff rate to
the average amount of rainfall over a period of time equal to the time of
concentration;
         I = Average rainfall intensity in inches per hour for a time equal to
the time of concentration; and
         A = Drainage area in acres.
            2.   In general, the procedure from the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation, Design Manual, Part 2 shall be followed.
               a.   Typical runoff coefficients for various surfaces can be
found in the Exhibit 2 of this Part. Runoff coefficients shall be computed as a
weighted average of conditions, which represent maximum development potential
on the property. Soil types, ground slope, and storm frequency shall all be
considered in the selection of runoff coefficients.
               b.   A computation table similar to the one found in the Exhibit
1 of this Part shall be submitted with the design of any stormwater collection
system.
               c.   Storm intensity (I) shall be computed as a function of the
time of concentration (Tc). A Tc of five minutes shall be used in determining
intensity unless the drainage area parameters justify the use of a greater
value. Use of a Tc greater than five minutes shall be as approved by the
Borough Engineer.
               d.   The minimum full flow velocity of any storm drainage system
or culvert shall be two and one-half feet per second (fps).
         (b)   Storm frequency.
            1.   The following storm frequencies are to be used for design:
               a.   Local streets: 25 year;
               b.   Major intersections of local streets: 25 year; and
               c.   Collector streets and arterial streets: 50 year.
            2.   Alternate criteria may be required following recommendation of
the Borough Engineer. In addition, functional classification of streets shall
be as interpreted by the Borough Engineer.
         (c)   Pipe material. For storm drainage systems which will be
dedicated to the borough, all pipe material shall either be reinforced concrete
or smooth lined corrugated polyethylene pipe to be as determined by the
borough. Standards as referenced from ASTM or other source acceptable to the
Borough Engineer shall be specified.
         (d)   Pipe size. Minimum pipe size for storm drainage pipe shall be 15
inches in diameter unless otherwise approved by the Borough Engineer.
         (e)   Installation.
            1.   Storm drainage pipes shall be installed a sufficient time in
advance of final street paving in order to allow for settlement of the trench.
            2.   Installation shall be in accordance with manufacturers’
recommendations, PennDOT Publication 408 and RC standards or as specified by
the Borough Engineer.
            3.   Storm drainage systems to be dedicated to the borough shall be
placed on a minimum of six inches of stone bedding. Stone backfill shall be
required to a point of 12 inches minimum over the top of the pipe for pipes
which will not be located under streets or parking lots and to the top of
finished subgrade for pipes which will be beneath streets or parking lots.
Backfill shall be compacted in lifts and shall be subject to inspection by the
Borough Engineer.
            4.   Minimum cover from the top of the pipe to the top of subgrade
shall be 12 inches.
         (f)   Safety features. Safety features shall be incorporated into the
storm drainage system as necessary.
         (g)   Minimum thickness. Minimum thickness of any corrugated steel or
metal pipe shall be 16 gage or as otherwise required by the borough for
anticipated load conditions. Metal pipes shall also be coated with applicable
approved material to minimize corrosion.
      (2)   Inlets/manholes/junctions.
         (a)   In general, inlets, manholes, grates, covers, frames and the
like shall conform to the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation Standard
Specifications, Publication 408 and RC Standards. Design shall be performed in
accordance with the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation or Federal
Highway Administration Standards. Additional/alternate criteria may be required
following review of the Borough Engineer.
            1.   Inlets shall be spaced such that they are not subject to flows
higher than five cubic feet per second or at a distance greater than 400 feet
along curbed streets and at low points on sag vertical curves with an inlet on
each side of the street. Additional inlets shall be placed at the upper side of
street intersections, to prevent stormwater from crossing the intersection.
Inlets are not allowed on the intersection radii. In no case shall inlets be
placed at a location where they function at less than 65% efficiency based on
criteria in the PennDot Design Manual. Design shall be such that the maximum
allowable spread of water on streets shall not exceed one-half of the travel
lane.
            2.   Inlets shall have weep holes placed at the appropriate
elevations to drain the bottom of the inlet box and the subgrade prior to
placing the base and surface courses.
         (b)   Where structures are subject to traffic loads, the structure
shall be traffic rated.
         (c)   Inlet tops in residential developments shall be bicycle safe
unless otherwise approved.
         (d)   Manholes shall not be placed more than 500 feet apart.
Additionally, manholes shall be placed at points of change in horizontal and/or
vertical direction of storm drainage systems. Inlets may be substituted for
manholes where they will serve as a means of intercepting runoff.
         (e)   If less than a 48-inch diameter, curves in pipes or box
culverts, without junction are prohibited. Tee joints, elbows and wyes are
prohibited unless specifically authorized by the Borough Engineer.
      (3)   Channels and culverts.
         (a)   In cases where drainage is collected by means of a headwall, and
inlet or outlet conditions control, the pipe shall be designed as a culvert.
            1.   The minimum diameter of the culvert shall be 18 inches. Design
shall be in accordance with the U.S. Federal Highway Administration design
procedure.
            2.   The maximum HW/D ratio for inlet control shall be 1.25 or such
that water surface elevation is one-half foot below the edge of street grade
during a 25-year storm event, whichever is more stringent.
            3.   Headwalls and endwalls shall be provided for all culverts
unless otherwise approved by the Borough Engineer. Material shall be reinforced
concrete unless otherwise approved.
            4.   Culvert pipe and material shall be the same as that required
for storm drainage systems. All applicable nomographs and supporting
documentation shall be submitted.
         (b)   Manning’s equation shall be used for the design of all open
channels. Complete calculations shall be submitted which detail flow, depth and
velocity. For channels and swales, design for erosion control must be provided.
         (c)   All channels shall be designed to prevent erosion of the channel
bottom and sides. The flow velocity in all vegetated drainage channels shall
not exceed the maximum permissible velocity to prevent soil erosion.
Stabilization techniques such as rip-rap, sodding, geo-fabrics and/or pre-
manufactured products shall be utilized where necessary to minimize erosion
potential.
         (d)   The design of swales and channels shall, as a minimum, conform
to the design procedures as outlined by the Federal Highway Administration and
the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection, Bureau of Soil and
Water Conservation, Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control Manual.
         (e)   Where swales are installed and vegetative stabilization has not
or will not occur between November 1 and March 1, other means of temporary
stabilization shall be provided.
         (f)   Design criteria for swales and channels shall be the same, as
that required for storm drainage systems.
   (B)   Stormwater management facilities.
      (1)   General design criteria.
         (a)   Peak discharge and runoff shall be computed using the soil-cover
complex method contained in the Urban Hydrology for Small Water Sheds,
Technical Release No. 55, published by the Engineering Division, Soil
Conservation Service, United States Department of Agriculture. Alternate
methodology may be used subject to approval by the Borough Engineer.
         (b)   Any pre-existing, pervious areas shall be assumed to be “meadow”
for purposes of establishing an existing ground cover condition unless actual
conditions would dictate a lesser value than for a meadow condition.
         (c)   Pre-existing, pervious or impervious areas, where stormwater
management controls have been previously provided, may be included as existing
conditions in pre-development runoff calculations. However, if stormwater
management controls have not been previously provided, ground cover shall be
considered as meadow.
         (d)   The rate and quantity of stormwater runoff from any proposed
subdivision and/or land development shall not exceed the rate and quantity or
volume of runoff prior to development (i.e., zero increase in runoff) for the
one-, two-, five-, ten-, 25- and 50-year storm event frequencies.
         (e)   1.   Applicants are encouraged to include stormwater quality
considerations in the design of stormwater management facilities.
            2.   Where, required by the borough, following review by the
Borough Engineer, high concentrations of oils, greases, metals and sediment may
occur, the design shall include provisions for the interception of such
constituents prior to discharge into surface waterways or municipal storm
drainage systems.
         (f)   Stormwater shall not be re-routed or concentrated in a manner
that is inconsistent with downstream conditions or where downstream properties
are likely to be affected. In addition the proposed stormwater discharge at the
perimeter of the site shall not exceed the capacity of any existing facility
nor shall it alter the pre-development flow characteristics. The existing
points of concentrated drainage that discharge onto adjacent property shall not
be altered without permission of the altered property owner(s) and shall be
subject to any applicable discharge criteria specified in this Part. All new
concentrated discharges of stormwater onto adjacent properties shall be within
existing storm drainage systems or channels. The borough may require written
acknowledgement or easement from adjacent property owners in the event that
these conditions are not met.
      (2)   Detention basins.
         (a)   Basin design criteria.
            1.   Basins shall provide control of post development peak runoff
rates as previously specified.
            2.   Basins shall be designed to safely convey the rate, quantity
or volume of stormwater runoff resulting from a 100-year 24-hour storm under
full development conditions, neglecting the discharge capacity of the principle
outlet structure. Contributing flow to the basin shall also include any off-
site runoff that may enter the basin. The design of the facility shall be
verified by routing the one-, two-, five-, ten-, 25-, 50- and 100-year
frequency storm hydrographs through the facility.
            3.   The modified PULS routing technique or other method approved
by the Borough Engineer shall be used for routing computations.
            4.   Computer software used in analysis shall be as approved by the
Borough Engineer.
         (b)   Basin construction standards.
            1.   Basins shall not be located over any existing or proposed
utility lines.
            2.   The maximum slope of earthen embankments shall be three to
one, with four to one preferred. The top or toe of any slope shall be located a
minimum of 15 feet from adjacent property lines, except for a downstream
property line where there shall be sufficient additional distance for energy
dissipation. Greater slopes may be allowed with the provision of a design basis
which considers fill material and stabilization where approved by the Borough
Engineer. In areas that are not easily accessible for maintenance, side slopes
shall not exceed five to one.
            3.   Where possible the side slopes and basin shape shall blend
with the natural topography.
            4.   The minimum top width of detention basin berms shall be six
feet. For basins over six feet in depth, a top of embankment width of eight
feet may be required.
            5.   All basins shall have provisions for de-watering so as not to
create unmaintainable conditions. The minimum grade of the basin floor shall be
2% to ensure proper drainage towards the outlet structure. This requirement may
be waived if a paved low flow channel (1% grade) is provided.
            6.   All submitted basin plans shall indicate the construction
specifications and compaction requirements to be used during construction. All
earth fill dams shall be designed and certified by a registered professional
engineer. Construction specifications shall be reviewed and approved by the
Borough Engineer.
            7.   A cutoff trench shall be excavated along the centerline of any
dam on an earth fill embankment. The minimum depth shall be three feet. The
minimum bottom width shall be ten feet or wide enough to permit operation of
compaction equipment.
            8.   A minimum of six inches of topsoil shall be placed on all
areas affected by the basin construction (i.e., basin floor, side slopes, top
of berm and the like) to allow for the establishment of vegetation.
            9.   All basins shall be stabilized using methods acceptable to the
USDA Soil Conservation Service.
            10.   The maximum water depth of a finished detention basin
(measured from the lowest point in the basin floor to the crest of the
emergency spillway) shall not exceed eight inches unless otherwise approved by
the Borough Engineer.
            11.   Fencing may be required where the borough, following
consultation with the Borough Solicitor and/or Borough Engineer, determines the
need for each specific case. Height of such fence shall be four feet to six
feet as required and shall include a locking main gate and vehicle access.
            12.   A minimum of one foot freeboard shall be provided above the
basin water surface elevation during a 100-year frequency storm.
            13.   Minimum floor elevations for all structures shall be two feet
(minimum) above the basin water surface elevation during 100-year frequency
storm. If basements will be provided, detailed calculations and water proofing
design shall be provided which addresses the effects of stormwater on the
structure.
            14.   The borough may, upon recommendation of the Borough Engineer,
impose additional requirements on earth fill dams for the safety and welfare of
the borough.
            15.   For sites of geologic concern, a geotechnical analysis and
design of the site as it relates to the proposed basin shall be provided.
            16.   The toe of slope for the exterior berm, or in the case of a
berm excavated into the earth, the outside edge of the berm shall not be closer
than 15 feet from existing or proposed property boundary or borough right-of-
way.
         (c)   Emergency spillway standards.
            1.   Minimum freeboard, or the distance between the design flow
elevation and the top of the settled basin embankment, shall be one foot for a
100-year frequency storm.
            2.   Emergency spillway design should be based on a 100-year design
storm when neglecting the capacity of the outlet structure and outfall culvert.
            3.   Emergency spillways shall be constructed on undisturbed earth,
where possible. Emergency spillways shall be constructed of vegetated earth,
reinforced concrete or concrete mound slabs. Emergency spillways shall not
discharge stormwater over earthen fill or other easily erodible material
without adequate protection against soil erosion. Detailed calculations and
design shall be submitted.
         (d)   Outlet pipes and structures. The following measures shall be
incorporated into the design and construction of all outlet structures and
pipes. Supporting calculations and drawings shall be submitted for approval
with the stormwater management plan:
            1.   Antiseep collars shall be installed around all outlet pipes
through embankments. The antiseep collars and their connections to the pipe
barrel shall be watertight. Design calculations in accordance with the USDA
Soil Conservation Service shall be submitted.
            2.   Temporary sedimentation controls shall be provided during
construction to prevent the flow of sediment-laden runoff through the basin
outlet pipe. Such measures may include temporary riser pipes, rock-filled
gabions, plywood standboxes, silt fences and the like. Design of such measures
shall comply with the requirements of the York County Conservation District.
            3.   Energy dissipation shall be provided at the outlet of
detention basins, along outfall channels, and at the discharge end of all
conveyance pipes.
            4.   Outlet control structures shall be constructed to prevent
flotation.
            5.   Outlet control structures shall be equipped with a childproof,
non-clogging, removable, trash rack for all openings larger than 12 inches in
diameter.
            6.   All pipes through earthen embankments shall be of a type which
watertight joint systems are available. Outfall pipes and culverts shall be
smooth lined corrugated polyethylene (SLCP) unless otherwise approved by the
Borough Engineer.
      (3)   Subsurface disposal/retention basin systems.
         (a)   General requirements. Subsurface disposal or surface
infiltration of stormwater shall be design using methods described within the
Pennsylvania Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual (BMP Manual).
Subsurface disposal or surface infiltration of stormwater shall be allowed only
where the applicant demonstrates that soils in that area are suitable for such
control measures and that there will be no adverse impacts to the environment
or adjoining or surrounding properties. Test pits shall be required to
establish a soil profile which shall identify any potential limiting zones such
as seasonal high water table, rock presence, spring activity, sinkholes and the
like. Soil testing shall also be performed to determine permeability or
percolation rates at locations where subsurface facilities are planned. All
percolation tests shall be conducted in accordance with the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection, rules and regulations regarding
subsurface disposal of wastewater. Tests shall be performed by a representative
of the Borough Engineer as directed by the borough, or an individual certified
to perform such tests in which case the tests will be observed by the Borough
Engineer. The borough reserves the right to disallow the use of subsurface
disposal or retention basin systems in areas that are deemed to be
unsatisfactory.
         (b)   Installation requirements.
            1.   The following procedures and materials shall be required for
all subsurface facilities.
               a.   Excavation for infiltration facility shall be performed
with equipment which will not compact the bottom of the seepage bed,
infiltration trench or like facility.
               b.   The bottom of the bed or trench shall be roughened prior to
placement of aggregate.
               c.   Only clean, open graded aggregate, free of fill, shall be
used in subsurface systems.
               d.   The top, side and bottom of all seepage beds, infiltration
trenches, or like facilities shall be covered with a drainage filtration fabric
which meets the requirements of the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation,
Publication 408 for Class I Geofabrics.
               e.   All pipes leading into subsurface drainage systems shall be
equipped with screening devices to prevent debris from entering the system.
               f.   The bottom of all subsurface disposal or retention basin
systems shall be a minimum of 12 inches above the limiting zone as established
by the site specific soil profile. Depths of less than 12 inches above the
limiting zone will only be allowed where the developer provides a written
report certified by a registered professional engineer, geologist or
hydrogeologist, which certifies that the condition will not create an
environmental hazard.
               g.   Inspection points, cleanouts and overflow facilities shall
be provided for subsurface disposal systems.
               h.   All subsurface stormwater disposal systems or retention
basins shall be located a minimum of 100 feet from any potable water wells.
            2.   a.   The owner or developer shall be responsible for the
proper installation, operation and maintenance of all subsurface stormwater
disposal facilities.
               b.   If, in the opinion of the borough, the system is not
functioning properly, the developer or owner shall be required to make
necessary improvements and/or corrections or provide a new alternate facility
which does function properly.
               c.   Ownership and maintenance shall be the same as under
stormwater management facilities.
      (4)   Basins with permanent pools (wet basins).
         (a)   Basins designed to have a permanent pool of water stored in the
reservoir shall conform to the design standards of detention or retention
basins. Where deemed to be necessary, after consulting with the Borough
Engineer, the borough may impose additional criteria for design and
construction of wet basins. Earthen embankment designs shall be sealed by a
registered professional engineer experienced in such design.
         (b)   Embankments shall have a slope not exceeding four horizontal to
one vertical.
         (c)   Adequate stabilization shall be provided to control anticipated
wave action.
   (C)   Erosion and sediment pollution control.
      (1)   General requirements. Where required by the borough, all earth
moving activities, as identified in this Part, shall be reviewed and approved
by the York County Conservation District. In addition, a copy of the erosion
control plan shall be submitted as part of the grading plan to the Borough
Engineer for review and comment. Approval of the erosion control plan is
required prior to approval of the stormwater management plan.
      (2)   Requirement for erosion and sediment controls.
         (a)   No regulated earth disturbance activities within the borough
shall commence until approval by the borough of an erosion and sediment control
plan for construction activities.
         (b)   The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection (DEP)
has regulations that require an erosion and sediment control plan for any earth
disturbance activity of 5,000 square feet or more, under 25 Pa. Code § 102.4
(b). These and all other legal requirements must be complied with.
         (c)   In addition, under 25 Pa. Code Chapter 92a, a DEP NPDES
construction activities permit is required for any earth disturbance one acre
or more with a point source discharge to surface waters or the borough’s storm
sewer system, or five acres or more regardless of the planned runoff
(hereinafter collectively referred to as “regulated earth disturbance
activities”). This includes earth disturbance on any portion of, part of, or
during any stage of, a larger common plan of development. These and all other
legal requirements must be complied with.
         (d)   Evidence of any necessary permit(s) for regulated earth
disturbance activities from the appropriate DEP regional office or County
Conservation District must be provided to the borough. The issuance of an NPDES
construction permit (or permit coverage under the statewide general permit
(PAG2)) satisfies the requirements subsection (C)(2)(1).
         (e)   A copy of the erosion and sediment control plan and any required
permit, as required by DEP regulations, shall be available at the project site
at all times.
(Ord. 2011-2, passed 10-11-2011)
ARTICLE IV: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT (SWM) SITE PLAN REQUIREMENTS
§ 26-401 PLAN REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Although not a requirement of this Part, prior to proceeding with SWM
site plan preparation and submission, the applicant is encouraged to request a
pre-application meeting with the municipality’s Engineer and a staff member of
the York County Conservation District to discuss the plan concept and
responsibility for submission of required documents and information.
   (B)   The following items shall be included in the SWM site plan:
      (1)   Appropriate sections of the municipality’s subdivision and land
development ordinance, and other applicable ordinances of the municipality
regarding subdivision and land development plan preparation and applicable plan
requirements shall be followed in preparing all SWM site plans, regardless of
whether or not a SWM site plan involves a subdivision and/or land development
plan. If the municipality has not adopted a subdivision and land development
ordinance, the content of SWM site plans shall follow the plan preparation and
applicable plan requirements of the York County subdivision and land
development ordinance;
      (2)   The municipality shall not approve any SWM site plan that is
deficient in meeting the requirements of this Part. At its sole discretion, and
in accordance with this Article, when a SWM site plan is found to be deficient,
the municipality may either disapprove the submission, or, in the case of minor
deficiencies, the municipality may accept the submission of a revised SWM site
plan as noted in § 26-404 of this Article;
      (3)   Provisions for permanent access or maintenance easements for all
physical SWM BMPs, such as ponds and infiltration structures, as necessary to
implement the operation and maintenance (O&M) plan discussed in subsection (B)
(5)(i) below;
      (4)   A signature block for the design engineer and borough’s Engineer
certifying that the plan has been reviewed and meets all design standards and
criteria of this Article; and
      (5)   If not required by the municipal or York County subdivision and
land development ordinance, as specified in this subsection (B) of this
section, the SWM site plan shall also provide the following information where
applicable:
         (a)   The overall stormwater management concept for the project,
including any additional information required for a post-construction
stormwater management plan (PCSWMP) as applicable;
         (b)   A determination of site conditions in accordance with the BMP
Manual. A detailed site evaluation shall be completed for projects proposed in
areas of carbonate geology or karst topography, as well as for other
environmentally sensitive areas, whether natural or human-made, including
floodplains, streams, lakes, ponds, hydric soils, wetlands, brownfields and
wellhead protection zones;
         (c)   Stormwater runoff design computations, and documentation as
specified in this Part, or as otherwise necessary to demonstrate that the
maximum practicable measures have been taken to meet the requirements of this
Part, including the recommendations and general requirements in § 26-301;
         (d)   Expected project time schedule;
         (e)   A soil erosion and sediment control plan, where applicable, as
prepared for, reviewed, and approved by the York County Conservation District;
         (f)   The effect of the project in terms of runoff volumes, water
quality and peak flows on surrounding properties and aquatic features, and on
any existing stormwater conveyance system that may be affected by the project;
         (g)   Plan and profile drawings of all SWM BMPs, including drainage
structures, pipes, open channels and swales;
         (h)   The SWM site plan shall show the locations of existing and
proposed on-lot wastewater facilities and water supply wells;
         (i)   The SWM site plan shall include an operation and maintenance
(O&M) plan for all existing and proposed physical stormwater management
facilities. This plan shall address long-term ownership and responsibilities
for O&M as well as schedules and costs for O&M activities;
         (j)   A description of permanent stormwater management techniques,
including the construction specifications of the materials to be used for
stormwater management facilities;
         (k)   A notarized signature of the owner of the parcel for which the
SWM site plan is proposed;
         (l)   Existing and proposed land uses;
         (m)   The location of the proposed regulated activity relative to
streets, municipal boundaries and other significant human-made features;
         (n)   Significant physical features and associated boundary limits
including flood hazard areas, sinkholes, existing drainage courses and areas of
natural vegetation;
         (o)   The location of existing and proposed utilities, stormwater
facilities, sanitary sewers and water lines on the parcel and within 50 feet of
property lines;
         (p)   Proposed changes to the land surface and vegetative cover, and
the type and amount of existing and proposed impervious area;
         (q)   Existing and proposed structures, buildings, streets, driveways,
access drives and parking areas;
         (r)   Preferred contour intervals of two feet in moderately sloped
areas, and contours at intervals of five feet for slopes in excess of 15%.
Where public improvements are to be done, one foot contours may be required
subject to the Borough Engineer’s recommendation. Dependent upon site
conditions, alternative contour intervals proposed by an applicant or his or
her designee may be accepted by the municipality;
         (s)   The name of the development, the name and address of the owner
of the property, and the name and address of the individual or firm preparing
the plan. Also to be included are the name, address, signature and seal of any
registered surveyor (attesting the accuracy of the boundary survey),
professional engineer, landscape architect or professional geologist (for
geomorphological assessments) contributing to and/or with a responsibility for
any aspect of the plan where applicable;
         (t)   Preferred graphic and written scale of one inch equals no more
than 50 feet. For parcels of 20 acres or more, the preferred scale is one inch
equals no more than 100 feet. Dependent upon site conditions, an alternative
scale proposed by the applicant or his or her designee may be accepted by the
municipality.
         (u)   North point (arrow);
         (v)   A map showing all existing human-made features beyond the
subject parcel’s boundary lines that will be affected by the proposed regulated
activities;
         (w)   Horizontal and vertical profiles of all open channels, including
hydraulic capacity;
         (x)   A note on the plan indicating the location, and responsibility
for maintenance of, SWM facilities and/or easements that would be located on
adjoining properties as a result of proposed regulated activities, and the
location of such facilities and/or easements;
         (y)   A hydrogeologic assessment of the effects of stormwater runoff
on sinkholes where present;
         (z)   The effect of the proposed regulated activity in terms of runoff
volumes and peak flows on adjacent properties and/or any existing municipal
stormwater collection system that may receive runoff from the project site; and
         (aa)   Drainage flow pathways.
(Ord. 2011-2, passed 10-11-2011)
§ 26-402 PLAN SUBMISSION.
   (A)   Three copies of the SWM site plan shall be submitted as follows:
      (1)   Two copies to the municipality; and
      (2)   One copy to the York County Planning Commission when a SWM site
plan accompanies a subdivision/land development plan application.
   (B)   Additional copies shall be submitted as requested by the municipality
or DEP.
   (C)   The municipality may establish a fee schedule for the review of SWM
plans, the amount of which shall be set by resolution of the municipality’s
governing body.
(Ord. 2011-2, passed 10-11-2011)
§ 26-403 PLAN REVIEW AND APPROVAL PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Generally. SWM site plans shall be reviewed by the municipality for
consistency with the provisions of this Part.
   (B)   Modification requests.
      (1)   When reviewing a SWM site plan, whether or not the SWM site plan is
included in a subdivision and/or land development plan application, the
municipality’s governing body may, after consulting with DEP as noted in §
26-301(C) of this Part, grant a modification of the requirements of one or more
provisions of this Part if the literal enforcement will enact undue hardship
because of peculiar conditions pertaining to the land in question, provided
that such modification will not be contrary to the public interest and that the
purpose and intent of the Part is observed.
      (2)   (a)   All requests for a modifications from an applicant shall be
in writing and shall accompany and be a part of the application for approval of
a SWM site plan and/or a subdivision or land development plan as applicable.
         (b)   The request shall state in full the grounds and facts of
unreasonableness or hardship on which the request is based, the provision or
provisions of the ordinance involved and the minimum modification necessary.
      (3)   The governing body of the municipality shall keep a written record
of all action on requests for modifications. The response of any consultation
and/or review by DEP shall be included as an original report if available or
otherwise documented in the required written record.
   (C)   SWM site plan review and approval procedure.
      (1)   If a SWM site plan does not involve a subdivision and/or land
development, the review of the SWM site, recommendations, approval, approval
with conditions, or disapproval, i.e., the review and decision period, shall
occur within 45 days of submission to the municipality. However, the
municipality, in its sole discretion, may extend the review and decision period
another 45 days due to the nature of the application and/or site conditions. If
an extension of another 45 days is imposed or granted by the municipality
beyond the first 45-day review and decision period designated by this
subsection (C)(1), the municipality shall notify the applicant in writing and
deliver such notice to said applicant within 15 days of the decision to extend
the review and decision period by the municipality. If no extension is imposed
or granted by the municipality beyond the first 45-day review and decision
period, and no decision has been rendered by the municipality within that
period, the SWM site plan shall be deemed approved. Similarly, if after a 45-
day extension of the review and decision period has been imposed or granted by
the municipality, and no decision has been rendered by the municipality within
that period, the SWM site plan shall be deemed approved.
      (2)   If a SWM site plan involves a subdivision and/or land development
plan, the period of time from the submission to the municipality of the
subdivision and/or land development plan application which includes the SWM
plan and the approval, approval with conditions, or disapproval, i.e., review
and decision period, shall be 90 days, in accordance with the procedure for
approval of plats in § 508 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code,
being 53 P.S. §§ 10101 et seq.
      (3)   From the time an application for approval of a plat involving a
subdivision or land development plan, whether preliminary or final, which
includes a SWM site plan, is duly filed with the municipality, no change or
amendment of this Part or other governing ordinance or plan shall affect the
decision on such application in accordance with the provisions of the governing
ordinances or plans as they stood at the time the application was duly filed,
as specified in § 508(4)(I) of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.
   (D)   Decision notification procedure.
      (1)   In all cases, the decision of the municipality to approve or
disapprove the SWM site plan shall be in writing and shall be delivered to the
applicant no later than 15 days following the decision. If the SWM site plan is
disapproved, the written decision by the municipality shall specify the defects
in the application, describe the requirements which were not met, and shall
cite the provisions of the ordinance relied upon.
      (2)   If the SWM site plan is approved with conditions, the notification
to the applicant shall state the acceptable conditions for approval and the
time limit for satisfying such conditions.
      (3)   The time limit for satisfying conditions of approval shall be the
time limit prescribed for conditional approval of subdivision and land
development plans as stated in the municipality’s subdivision and land
development ordinance, or the York County subdivision and land development
ordinance where applicable.
(Ord. 2011-2, passed 10-11-2011)
§ 26-404 REVISION OF PLANS.
   A revision to a previously submitted SWM site plan that involves a change in
SWM BMPs, stormwater management facilities, or changes in analytical
techniques, or that involves the relocation or redesign of SWM BMPs, or that is
necessary because soil or other conditions are not as stated on the SWM site
plan, as determined by the municipality, shall require a resubmission of the
revised SWM site plan in accordance with this Article, including applicable
fees. For NPDES permitted sites, any revised SWM site plan shall also be re-
submitted to the York County Conservation District for review. In the case of a
SWM site plan which contains minor deficiencies, such as a missing label,
omission of a required note or minor construction detail, as determined by the
municipality, the municipality may accept a re-submission of such SWM site plan
without the requirement of a review fee, or for a lesser fee as provided for in
the municipality’s fee schedule.
(Ord. 2011-2, passed 10-11-2011)
§ 26-405 RE-SUBMISSION OF DISAPPROVED SWM SITE PLANS.
   A disapproved SWM site plan may be resubmitted, with the revisions
addressing the municipality’s concerns as stated regarding the original
submission, to the municipality in accordance with this Article. The applicable
review fee must accompany the submission of a revised SWM site plan, unless
such fee is waived by the municipality. (See §
26-404.)
(Ord. 2011-2, passed 10-11-2011)
§ 26-406 AUTHORIZATION TO CONSTRUCT AND TERM OF VALIDITY.
   (A)   SWM site plans independent of subdivision and land development plans.
The municipality’s approval of a SWM site plan, when such plan is submitted
independent of a subdivision and/or land development plan, authorizes the
regulated activities contained in the SWM site plan for a maximum term of
validity of five years following the date of approval. The municipality may, in
its sole discretion, specify a term of validity shorter than five years in the
approval for any specific SWM site plan, particularly if the nature of the
proposed SWM facilities require more frequent maintenance and/or short-term
replacement of certain components. Terms of validity shall commence on the date
the municipality signs the approval for an SWM site plan. If an approved SWM
site plan is not completed according to §
26-407 within the term of validity, then the municipality may consider the SWM
site plan disapproved and may revoke any and all permits. SWM site plans that
are considered disapproved by the municipality may be resubmitted in accordance
with §
26-405 of this Part.
   (B)   SWM site plans included in a subdivision and/or land development plan.
The municipality’s approval of a SWM site plan, which is a part of a
subdivision and/or land development plan, authorizes that plan and the
regulated activities therein so that no subsequent change or amendment in this
Part or other governing ordinances or plans shall be applied to affect
adversely the right of the applicant to commence and to complete any aspect of
the approved development in accordance with the terms of such approval within
five years from such approval, as specified in § 508(4)(ii) through (4)(vii) of
the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, being 53 P.S. §§ 10101 et seq.
(Ord. 2011-2, passed 10-11-2011)
§ 26-407 AS-BUILT PLANS, COMPLETION CERTIFICATE AND FINAL INSPECTION.
   (A)   The developer shall be responsible for providing as-built plans of all
SWM BMPs included in the approved SWM site plan. The as-built plans and an
explanation of any discrepancies with the construction plans shall be submitted
to the municipality.
   (B)   The as-built submission shall include a certification of completion
signed by a qualified person verifying that all permanent SWM BMPs have been
constructed according to the approved plans and specifications. If any licensed
qualified person contributed to the construction plans, then a licensed
qualified person must sign the completion certificate.
   (C)   After receipt of the completion certification by the municipality, the
municipality may conduct a final inspection to verify compliance with, and
accuracy of, the as-built plans.
(Ord. 2011-2, passed 10-11-2011)
ARTICLE V: OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE
§ 26-501 RESPONSIBILITIES OF DEVELOPERS AND LANDOWNERS.
   (A)   The municipality shall make the final determination on the continuing
maintenance responsibilities prior to final approval of the SWM site plan. The
municipality may require a dedication of such facilities as part of the
requirements for approval of the SWM site plan. Such a requirement is not an
indication that the municipality will accept the facilities. The municipality
reserves the right to accept or reject the ownership, maintenance and operating
responsibility for any portion of the stormwater management facilities and
controls.
   (B)   Facilities, areas, or structures used as stormwater management BMPs
shall be enumerated as permanent real estate appurtenances and recorded in the
County Recorder of Deeds office as deed restrictions/protective covenants or
easements that run with the land.
   (C)   The operation and maintenance (O&M) plan shall be recorded as a
restrictive deed covenant that runs with the land.
   (D)   The municipality may take enforcement actions against an owner for any
failure to satisfy the provisions of this Article.
(Ord. 2011-2, passed 10-11-2011)
§ 26-502 OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE AGREEMENTS.
   (A)   Prior to final approval of the SWM site plan, the property owner shall
sign and record an operation and maintenance (O&M) agreement (see
Appendix B) covering all stormwater control facilities which are to be
privately owned.
      (1)   The owner, successor and assigns shall maintain all facilities in
accordance with the approved maintenance schedule in the O&M plan.
      (2)   The owner shall convey to the municipality easements to assure
access for periodic inspections by the municipality and maintenance, as
necessary.
      (3)   The owner shall keep on file with the municipality the name,
address and telephone number of the person or company responsible for
maintenance activities; in the event of a change, new information shall be
submitted by the owner to the municipality within ten working days of the
change.
   (B)   The owner of all facilities, areas or structures used as stormwater
management BMPs shall be responsible for the proper operation and maintenance
in accordance with the approved/recorded plan. Should an owner fail to properly
maintain such facilities, areas or structures, the municipality may perform the
services necessary in order to maintain the proper functioning and operation of
the stormwater management BMP and thereafter, charge to the owner appropriate
fees and/or place a lien against the property until such fees are collected and
paid by the owner.
   (C)   The municipality is exempt from the requirement to sign and record an
operation and maintenance agreement.
(Ord. 2011-2, passed 10-11-2011)
§ 26-503 PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE.
   For SWM site plans that involve subdivision and land development, the
applicant shall provide a financial guarantee to the municipality for the
timely installation and proper construction of all stormwater management
controls as required by the approved SWM site plan and this Part in accordance
with the provisions of §§ 509, 510, and 511 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, being 53 P.S. §§ 10101 et seq.
(Ord. 2011-2, passed 10-11-2011)
ARTICLE VI: FEES AND EXPENSES
§ 26-601 GENERAL.
   Reserved for S-1 Supplement.
(Ord. 2011-2, passed 10-11-2011)
ARTICLE VII: PROHIBITIONS
§ 26-701 PROHIBITED DISCHARGES AND CONNECTIONS.
   (A)   Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, that
allows any nonstormwater discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and
wash water to enter the waters of this Commonwealth is prohibited.
   (B)   No person shall allow, or cause to allow, discharges into surface
waters of this Commonwealth which are not composed entirely of stormwater,
except:
      (1)   As provided in subsection (C) below; and
      (2)   Discharges allowed under a state or federal permit.
   (C)   The following discharges are authorized unless they are determined to
be significant contributors to pollution to the waters of this Commonwealth:
      (1)   Discharges from firefighting activities;
      (2)   Potable water sources including water line flushing;
      (3)   Irrigation drainage;
      (4)   Air conditioning condensate;
      (5)   Springs;
      (6)   Water from crawl space pumps;
      (7)   Pavement wash waters where spills or leaks of toxic or hazardous
materials have not occurred (unless all spill material has been removed) and
where detergents are not used;
      (8)   Diverted stream flows;
      (9)   Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands;
      (10)   Uncontaminated water from foundations or from footing drains;
      (11)   Lawn watering;
      (12)   De-chlorinated swimming pool discharges;
      (13)   Uncontaminated groundwater;
      (14)   Water from individual residential car washing;
      (15)   Routine external building wash-down (which does not use detergents
or other compounds); and
      (16)   Water discharged in well testing for potable water supplies.
   (D)   In the event that the municipality or DEP determines that any of the
discharges identified in subsection (C) above significantly contribute to
pollution of the waters of this Commonwealth, the municipality or DEP will
notify the responsible person(s) to cease the discharge.
(Ord. 2011-2, passed 10-11-2011)
§ 26-702 ROOF DRAINS.
   Roof drains and sump pumps shall discharge to infiltration or vegetative
BMPs and to the maximum extent practicable satisfy the criteria for DIAs.
(Ord. 2011-2, passed 10-11-2011)
§ 26-703 ALTERATION OF SWM BMPs.
   No person shall modify, remove, fill, landscape or alter any SWM BMPs,
facilities, areas, grades or structures in a manner without the written
approval of the municipality, with the exception of necessary maintenance
activities such as mowing.
(Ord. 2011-2, passed 10-11-2011)
ARTICLE VIII: ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES
§ 26-801 RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   Upon presentation of proper credentials, the municipality may enter at
reasonable times upon any property within the municipality to inspect the
condition of the stormwater structures and facilities in regard to any aspect
regulated by this Part.
(Ord. 2011-2, passed 10-11-2011)
§ 26-802 INSPECTION.
   SWM BMPs shall be inspected by the landowner, or the owner’s designee,
including the municipality for dedicated and owned facilities, according to the
following list of minimum frequencies:
   (A)   Annually for the first five years;
   (B)   Once every three years thereafter; and
   (C)   During or immediately after the cessation of a ten-year or greater
storm, i.e., a storm of a estimated frequency of recurrence of ten years or
greater interval of time.
(Ord. 2011-2, passed 10-11-2011)
§ 26-803 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for a person to undertake any regulated activity
except as provided in an approved SWM site plan, unless specifically exempted
in §
26-302.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to violate any section of this Part.
   (C)   Inspections regarding compliance with the SWM site plan are a
responsibility of the municipality.
   (D)   Landowner must notify the borough seven days prior to starting
construction on improvements proposed by an approved SWM site plan. At that
time a schedule of inspections of the construction activities shall be
confirmed by the landowner/contractor to the borough.
   (E)   Any BMPs that will have backfill placed over them will need to be
observed by the borough prior to being backfilled.
   (F)   As per the fee schedule, the applicant will be required to pay all
fees for inspections that are associated with constructing the improvements
proposed by the SWM site plan.
(Ord. 2011-2, passed 10-11-2011)
§ 26-804 SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.
   (A)   Any approval or permit issued by the municipality pursuant to this
Part may be suspended or revoked for:
      (1)   Noncompliance with or failure to implement any provision of the
approved SWM site plan or O&M agreement;
      (2)   A violation of any provision of this Part or any other applicable
law, ordinance, rule, or regulation relating to the regulated activity; and
      (3)   The creation of any condition or the commission of any act during
the regulated activity which constitutes or creates a hazard, nuisance,
pollution, or endangers the life or property of others.
   (B)   A suspended approval shall be reinstated by the municipality when:
      (1)   The municipality has inspected and approved the corrections to the
violations that caused the suspension; and
      (2)   The municipality is satisfied that the violation has been
corrected.
   (C)   An approval that has been revoked by the municipality cannot be
reinstated. The applicant may apply for a new approval under the provisions of
this Part.
   (D)   If a violation causes no immediate danger to life, public health or
property, at its sole discretion, the municipality may provide a limited time
period for the owner to correct the violation. In these cases, the municipality
will provide the owner, or the owner’s designee, with a written notice of the
violation and the time period allowed for the owner to correct the violation.
If the owner does not correct the violation within the allowed time period, the
municipality may revoke or suspend any, or all, applicable approvals and
permits pertaining to any provision of this Part.
(Ord. 2011-2, passed 10-11-2011)
§ 26-805 PENALTIES.
   (A)   Any person, firm, corporation or other entity who shall violate any
provision of this Part shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a
fine of not less than $100 nor more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of
payment of said fine and costs to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days.
Each day that a violation of this Part continues or each section of this Part
which shall be found to have been violated shall constitute a separate offense.
   (B)   The municipality may institute injunctive, mandamus or any other
appropriate action or proceeding at law or in equity for the enforcement of
this Part. Any court of competent jurisdiction shall have the right to issue
restraining orders, temporary or permanent injunctions, mandamus or other
appropriate forms of remedy or relief.
(Ord. 2011-2, passed 10-11-2011)
§ 26-806 APPEALS.
   (A)   Any person aggrieved by any action of the municipality or its
designee, relevant to the provisions of this Part, may appeal to the
municipality within 30 days of that action.
   (B)   Any person aggrieved by any decision of the municipality, relevant to
the provisions of this Part, may appeal to the County Court of Common Pleas
within 30 days of the municipality’s decision.
(Ord. 2011-2, passed 10-11-2011)
ARTICLE IX: REFERENCES
§ 26-901 REFERENCES.
   (A)   Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. No. 363-0300-002
(December 2006), as amended and updated. Pennsylvania Stormwater Best
Management Practices Manual. Harrisburg, PA.
   (B)   Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. No. 363-2134-008
(April 15, 2000), as amended and updated. Erosion and Sediment Pollution
Control Program Manual. Harrisburg, PA.
   (C)   U.S. Department of Agriculture, National Resources Conservation
Service (NRCS). National Engineering Handbook. Part 630: Hydrology, 1969-2001.
Originally published as the National Engineering Handbook, Section 4:
Hydrology. Available from the NRCS online at: http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/.
   (D)   U.S. Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources Conservation
Service. 1986. Technical Release 55: Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds, 2nd
Edition. Washington, D.C.
   (E)   U.S. Department of Commerce, National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration, National Weather Service, Hydrometeorological Design Studies
Center. 2004-2006. Precipitation-Frequency Atlas of the United States, Atlas
14, Volume 2, Version 3.0, Silver Spring, Maryland. Internet address: http://
hdsc.nws.noaa.gov/hdsc/pfds/.
   (F)   Act of July 31, 1968, P.L. 85, No.247, the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, as amended, being 53 P.S. §§ 10101 et seq.
(Ord. 2011-2, passed 10-11-2011)
ARTICLE X: ENACTMENT
§ 26-1001 ENACTMENT.
   This Ordinance 2011-2 shall become effective October 12, 2011.
(Ord. 2011-2, passed 10-11-2011)
EXHIBIT 1: COMPUTATION TABLE FOR STORM SEWER DESIGN
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/94f7604698164d47ce09a94755960d75f49d81c0/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1627.png]
 
EXHIBIT 2: TYPICAL COMPOSITE RUNOFF COEFFICIENTS
BY LAND USE
Borough of Dillsburg
Typical Composite Runoff Coefficients by Land Use*
Description of Area (1) Runoff Coefficients (2)
Borough of Dillsburg
Typical Composite Runoff Coefficients by Land Use*
Description of Area (1)   Runoff Coefficients (2)
Business                   
   Downtown            0.70 to 0.95
   Neighborhood        0.50 to 0.70
Residential                
   Single Family       0.30 to 0.50
   Multi-units, detache0.40 to 0.60
   Multi-units, attache0.60 to 0.75
   Residential (suburba0.25 to 0.40
   Apartment           0.50 to 0.70
Industrial                 
   Light               0.50 to 0.80
   Heavy               0.60 to 0.90
Parks, cemeteries         0.10 to 0.25
Playgrounds               0.20 to 0.35
Railroad yards            0.20 to 0.35
Unimproved                0.10 to 0.30
Normal Range of Runoff Coefficients*
Character of Surface (1) Runoff Coefficients (2)
Normal Range of Runoff Coefficients*
Character of Surface (1)    Runoff Coefficients (2)
Pavement                     
   Asphalt and concrete  0.70 to 0.95
   Brick                 0.70 to 0.85
Roofs                        
Lawns, Sandy Soil            
   Flat (2 percent)      0.05 to 0.10
   Average (2 to 7 percen0.10 to 0.15
   Steep (>7 percent)    0.15 to 0.20
Lawns, Heavy Soil            
   Flat (2 percent)      0.13 to 0.17
   Average (2 to 7 percen0.18 to 0.22
   Steep (>7 percent)    0.25 to 0.35
 
The range of “C” values presented are typical for return periods of 2-10 years.
Higher values are appropriate for larger design storms.
EXHIBIT 3: RAINFALL; INTENSITY, DURATION, FREQUENCY CURVE
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/94f7604698164d47ce09a94755960d75f49d81c0/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1625.png]
 
APPENDIX A: DISCONNECTED IMPERVIOUS AREA (DIA)
A. 1.   Rooftop Disconnection
When rooftop down spouts are directed to a pervious area that allows for
infiltration, filtration and increased time of concentration, the rooftop may
qualify as completely or partially DIA and a portion of the impervious rooftop
area may be excluded from the calculation of total impervious area.
A rooftop is considered to be completely or partially disconnected if it meets
the requirements listed below:
   •   The contributing area of rooftop to each disconnected discharge is 500
square feet or less;
   •   The soil, in proximity of the roof water discharge area, is not
designated as hydrologic soil group “D” or equivalent; and
   •   The overland flow path from roof water discharge area has a positive
slope of 5% or less.
For designs that meet these requirements, the portion of the roof that may be
considered disconnected depends on the length of the overland path as
designated in Table B.l.
Table B.1: Partial Rooftop Disconnection
Length of Pervious Flow Path * Roof Area Treated as Disconnected
(ft)                           (% of contributing area)
Table B.1: Partial Rooftop Disconnection
Length of Pervious Flow Path Roof Area Treated as Disconnected
*
(ft)                         (% of contributing area)
0—14                       0
15—29                      20
30—44                      40
45—59                      60
60—74                      80
75 or more                   100
*   Flow path cannot include impervious surfaces and must be at least 15 feet
from any impervious surfaces.
   
A.2. Pavement Disconnection
When pavement runoff is directed to a pervious area that allows for
infiltration, filtration, and increased time of concentration, the contributing
pavement area may qualify as a DIA that may be excluded from the calculation of
total impervious area. This applies generally only to small or narrow pavement
structures such as driveways and narrow pathways through otherwise pervious
areas, e.g., a walkway or bike path through a park.
Pavement is disconnected if the pavement, or area adjacent to the pavement,
meets the requirements below:
   •   The contributing flow path over impervious area is not more than 75
feet;
   •   The length of overland flow is greater than or equal to the contributing
length;
   •   The soil is not designated as hydrologic soil group “D” or equivalent;
   •   The slope of the contributing impervious area is 5% or less; and
   •   The slope of the overland flow path is 5% or less.
If the discharge is concentrated at one or more discrete points, no more than
1,000 square feet may discharge to any one point. In addition, a gravel strip
or other spreading device is required for concentrated discharges. For non-
concentrated discharges along the edge of the pavement, this requirement is
waived; however, there must be a provision for the establishment of vegetation
along the pavement edge and temporary stabilization of the area until
vegetation becomes stabilized.
Reference
Philadelphia Water Department. 2006. Stormwater Management Guidance Manual. §
4.2.2: Integrated Site Design. Philadelphia, PA.
(Ord. 2011-2, passed 10-11-2011)
APPENDIX B: O&M AGREEMENT
OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE (O&M) AGREEMENT
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (SWM BMPs)
   THIS AGREEMENT, made and entered into this _________ day of ________, 20__,
by and between ________________________________, (hereinafter the “Landowner”),
and Dillsburg Borough, York County, Pennsylvania, (hereinafter “Borough”);
   WITNESSETH
   WHEREAS, the Landowner is the owner of certain real property as recorded by
deed in the land records of York County, Pennsylvania, Deed Book ____ at page
____ , (hereinafter “Property”).
   WHEREAS, the Landowner is proceeding to build and develop the Property; and
   WHEREAS, the SWM BMP Operation and Maintenance (O&M) Plan approved by the
Borough (hereinafter referred to as the “O&M Plan”) for the property identified
herein, which is attached hereto as Appendix A and made part hereof, as
approved by the Borough, provides for management of stormwater within the
confines of the Property through the use of BMPs; and
   WHEREAS, the Borough, and the Landowner, his successors and assigns, agree
that the health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the Borough and the
protection and maintenance of water quality require that on-site SWM BMPs be
constructed and maintained on the Property; and
   WHEREAS, the Borough requires, through the implementation of the SWM Site
Plan, that SWM BMPs as required by said SWM Site Plan and the Municipal
Stormwater Management Ordinance be constructed and adequately operated and
maintained by the Landowner, successors, and assigns.
   NOW, THEREFORE, in consideration of the foregoing promises, the mutual
covenants contained herein, and the following terms and conditions, the parties
hereto agree as follows:
1.   The Landowner shall construct the BMPs in accordance with the plans and
specifications identified in the SWM Site Plan.
2.   The Landowner shall operate and maintain the BMPs as shown on the SWM Plan
in good working order in accordance with the specific operation and maintenance
requirements noted on the approved O&M Plan.
3.   The Landowner hereby grants permission to the Borough, its authorized
agents and employees, to enter upon the property, at reasonable times and upon
presentation of proper credentials, to inspect the BMPs whenever necessary.
Whenever possible, the Borough shall notify the Landowner prior to entering the
property.
4.   In the event the Landowner fails to operate and maintain the BMPs per
paragraph 2., the Borough or its representatives may enter upon the Property
and take whatever action is deemed necessary to maintain said BMP(s). It is
expressly understood and agreed that the Borough is under no obligation to
maintain or repair said facilities, and in no event shall this Agreement be
construed to impose any such obligation on the Borough.
5.   In the event the Borough, pursuant to this Agreement, performs work of any
nature, or expends any funds in performance of said work for labor, use of
equipment, supplies, materials, and the like, the Landowner shall reimburse the
Borough for all expenses (direct and indirect) incurred within ten (10) days of
receipt of invoice from the Borough.
6.   The intent and purpose of this Agreement is to ensure the proper
maintenance of the onsite BMPs by the Landowner; provided, however, that this
Agreement shall not be deemed to create or effect any additional liability of
any party for damage alleged to result from or be caused by stormwater runoff.
7.   The Landowner, its executors, administrators, assigns, and other
successors in interests, shall release the Borough from all damages, accidents,
casualties, occurrences, or claims which might arise or be asserted against
said employees and representatives from the construction, presence, existence,
or maintenance of the BMP(s) by the Landowner or the Borough.
8.   Inspection of the BMPs shall be in compliance with the Dillsburg Borough
Stormwater Management Ordinance, as amended.
This Agreement shall be recorded at the Office of the Recorder of Deeds of York
County, Pennsylvania, and shall constitute a covenant running with the Property
and/or equitable servitude, and shall be binding on the Landowner, his
administrators, executors, assigns, heirs, and any other successors in
interests, in perpetuity.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, this instrument is executed this __________ day of _______,
20____.
WITNESS:
_________________________         By: ______________________________
                           Property Owner
_________________________         By: ______________________________
                           Property Owner
COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA
      SS:
COUNTY OF YORK
On this ______________ day of _______________, 20____, before me a Notary
Public, the undersigned officer personally appeared, ___________________, an
individual, known to me to be the person whose name is subscribed to the within
instrument, and acknowledged that he/she executed the same for the purpose
contained herein
                                          _________________________________
   Notary Public
COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA
         SS:
COUNTY OF YORK
On this ______________ day of _______________, 20____, before me a Notary
Public, the undersigned officer personally appeared, ___________________, an
individual, known to me to be the person whose name is subscribed to the within
instrument, and acknowledged that he/she executed the same for the purpose
contained herein
                                          _________________________________
      Notary Public
Attest:                                       Dillsburg Borough
___________________________                     _________________________________
   Secretary                                 Manager
COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA
            SS:
COUNTY OF YORK
On this ______________ day of _______________, 20____, before me a Notary
Public, the undersigned officer personally appeared, ___________________, an
individual, known to me to be the person whose name is subscribed to the within
instrument, and acknowledged that he/she executed the same for the purpose
contained herein
CHAPTER 27: ZONING
      Part
         
1.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
         
2.   DEFINITION OF TERMS
         
3.   DESIGNATION OF DISTRICTS
         
4.   DISTRICT REGULATIONS
            
A: C - Conservation District
            
B: R-S - Residential - Suburban District
            
C: R-U - Residential - Urban District
            
D: T-C - Town Center District
            
E: C-H - Commercial - Highway District
            
F: M-C - Manufacturing - Commercial District
            
G: P-C - Planned Commercial District
            
H: MU-C Mixed Use Center District
         
5.   GENERAL REGULATIONS
         
6.   AMENDMENTS, VALIDITY AND ENACTMENT
         
7.   ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
         
8.   INTERPRETATION, VALIDITY, REPEALER AND EFFECTIVE DATE
         
9.   ZONING MAP AMENDMENTS
            ATTACHMENTS
            
ATTACHMENT 1: DIAGRAMS
            
ATTACHMENT 2: TABLE
            
ATTACHMENT 3: CHART A
            
ATTACHMENT 4: CHART B
PART 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
27-101   Short title
   
27-102   Purpose
   
27-103   Declaration of conformance
   
27-104   Zoning Officer
   
27-105   Zoning Hearing Board
   
27-106   Interpretation
§ 27-101 SHORT TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known as the “Dillsburg Zoning Ordinance”.
(Ord. 171, passed 1-18-1972, Art. I, § 101; Ord. 1997-04, passed 3-18-1997)
§ 27-102 PURPOSE.
   This chapter is enacted for the following purposes:
   (A)   To promote, protect and facilitate one or more of the following; the
public health, safety, morals, general welfare, coordinated and practical
community development, proper density of population, the provisions of adequate
light and air, police protection, vehicle parking and loading space,
transportation, water, sewerage, schools, public grounds and other public
requirements; and
   (B)   As well as to prevent one or more of the following; overcrowding of
land, blight, danger and congestion in travel and transportation, loss of
health, life or property from fire, flood, panic or other dangers. This chapter
is made in accordance with an overall program, and with consideration for the
character of the borough, its various parts and the suitability of the various
parts for particular uses and structures.
(Ord. 171, passed 1-18-1972, Art. I, § 102; Ord. 1997-04, passed 3-18-1997)
§ 27-103 DECLARATION OF CONFORMANCE.
   This chapter has been made with consideration for the character of the
borough, its various parts, and the suitability of the various parts for
particular uses and structures; and is in accordance with the expressed or
implied community development objectives of the comprehensive plan for the
development of the borough as set forth in the Northern York County Regional
Plan.
(Ord. 171, passed 1-18-1972, Art. I, § 103; Ord. 1997-04, passed 3-18-1997)
§ 27-104 ZONING OFFICER.
   The appointed position of the Zoning Officer is hereby established for the
administration of this chapter and said Officer shall have such powers and
authority as set forth within the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code,
being 53 P.S. §§ 10101 et seq., and this chapter.
(Ord. 171, passed 1-18-1972, Art. I, § 104; Ord. 1997-04, passed 3-18-1997)
§ 27-105 ZONING HEARING BOARD.
   A Zoning Hearing Board is hereby created and shall have the number of
members and such powers and authority as set forth within the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code and this chapter. The duly established Zoning
Hearing Board may, from time to time, be herein referred to as the Board and
unless otherwise clearly indicated, the term “Board” shall refer to such Zoning
Hearing Board.
(Ord. 171, passed 1-18-1972, Art. I, § 105; Ord. 1997-04, passed 3-18-1997)
§ 27-106 INTERPRETATION.
   In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, they shall be
held to be the minimum requirements far the promotion of health, safety, morals
and the general welfare of the borough and its citizens. It is not intended by
this chapter interfere with or abrogate or annul any rules or regulations
previously adopted or permits previously issued by the borough which are not in
conflict with any provisions of this chapter, nor is it intended by this
chapter to interfere with or abrogate or annul any easements; covenants,
building restrictions or other agreements between parties; provided, however,
that where this chapter imposes a greater restriction upon the use of the
buildings or premises or upon the height of the building, or requires a larger
open space than is imposed or required by such ordinance, rules, regulations,
or by easements, covenants, building restrictions or agreements, the provisions
of this chapter shall control.
(Ord. 171, passed 1-18-1972, Art. I, § 106; Ord. 1997-04, passed 3-18-1997)
PART 2: DEFINITION OF TERMS
Section
   
27-201   Application and interpretation
   
27-202   Definitions
§ 27-201 APPLICATION AND INTERPRETATION.
   The words, terms and phrases set forth under §
27-202 are defined in order to facilitate the interpretation of this chapter
for administrative purposes and in the carrying out of duties by appropriate
officers and by the Board. Unless otherwise expressly stated, words used in the
present tense include the future; words used in the singular include the
plural; the word PERSON includes a profit or non-profit CORPORATION, COMPANY,
PARTNERSHIP, ASSOCIATION, or INDIVIDUAL; the word USED or OCCUPIES as applied
to any land or building includes the words INTENDED, ARRANGED, or DESIGNED TO
BE USED OR OCCUPIES; the word BUILDING includes STRUCTURE; the word LOT
includes PLOT or PARCEL; and the word SHALL is always mandatory.
(Ord. 171, passed 1-18-1972, Art. II, § 201; Ord. 1997-04, passed 3-18-1997)
§ 27-202 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCESS DRIVE. A private drive, other than a driveway, which provides for
vehicular access between a street and a parking area, loading area, drive-in
service window or other facility within a land development. See DRIVEWAY.
   ACCESSORY BUILDING. See BUILDING.
   ACCESSORY USE. See USE.
   ADULT REGULATED FACILITY. An establishment open to the general public or a
private club open to members, except persons under the age of 18 years, which
is used and occupied for one or more of the following activities.
      (1)   ADULT BOOK STORE. An establishment in which 5% or more of the
occupied sales or display area offers for sale, for rent or lease, for loan, or
for view upon the premises, pictures, photographs, drawings, prints, images,
sculpture, still film, motion picture film, video tape, or similar visual
representations distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on sexual conduct
or sexually  explicit nudity, or books, pamphlets, magazines, printed matter or
sound recordings containing explicit and detailed descriptions or narrative
accounts distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on sexual conduct, or
offers sexual devices for sale. An establishment in which less than 5% of the
occupied sales area offers for sale, for rent or lease, for loan, or for view
upon the premises, such items, as described above, shall not be regulated as an
ADULT REGULATED FACILITY, provided that the items are kept out of public view
and not sold to persons under 18 years of age.
      (2)   ADULT CABARETS. An establishment, club, tavern, restaurant, theater
or hall which features live entertainment distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on sexual conduct or sexually explicit nudity.
      (3)   ADULT MASSAGE PARLORS. An establishment whose business is the
administration of massage to the anatomy of patrons, regardless whether or not
the same includes sexual conduct, but shall exclude licensed hospitals,
licensed nursing homes, medical offices, clinical offices or other offices and
quarters of licensed professional health practitioners.
      (4)   ADULT THEATER. A building, a room within a building or a portion of
a building, used for presenting motion picture film, video tape or similar
visual representation of materials distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on sexual conduct or sexually explicit nudity.
   AGRICULTURE. The use of land for farming, dairying, pasturage, sylviculture,
horticulture, floriculture, viticulture, or animal or poultry husbandry,
including the necessary accessory uses for packing, treating or storing the
produce and equipment or housing and feeding the animals. Includes land devoted
to and meeting the requirements and qualifications for payments or other
compensation pursuant to a soil conservation program.
   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE PRODUCTION. An establishment which produces alcoholic
beverage for on-site or off-site sale and distribution, and which may include a
brewpub and tasting room on the premise, or as otherwise defined as
MANUFACTURER by Chapter 47 of the Pennsylvania Liquor Code, as amended.
   ALTERATIONS.
      (1)   ALTERATIONS. As applied to a building or structure, any change or
rearrangement in the total floor area, or an enlargement, whether horizontally
or vertically.
      (2)   STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS. Any change to or addition of supporting
members of a building or structure, such as bearing walls, columns, beams or
girders.
   AMENDMENT. A change which includes revisions to the zoning text and/or the
official zoning map. The authority for any amendment lies solely with the
Borough Council.
   ANIMAL HOSPITAL. A building used primarily for the treatment, by a
veterinarian, of small domestic animals such as dogs, cats, rabbits and birds
or fowl. Boarding of such animals shall be for medical or surgical treatment
only.
   APPLICANT. Any landowner, lessee or his or her authorized agent who submits
plans, data and/or application to the Zoning Officer or other designated
borough official for the purpose of obtaining approval thereof.
   BAR. An establishment where the principal use is the serving of alcoholic
beverages by the drink to the general public and where food or packaged
beverages may be served or sold as an accessory use.
   BASEMENT. That portion of a building partly underground but having one-half
or more of its height above the average level of the adjoining ground. A
BASEMENT shall be considered as a story in determining the number of stories.
See CELLAR.
   BED AND BREAKFAST INN. A single-family residence, or portion thereof,
containing not more than four guest rooms, which are used by not more than
eight guests, where rent is paid in money, goods, labor or otherwise. See
BOARDING HOUSE, ROOMING HOUSE.
   BOARDING HOUSE. A building, where for compensation, provisions are made for
lodging and meals for at least three, but not more than 15, persons. See BED
AND BREAKFAST INN, ROOMING HOUSE.
   BREWERY. A facility that holds a license to manufacture, store and
distribute malt or brewed beverages as regulated by the Pennsylvania Liquor
Code, as amended. Sales of malt and brewed beverages of alcoholic and or non-
alcoholic content that are manufactured outside the facility are prohibited.
Holders of a brewery license may allow patrons to consume alcohol on the
premises only in accordance with Title 40 of the Pennsylvania Liquor Code. See
also MICRO-BREWERY and BREWPUB.
   BREWPUB. A restaurant in which beer or malt beverages, wine, and other
alcoholic beverages are manufactured, brewed or distilled on-site for retail
purchase only and which establishment is licensed and operated in accordance
with the Pennsylvania Liquor Code and in compliance with the requirements of
the Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board.
   BUILDING. Any structure on a lot, having a roof supported by columns or
walls and intended for the shelter, housing or enclosure of persons, animals or
property. See STRUCTURE.
      (1)   ACCESSORY BUILDING. A building subordinate to and detached from the
principal building on the same lot and used for purposes customarily incidental
to the principal building.
      (2)   PRINCIPAL BUILDING. A building in which is conducted the principal
use of the lot on which it is located.
   BUILDING AREA. The total area of outside dimensions taken on a horizontal
plane at the mean level of the ground surrounding the principal building and
all accessory buildings, exclusive of uncovered porches, terraces and steps.
   BUILDING HEIGHT. The vertical distance measured from the mean level of the
ground surrounding the building to a point midway between the highest and
lowest point of the roof, but not including chimneys, towers, spires, elevator
penthouses, tanks and similar projections.
   BUSINESS OFFICE. An office which generally operates on an appointment basis.
BUSINESS OFFICES shall include, but not be limited to, advertising agencies,
banking and financial institutions, opticians’ offices, personnel agencies, and
travel and ticket agencies.
   BUSINESS PARK. A practical and flexible development with low to moderately
intensive activities, architecturally attractive building facades and
landscaping. Permitted uses within the park shall include professional and
business offices, hotels or motels, wholesale establishments, warehouses,
industrial activities, child care centers and research laboratories.
   CARE FACILITIES. Establishments which provide food, shelter, personal
assistance, supervision and/or medical or other health related services for
individuals not in need of hospitalization, but who, because of age, illness,
disease, injury, convalescence or physical or mental infirmity, need such care.
      (1)   ADULT DAY CARE CENTER. Any premises in which care is provided to
four or more elderly or disabled adults for part of a 24-hour day, excluding
care provided by relatives. Care includes personal assistance, the development
of skills for daily living and the provision of social contact, by a caregiver
that has an appropriate license issued by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania,
Department of Public Welfare.
      (2)   CHILD DAY CARE CENTER. A facility that is licensed by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Department of Public Welfare and which provides a
wide range of formal day care services for remuneration to seven or more
children who are supervised by a qualified staff. The child care areas in a day
care center shall not be used as a family residence.
      (3)   CONVALESCENT OR NURSING HOME. An establishment that is licensed by
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and which provides full-time residential,
intermediate or skilled nursing care for three or more individuals who, by
reason of chronic illness or infirmity, are unable to care for themselves. No
care for the acutely ill or surgical or obstetrical services shall be provided
in such a home.
      (4)   DOMICILIARY CARE HOME. A facility that is located in a single-
family residence and provides 24 hour supervised protective living arrangements
by the family residing therein for not more than three unrelated persons 18
years of age and above who are disabled physically, mentally, emotionally or
who are aged persons.
      (5)   FAMILY DAY CARE HOME. A facility that is located in a single-family
residence and provides supervised care for remuneration to not more than six
children, who are not relatives of the care giver. The facility must be
registered by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Department of Public Welfare.
      (6)   GROUP DAY CARE HOME. A facility that is located in a single-family
residence and provides supervised care for remuneration to more than six, but
less than 12, children who are not relatives of the care giver. The facility
must be licensed by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Department of Public
Welfare.
      (7)   GROUP HOME. A type of group quarters, specifically a dwelling
designed for a group of mentally and/or physically disabled persons living and
cooking together in a single dwelling unit. A GROUP HOME may be directly
affiliated with a parent institution which provides for the administration of
the residents, who are required to reside on the premises to benefit from the
service, through the direction of a professional staff and for supervision of
residents by full-time resident staff. GROUP HOMES must be licensed where
required by an appropriate government agency(ies). A GROUP HOME does not
include a halfway house.
      (8)   PERSONAL CARE BOARDING HOME. A type of group quarters, specifically
a premises in which food, shelter and personal assistance or supervision are
provided, on a state or federal licensed basis, for a period exceeding 24
consecutive hours for at least four but not more than 16 persons who are over
the age of 18, are not relatives of the operator and who are aged, blind,
disabled, infirm or dependent but do not require skilled or intermediate
nursing care.
   CELLAR. That portion of a building partly underground and having more than
one-half of its clear height below the average level of the adjoining ground. A
CELLAR shall not be considered in determining the number of stories. See
BASEMENT.
   CONDOMINIUM. A type of ownership arrangement, not a land use, wherein parts
of a building typically are owned separately by persons and other parts such as
halls, stairs and recreation areas are owned jointly by such persons. A
CONDOMINIUM may be residential, commercial or industrial in nature.
   CONTRACTOR’S OFFICE OR SHOP. An office or shop for a tradesman, such as a
building, cement, electrical, masonry, painting or roofing contractor.
   COUNTRY INN. An overnight lodging facility established in an historic
single-family detached residence or a new building built to resemble a single-
family detached residence typical of the historic architecture in the borough
and/or the Northern York County region in the period prior to the year 1900.
The INN may include dining facilities and other amenities. The INN shall not
function as a boarding or rooming house.
   COURT. An unoccupied open space, other than a yard, on the same lot with a
building, which is bounded on two or more sides by the walls of such building.
   DISTILLERY. A facility that holds a license to manufacture, store and
distribute alcoholic liquors as regulated by the Pennsylvania Liquor Code, as
amended. Sales of beverages of alcoholic and or non-alcoholic content that are
manufactured outside the facility are prohibited. Holders of a brewery license
may allow patrons to consume alcohol on the premises only in accordance with
Title 40 of the Pennsylvania Liquor Code. See also MICRO-DISTILLERY and
BREWPUB.
   DRIVEWAY. A private minor vehicular right-of-way providing access between a
street and a garage, carport or other parking space for a single-family or two-
family dwelling. See ACCESS DRIVE.
   DWELLING. A building or structure designed for living quarters for one or
more families, including mobile homes and modular housing resting directly on
and securely anchored to a concrete or bonded masonry foundation extending
below the frost level and supporting the entire perimeter or a concrete slab so
supported; but not including hotels, rooming houses or other accommodations
used for transient occupancy, or recreational vehicles, tents, converted
vehicles, foundations or other make-shift structures.
      (1)   DWELLING UNIT. One or more rooms used for living and sleeping
purposes, having a kitchen with fixed cooking facilities and a bathroom with a
toilet and bathtub or shower, arranged for occupancy by one family.
      (2)   MULTI-FAMILY DWELLING. A building containing three or more dwelling
units, including apartment houses, garden apartment or townhouses. All dwelling
units are located on the same
lot and share with other units a common yard area. For purposes of this
chapter, the use MULTI- FAMILY DWELLING does not include a multi-family
conversion dwelling. See diagrams at the end of the chapter.
      (3)   MULTI-FAMILY OR TWO-FAMILY CONVERSION DWELLINGS. A type of multi-
family or two-family dwelling constructed by converting an existing building
into two or more dwelling units, without substantially altering the exterior of
the building.
      (4)   SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED DWELLING. A portion of a building containing
one dwelling unit, and having two partitions in common with other dwelling
units (such as row houses or townhouses). Each dwelling unit is located on a
separate lot. See diagrams at the end of the chapter.
      (5)   SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED DWELLING. A building containing only one
dwelling unit and having two side yards. See diagrams at the end of the
chapter.
      (6)   SINGLE-FAMILY SEMI-DETACHED DWELLING. A portion of a building
containing one dwelling unit, having one side yard and having one partition in
common with another dwelling unit. Each dwelling unit is located on a separate
lot. See diagrams at the end of the chapter.
      (7)   TWO-FAMILY DWELLING. A building containing two dwelling units,
having two side yards and having one partition in common between the two
dwelling units. Both dwelling units are located on the same lot. For purposes
of this chapter, the use TWO-FAMILY DWELLING shall not include a two-family
conversion dwelling. See diagrams at the end of the chapter.
   EATING ESTABLISHMENT. A public eating place where food is prepared and sold
for either on-premises or off-premises consumption.
   FAMILY. One or more persons who live in one dwelling unit and maintain a
common household. May consist of a single person or of two or more persons,
whether or not related by blood, marriage or adoption. May also include
domestic servants and gratuitous guests, but not occupants of a club,
fraternal, lodging or boarding house.
   FLOOR AREA OF A BUILDING.
      (1)   FLOOR AREA OF A BUILDING. The sum of the gross horizontal areas of
the floors of a building, excluding cellar, basement and attic floor areas if
not devoted to the principal use, but including the area of roofed porches and
roofed terraces. All dimensions shall be measured between exterior faces of
walls.
      (2)   HABITABLE FLOOR AREA. The sum of the horizontal areas of all rooms
used for habitation, such as living room, dining room, kitchen or bedroom, but
not including hallways, stairways, cellars, attics, service or utility rooms,
bathrooms, closets, nor unheated areas such as enclosed porches, nor rooms
without at least one window or skylight opening onto an outside yard or court.
   GARAGE. An accessory building or that portion of a principal building used
for the storage of one or more automobiles and/or other vehicles accessory and
incidental to the principal use of the premises, provided that no business,
occupation or service is conducted for profit therein nor space therein for
more than one automobile is leased to a non-occupant of the premises.
   GOVERNING BODY. The Council of the Borough of Dillsburg, York County,
Pennsylvania.
   GREENHOUSE, HORTICULTURAL NURSERY. A use primarily involved in horticulture
which includes the sale of plants grown on the premises and related goods and
materials, as well as the storage of equipment customarily incidental and
accessory to the primary use.
   GROSS AREA. Based on the entire area of development including all structure
area and all open space, such as, but not limited to, yard areas, water areas,
parking areas, internal streets and drives, and one-half the width of boundary
streets not including any limited access highway.
   GROUP QUARTERS. Any dwelling, or portion thereof, which is designed or used
for at least three, but not more than eight, persons unrelated to each other or
to any family occupying the dwelling unit and having common eating facilities.
GROUP QUARTERS include, but are not limited to, fraternity and sorority houses,
dormitories and other quarters of an institutional nature. Such quarters must
be associated with a parent religious, educational, charitable or philanthropic
institution.
   GUEST ROOM. A room which is intended, arranged or designed to be occupied,
or which is occupied, by one or more guests, but in which no provision is made
for cooking. Residential non- commercial guest rooms shall be within, or
attached to, the principal residence and shall be a part of the residential
utility (sewer, electric and the like) service line.
   HALF-WAY HOUSE. A dwelling for the supervision of transitionally
institutionalized individuals who are involved in drug or alcohol
rehabilitation and/or individuals who have violated the law and who are sent to
a half-way house upon release from, or in lieu of being sent to, a penal
institution or juvenile detention center.
   HOME OCCUPATION. A special type of accessory use, specifically an occupation
which is carried on only in a dwelling unit, is carried on by a member of the
family residing in the dwelling unit, and is clearly incidental and secondary
to the use of a property for residential purposes. Any sales in conjunction
with a home occupation shall be limited to items produced on site or items
incidental to the home occupation.
   HOSPITAL. A place for the diagnosis, treatment or other care of humans and
having facilities for in-patient care, including such establishments as a
sanitarium, sanatorium or preventorium.
   HOTEL or MOTEL. A group of attached or detached buildings containing
sleeping rooms or living units with accessory facilities designed for temporary
use by automobile tourists or transients including auto courts, motor lodges
and similar establishments.
   INDOOR COMMERCIAL RECREATION ESTABLISHMENT. A commercial leisure time
activity or amusement contained within a building, such as a bowling alley,
billiard room or video arcade.
   INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITIES. The manufacturing, processing and/or assembly of
materials, including, but not limited to, such activities as printing and
publishing, electronic components industries, tool and die making, molding
plastics, bottling operations, food processing, furniture making, metal
fabrication and textiles.
   INDUSTRIAL PARK. A tract of land organized and laid out in accordance with
an overall plan for a group of industrial activities with separate building
sites designed to ensure compatibility between industrial activities in the
park and the surrounding area through such devices as landscaping, setbacks and
use requirements.
   INTERIOR YARD. An open space between buildings on the same lot.
   JUNK YARD. Any lot, land or structure, or part thereof, used primarily or
incidentally for the collection, storage and/or sale of waste paper, rags,
scrap metal or discarded material, or for the collecting, dismantling, storage
or salvaging of machinery or vehicles not in running condition, and/or for the
sale of parts thereof. For the purpose of this chapter, the outdoor storage of
three or more unlicensed and/or inoperable automobiles shall constitute a JUNK
YARD subject to all regulations of this chapter pertaining to such.
   KENNEL. Any building or buildings and/or land used for the sheltering,
boarding, breeding or training of four or more dogs, cats, fowl or other small
domestic animals at least four months of age and kept for purposes of profit,
show, hunting or as pets but not to include animals and fowl raised for
agricultural purposes. A KENNEL operation may include accessory uses such as
animal grooming.
   LANDOWNER. The legal or beneficial owner or owners of land including the
holder of an option or contract to purchase (whether or not such option or
contract is subject to any condition), a lessee if he or she is authorized
under lease to exercise the rights of the land owner, or other person having a
proprietary interest in land.
   LOT.
      (1)   A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat or
otherwise as permitted by law and to be used, developed or built upon as a
unit.
         (a)   CORNER LOT. A lot at the junction of and abutting on two or more
intersecting streets or private roads or at the point of abrupt change of a
single street or private road, where the interior angle is less than 135
degrees and the centerline radius of the street or private road line is less
than 100 feet. A front setback shall be provided from each street frontage and
a side setback shall be provided from all other property lines. However, if one
of the street frontages is a service drive, then the lot shall be regulated as
an interior lot and shall have front, side and rear setbacks. See diagrams at
the end of the chapter.
         (b)   DOUBLE FRONTAGE LOT. A lot extending between and having frontage
on two streets. Vehicular access can be from either or both streets. Also
referred to as a THROUGH LOT. DOUBLE FRONTAGE LOTS, or THROUGH LOTS, are not
permitted. See diagrams at the end of the chapter.
         (c)   INTERIOR LOT. A lot having frontage on one street and adjoined
on the sides and rear by other lots. INTERIOR LOTS shall have front, side and
rear setbacks. See diagrams at the end of the chapter.
         (d)   REVERSE FRONTAGE LOT. A lot extending between and having
frontage on a minor street and either an arterial or collector street with
vehicular access solely from the minor street. The front setback requirement
for the district in which the lot is located shall apply to both street
frontages. See diagrams at the end of the chapter.
         (e)   TRIPLE FRONTAGE LOT. A lot fronting on three streets. A front
setback shall be provided from each street frontage and a side setback shall be
provided from all remaining property lines. See diagrams at the end of the
chapter.
      (2)   However, if one of the street frontages is a service drive, then
the LOT shall be regulated as a corner lot or a double frontage lot, whichever
is applicable, and shall have only two front setbacks. If two of the street
frontages are service drives, then the LOT shall be regulated as an interior
lot and shall have front, side and rear setbacks. See diagrams at the end of
the chapter.
   LOT COVERAGE (MAXIMUM). A percentage which when multiplied by the lot area
will determine the permitted area that can be covered with buildings and
structures.
   LOT WIDTH. The width of the lot measured at the required front building
line.
   MEDICAL CLINIC. Any building or group of buildings occupied by medical
practitioners and related services for the purpose of providing health services
to persons on an outpatient basis.
   MEDICAL MARIJUANA. Marijuana for certified medical use in the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania as set forth in Act No. 16 of 2016, also known as the Medical
Marijuana Act, being 35 P.S. §§ 10231 et seq.
   MEDICAL MARIJUANA DISPENSARY. The use of a premises by a natural person,
corporation, partnership, association, trust or other entity, or any
combination thereof, holding a legal permit issued by the Pennsylvania
Department of Health, to dispense medical marijuana in accordance with Act No.
16 of 2016, also known as the Medical Marijuana Act.
   MEDICAL MARIJUANA GROWER/PROCESSOR. The use of the premises by a person,
including a natural person, corporation, partnership, association, trust or
other entity, or any combination thereof, holding a legal permit from the
Pennsylvania Department of Health, to grow and/or process medical marijuana,
with all growing and processing activity to be conducted indoors.
   MICRO-BREWERY. A small, usually independent brewery that produces limited
quantities of specialized beers. A micro-brewery provides for the retail sales
of beer at the location where it is produced. A micro-brewery may also include
a tasting room and restaurant in conjunction with the use. A micro-brewery must
meet all applicable state licensing requirements. See also BREWERY and BREWPUB.
   MICRO-DISTILLERY. A small, often boutique-style distillery established to
produce beverage grade spirit alcohol in relatively small quantities, usually
done in single or small batches. A micro-distillery provides for the retail
sales of distilled beverages at the location where beverages are distilled. A
micro-distillery may also include a tasting room and restaurant in conjunction
with the use. A micro-distillery must meet all applicable state licensing
requirements. See also DISTILLERY and BREWPUB.
   MINI-STORAGE FACILITY. A facility providing for the enclosed storage of
commercial business stock or equipment, household items, seasonal equipment
and/or classic or antique automobiles where said items are retained for direct
use by their owner who shall have direct access thereto without intermediate
handling by the proprietor of the facility.
   MOBILE HOME. A transportable, single-family dwelling intended for permanent
occupancy, contained in one unit, or in two or more units designed to be joined
into one integral unit capable of again being separated for repeated towing,
which arrives at a site complete and ready for occupancy except for minor and
incidental unpacking and assembly operations, and construction so that it may
be used without a permanent foundation.
   MOBILE HOME LOT. A parcel of land in a mobile home park, improved with the
necessary utility connections and other appurtenances necessary for the
erection thereon of a single mobile home.
   MOBILE HOME PARK. A parcel or contiguous parcels of land which has been so
designated and improved that it contains two or more mobile home lots for the
placement thereon of mobile homes.
   NEIGHBORHOOD PARK OR PLAYGROUND. An area developed, managed and conserved to
provide outdoor recreational opportunities for the neighborhood in which it is
located. The types of recreational activities to be permitted include passive
recreational facilities, such as picnic areas, natural trails, bicycle paths
and gardens; and active recreational facilities, such as children’s play
equipment, turf area for field games, and hard surface areas for court games.
Use of the facilities in a neighborhood park or playground shall not require
the payment of any fees.
   NO-IMPACT HOME-BASED BUSINESS.
      (1)   A business or commercial activity administered or conducted as an
accessory use which is clearly secondary to the use as a residential dwelling
and which involves no customer, client or patient traffic, whether vehicular or
pedestrian, pickup, delivery or removal functions to or from the premises, in
excess of those normally associated with residential use.
      (2)   The business or commercial activity must satisfy the following
requirements:
         (a)   The business activity shall be compatible with the residential
use of the property and surrounding residential uses;
         (b)   The business shall employ no employees other than family members
residing in the dwelling;
         (c)   There shall be no display or sale of retail goods and no
stockpiling or inventory of a substantial nature;
         (d)   There shall be no outside appearance of a business use,
including, but not limited to, parking, signs or lights;
         (e)   The business activity may not use any equipment or process which
creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electrical or electronic
interference, including interference with radio or television reception, which
is detectable in the neighborhood;
         (f)   The business activity may not generate any solid waste or sewage
discharge, in volume or type, which is not normally associated with residential
use in the neighborhood;
         (g)   The business activity shall be conducted only within the
dwelling and may not occupy more than 25% of the habitable floor area; and
         (h)   The business may not involve any illegal activity.
   NONCONFORMITY. A use, structure, lot or dimension in conflict with the
regulations of this chapter, existing on the effective date of this chapter, or
existing at any subsequent amendment of this chapter, or created by variance.
Specifically, the following types of nonconformities are distinguished.
      (1)   NONCONFORMING LOT. A lot the area or dimension of which was lawful
prior to the adoption or amendment of this chapter, but which fails to conform
to the requirements of the zoning district in which it is located by reasons of
such adoption or amendment.
      (2)   NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE. A structure or part of a structure
manifestly not designed to comply with the applicable use or extent of use
provisions in this chapter or any amendment heretofore or hereafter enacted,
where such structure lawfully existed prior to the enactment of this chapter or
amendment or prior to the application of this chapter or amendment to its
location by reason of annexation. Such nonconforming structures include, but
are not limited to, nonconforming signs.
      (3)   NONCONFORMING USE. A use, whether of land or of a structure, which
does not comply with the applicable use or extent of use provisions in this
chapter or any amendment heretofore or hereafter enacted, where such use was
lawfully in existence prior to the enactment of this chapter or amendment, or
prior to the application of this chapter or amendment to its location by reason
of annexation.
   NONPROFIT. An educational, religious or charitable use which qualifies as
“non-profit” under § 501-C of the Internal Revenue Service Code.
   OUTDOOR COMMERCIAL RECREATION ESTABLISHMENT. A use of open land for leisure
time activities, such as a swimming pool, tennis court, golf driving range,
miniature, golf, golf course or drive-in theater that involves the payment of a
fee.
   OWNER. The owner of record of a parcel of land.
   PARKING GARAGE. A building where passenger vehicles may be stored for short-
term, daily or overnight off-street parking.
   PARKING LOT. An open lot where passenger vehicles may be stored for short-
term, daily or overnight off-street parking.
   PARKING SPACE. An off-street space available for the parking of one motor
vehicle and having direct usable access to a street or service drive.
   PERSONAL SERVICE BUSINESS. Includes barber and beauty shops; self-service
laundry and dry cleaning establishments; laundromats; radio and television
repair; repair shops for home appliances, tools, bicycles, guns, locks, shoes
and watches; tailor and dressmaking shops or any other establishment of similar
nature providing personalized service to customers.
   PLANNING CODE. The Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act of July
31,1968, P.L. 805, Act 247, 53 P.S. § 10101, ff., as reenacted and amended.
   PREMISES. Any lot, parcel or tracts of land and any improvements constructed
or placed thereon.
   PRINCIPAL USE. See USE.
   PRIVATE. Not publicly owned, operated or controlled.
   PROFESSIONAL/BUSINESS OFFICE COMPLEX. A building or group of buildings
designed for use as professional and/or business offices.
   PROFESSIONAL OFFICE. An area, room, or rooms used for carrying on the
following professional occupations recognized by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania and requiring a certification of practice:
      (1)   Accountants;
      (2)   Architects;
      (3)   Attorneys;
      (4)   Chiropractors;
      (5)   Dentists;
      (6)   Engineers;
      (7)   Insurance agents;
      (8)   Insurance brokers;
      (9)   Nurses;
      (10)   Optometrists;
      (11)   Osteopaths;
      (12)   Physicians;
      (13)   Podiatrists;
      (14)   Psychiatrists;
      (15)   Psychologists;
      (16)   Real estate brokers;
      (17)   Surgeons; and
      (18)   Surveyors.
   PROPERTY LINES. The lines bounding a lot as described in the recorded title.
Also referred to as LOT LINES.
   PUBLIC. Owned, operated or controlled by a government agency (federal, state
or local; including a corporation created by law for the performance of certain
specialized governmental functions and the Board of Public Education).
   QUARRY. Land used for the purpose of extracting stone, sand, clay, gravel,
top soil or other mineral for sale, and exclusive of the process of grading a
lot preparatory to the construction of a building for which application for a
building permit has been made.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. Any portable or mobile vehicle used or designed to be
used for travel recreation, and/or temporary living purposes; regardless of any
other intended use and whether or not its wheels, rollers or skids are in
place. A RECREATIONAL VEHICLE shall include trailer, camper, boat, boat
trailer, snowmobile, three or four wheel all-terrain vehicle, trail/dirt bike,
airplane or other similar vehicle which may provide partial and usually
temporary living and sleeping quarters and which may or may not include kitchen
and/or bathroom conveniences.
   RETAIL STORE OR SHOP. Any shop or store whose primary activities involve the
sale or lease of amusements and games, antiques, art, books, beverages, carpets
and rugs, ceramics and glass, confections, drugs, dry goods, flowers, food,
furniture, gifts, garden supplies, hobbies, hardware, household appliances,
household pets and supplies, leather goods, musical supplies and equipment,
notions, paint, periodicals, photographs and photographic equipment, radio,
television and sound equipment, sporting and camping goods, stationery,
tobacco, toys and wearing apparel. The wholesale distribution or manufacture of
the foregoing products are not included herein and are permitted only as
provided in other appropriate sections of this chapter. Among the uses not to
be interpreted as a retail store or business are uses specifically provided for
elsewhere in this chapter, including, but not limited to, a service station,
vehicular sales and/or rental facility, eating establishment, tavern, adult
regulated facility, hotel or motel, personal service business, and heavy
storage sales facility.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. A right of passage across land occupied or intended to be
occupied by a street, crosswalk, railroad, electric transmission line, oil or
gas pipeline, water main, sanitary or storm sewer main, or for another special
use. If the RIGHT-OF-WAY involves maintenance by a public agency, it shall be
dedicated to public use by the maker of the plat on which such right-of-way is
established.
   ROOMING HOUSE. A residential building, other than a hotel, containing not
more than one dwelling unit where lodging is provided with or without meals for
compensation, for at least three, but not more than 15, persons in addition to
the family unit. No medical or personal care is provided to roomers by the
operators of the facility.
   SCHOOL.
      (1)   SCHOOL. Any place offering instruction in any branch of knowledge
under the supervision of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or a lawfully
constituted ecclesiastical governing body, person, partnership or corporation
meeting the requirements of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
      (2)   COMMERCIAL SCHOOL. A school conducted for profit for such special
instruction as business, art, music, trades, handicraft or dancing.
   SCREEN PLANTING. A vegetation material of sufficient height and density to
conceal from the view of passing motorists and adjacent property owners the
structures and uses on the premises on which the screen planting is located.
   SEMI-PUBLIC. Owned, operated or controlled by a private or non-profit
organization of a public service nature and duly recognized as such by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
   SERVICE DRIVE. A minor right-of-way which is used to provide secondary
vehicular access to the rear or side of two or more properties whose frontage
is on some other street. Also referred to as a LANE or ALLEY.
   SETBACK. The required distance that buildings and structures must be set
back from street or property lines. For purposes of SETBACK, a service drive
right-of-way line shall not be considered a street line.
      (1)   FRONT SETBACK. The required distance between a street line, other
than a street line of a service drive, (regardless whether the same is also a
front, side or rear property line) and the front setback line projected the
full width of the lot. See diagrams at the end of this chapter. See SERVICE
DRIVE.
      (2)   REAR SETBACK. The required distance between the rear property line,
unless such line is also a street line other than a street line of a service
drive, and the rear setback line projected the full width of the lot. See
diagrams at the end of this chapter. See SERVICE DRIVE.
      (3)   SIDE SETBACK. The required distance between the side property line,
unless such line is also a street line other than a street line of a service
drive, and the side setback line projected from the front setback line to the
opposite setback line. However, in the case of corner lots, the second side
setback shall be the required distance between the rear lot line and the side
setback line projected from the side lot line to the opposite front setback
line. See diagrams at the end of this chapter. See SERVICE DRIVE.
   SETBACK LINE. A line within a property and parallel to a property or street
line which delineates the required minimum distance that must be provided
between a structure or building and an adjacent street line and/or property
line.
   SEXUAL CONDUCT. Ultimate sexual acts, normal or perverted, actual or
simulated, involving a person or persons, or a person or persons and an animal,
including acts of masturbation, sexual intercourse, fellatio, cunnilingus,
analingus or physical contact, including fondling or other erotic touching,
with a person’s nude or partially denuded genitals, pubic area, perineum, anal
region, or, if such person be female, a breast.
   SEXUAL DEVICE. An artificial human penis, vagina or anus, or other device
primarily designed to stimulate or manipulate the human genitals, pubic area,
perineum or anal area, including dildoes, penisators, vibrators, vibrillators,
penis rings and erection enlargement or prolonging creams, jellies or other
such chemicals or preparations.
   SEXUALLY EXPLICIT NUDITY. A sexually oriented and explicit showing or
exhibition, by any means or manner, which presents or exposes to the viewer the
following anatomical areas the human genitals, pubic area, perineum, buttocks
or anal region, with less than a fully opaque covering; the covered human male
genitals in a discernible turgid state; the postpubertal, full or partially
developed human female breast with less than opaque covering of a portion
thereof below the top of the areola or nipple.
   SERVICE STATION. Any area of land, including structures thereon, that is
used for the sale of gasoline or any other motor vehicle fuel and oil and other
lubricating substances, including any sales of motor vehicle accessories at
retail only, but not including major repairing, body and fender work, painting,
vehicular sales or rental or automatic car washes.
   SHOPPING CENTER OR MALL. A group of stores planned and designed to function
as a unit for the lot on which it is located with off-street parking provided
as an integral part of the unit.
   SIGN. Any surface, fabric, device or structure (including billboards or
poster panel) bearing lettered, pictorial or sculptured matter designed for
visual communication and used for the purpose of  bringing the subject thereof
to the attention of the public, but not including any flag, badge or insignia
of any government agency or any civic, charitable, religious, fraternal or
similar organization, or any official traffic control sign or device.
      (1)   ADVERTISING SIGNAL. A sign whose major purpose is for directing
attention to a business commodity, service or entertainment conducted, sold or
offered elsewhere than upon the same lot, such as billboards.
      (2)   ATTACHED SIGN. A sign attached, painted or otherwise mounted
parallel to the surface of that portion of the building or structure to which
it is affixed.
      (3)   BUSINESS SIGN. A sign directing attention to a business or
profession conducted on the same lot or, as incidental to a business, to
products sold upon the same lot.
      (4)   DIRECTIONAL SIGN. A sign which directs people to a community; an
event of public interest; public uses and buildings; uses and buildings of
service and charitable organizations; and uses and buildings of commercial
nature provided that no advertising matter other than identifying name or
symbol shall be contained on signs of this type.
      (5)   FREESTANDING SIGN. A sign supported by uprights or braces placed
upon or in the ground and not attached to a building.
      (6)   PERMANENT SIGN. A sign permanently attached or applied to a
building or structure or permanently anchored into the ground and which cannot
easily be moved. PERMANENT SIGNS may have either permanent or replaceable
lettering.
      (7)   PORTABLE SIGN. A temporary sign, of any material, with or without
changeable type lettering, illuminated or non-illuminated, mounted or
transported on a vehicle, trailer or similar structure, with or without wheels,
and not permanently attached to the ground, often referred to as a MOBILE SIGN.
      (8)   PROJECTING SIGN. A sign which is attached to a building or other
structure and extends beyond the line of a building or structure or beyond the
surface of that portion of the building or structure to which it is attached.
      (9)   SIDEWALK SIGN. Any “A” frame, inverted “V” shaped or similar
structure resting on the ground with no permanent attachment and used for
display as a temporary commercial business sign.
      (10)   TEMPORARY SIGN. A sign which is anchored to the ground or attached
to a building or structure with weights, cables, pins, braces or stakes and
which can easily be moved. TEMPORARY SIGNS are displayed for a limited period
of time.
   SMALL PROCESSING ESTABLISHMENT. A commercial enterprise in which the
principal use involves light processing and/or repair, in conjunction with
retail sales or personal service, such as an opticians’ office and optical
laboratory. Such establishments shall not exceed 2,000 square feet of ground
floor area.
   SPECIAL EXCEPTION. The granting of the right to use land and/or structures
in a district for a purpose other than that generally permitted outright in
that district. A SPECIAL EXCEPTION is granted by the Zoning Hearing Board under
the terms, procedures and conditions prescribed herein.
   SPECIALTY CENTER. A retail and/or office center whose shops/offices cater to
a specific market and are linked together by an architectural, historical or
geographic theme or by a commonality of goods and services; also known as a
theme or fashion center.
   STORY.
      (1)   HALF STORY. A story under a gable, hip or gambrel roof, the wall
plates of which on at least two opposite exterior walls are not more than two
feet above the floor.
      (2)   STORY. That portion of a building, excluding cellars, included
between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or
if there be no floor above it, then the space between any floor and the ceiling
next above it.
   STREET. A public or private way, excluding driveways and access drives,
which affords the principal means of access to abutting properties, intended to
be used by vehicular traffic or pedestrians. Includes street, avenue,
boulevard, road, highway, freeway, parkway, lane, alley, service drive, viaduct
and any other dedicated and accepted public right-of-way or private right-of-
way.
   STREET LINE. A line defining the edge of a street right-of-way and
separating the street from abutting property or lots. Commonly known as the
STREET RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE.
   STRUCTURE.
      (1)   ACCESSORY STRUCTURES. A subordinate structure or a portion of the
principal building or structure on a lot, the use of which is customarily
incidental to that of the principal building or structure.
      (2)   STRUCTURE. Any human-made object having an ascertainable stationary
location on or in land or water, whether or not affixed to the land, but
excluding driveways, walkways and parking areas. All STRUCTURES must meet
setback requirements. See BUILDING.
   SWIMMING POOL. Any pool or open tank containing, or normally capable of
containing, water to a depth at any point greater than one and one-half feet.
Farm ponds and/or lakes are not included, provided that swimming was not the
primary purpose for their construction.
   TAVERN. An establishment which serves primarily alcoholic beverages for
mostly on-premises consumption and which is licensed by the Pennsylvania Liquor
Control Board. TAVERNS may also serve food.
   USE. The specific purpose for which land or a structure is designed,
arranged, intended, occupied, or maintained. The term PERMITTED USE or its
equivalent shall not be deemed to include any nonconforming use.
      (1)   ACCESSORY USE. A use customarily incidental and subordinate to the
principal use or building and located on the same lot with this principal use
or building.
      (2)   PRINCIPAL USE. The main or primary use of property, buildings, or
structures. Only one use permitted by right, by special exception, or as a
conditional use shall be permitted as a principal use on an individual lot
except as provided in § 27-432(C) of this chapter. For example only one single-
family dwelling, one commercial establishment, or one industrial establishment
shall be permitted on an individual lot. Complexes listed as permitted uses,
such as a business park, industrial park, professional/business office complex,
or shopping center or mall, shall be limited to one such complex per lot.
   USE CERTIFICATE. A certificate, issued by the Zoning Officer, which permits
the use of a building in accordance with the approved plans and specifications
and certifies compliance with the provisions of law for the use and occupancy
of the land and structure in its several parts, together with any special
stipulations or conditions of the building permit.
   VARIANCE. The permission, granted by the Zoning Hearing Board under the
terms, procedures and conditions prescribed herein, for a particular
modification to some regulation or provision of the zoning regulations of this
chapter which, if strictly adhered to, would result in an unnecessary hardship,
and where the permission granted would not be contrary to the public interest
and would maintain the spirit and intent of this chapter.
   VEHICLE SALES OR RENTAL FACILITY. An open lot for the outdoor display of new
or used automobiles, recreational vehicles and similar vehicles when accessory
to a vehicle sales, rental or display building.
   VEHICLE SERVICE AND REPAIR FACILITY. A building on a lot designed and/or
used primarily for mechanical and/or body repairs, storage, servicing, or
supplying of gasoline or oil to automobiles, recreational vehicles and similar
vehicles.
   VEHICLE WASHING FACILITY. A building on a lot, designed and used primarily
for the washing and polishing of automobiles and which may provide accessory
services related to washing and polishing.
   WAREHOUSE. A structure to be used for storage only of equipment and
merchandise.
   WHOLESALE ESTABLISHMENT. A business devoted to the sale of commodities in
quantity chiefly to retailers, other merchants, or industrial, institutional
and commercial users mainly for resale or business use. Such commodities shall
be limited to durable goods, sundries, dry goods and non-perishable items.
   YARD. A prescribed open area on a lot, unobstructed from the ground upward,
except as otherwise permitted by this chapter.
      (1)   FRONT YARD. A yard extending the full width of the lot and situated
between the street line and the front wall of the principal building projected
to the side property lines of the lot. See diagrams at the end of this chapter.
      (2)   REAR YARD. A yard extending the full width of the lot and situated
between the rear property line of the lot and the rear wall of the principal
building projected to the side property lines of the lot. See diagrams at the
end of this chapter.
      (3)   SIDE YARD. A yard situated between the side wall of the principal
building and the side property line of the lot and extending from the front
yard to the rear yard. Any yard not a rear yard or a front yard shall be deemed
a SIDE YARD. See diagrams at the end of this chapter.
(Ord. 171, passed 1-18-1972, Art. II, § 202; Ord. 213, passed 3-29-1979; Ord.
1987-2, passed 10-20-1987; Ord. 1993-2, passed 2-16-1993; Ord. 1997-04, passed
3-18-1997; Ord. 2000-1, passed 5-9-2000, § 2; Ord. 2022-1, passed 12-13-2022;
Ord. 2025-1, passed 9-9-2025)
PART 3: DESIGNATION OF DISTRICTS
Section
   
27-301   Districts
   
27-302   Zoning map
   
27-303   District boundaries
   
27-304   Interpretation of boundaries
   
27-305   Use adjustment on district boundaries
§ 27-301 DISTRICTS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the borough is hereby divided into
districts which shall be designated as follows:
 
C Conservation District
R-S Residential-Suburban District
R-U Residential-Urban District
T-C Town Center District
C-H Commercial-Highway District
M-C Manufacturing-Commercial District
P-C Planned Commercial District
 
(Ord. 171, passed 1-18-1972, Art. III, § 301; Ord. 1997-04, passed 3-18-1997)
§ 27-302 ZONING MAP.
   The boundaries of said districts shall be as shown upon the map designated
“Zoning Map - Borough of Dillsburg”. The said map, and all the notations,
references and other data shown thereon, are hereby incorporated by reference
into this chapter as if all were fully described herein.
(Ord. 171, passed 1-18-1972, Art. III, § 302; Ord. 212, passed 2-20-1979; Ord.
1982-1, passed 3-16-1982; Ord. 1997-04, passed 3-18-1997)
§ 27-303 DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.
   Where uncertainty exists as to boundaries of any district as shown on said
map, the following rules shall apply.
   (A)   District boundary lines are intended to follow or be parallel to the
centerline of streets, streams and railroads and to lot or property lines as
they exist on plans of record at the time of the adoption of this chapter,
unless such district boundary lines are fixed by dimensions as shown on the
zoning map.
   (B)   Where a district boundary is not fixed by dimensions and where it
approximately follows lot lines, or approved subdivision plans, and where it
does not scale more than ten feet therefrom, such lot lines shall be construed
to be such boundaries unless specifically shown otherwise.
   (C)   In unsubdivided land or where a district boundary divides a lot, the
location of such boundary, unless the same is indicated by dimensions, shall be
determined by the use of the scale appearing on the map.
(Ord. 171, passed 1-18-1972, Art. III, § 303; Ord. 1997-04, passed 3-18-1997)
§ 27-304 INTERPRETATION OF BOUNDARIES.
   In case of an uncertainty, the Zoning Hearing Board shall interpret the
intent of the map as to location of district boundaries.
(Ord. 171, passed 1-18-1972, Art. III, § 304; Ord. 1997-04, passed 3-18-1997)
§ 27-305 USE ADJUSTMENT ON DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.
   In subdivided land where a district boundary line divides a lot held in
single and separate ownership the regulations of a district may extend over
either portion of the lot a distance of not more than 50 feet beyond the
district boundary line providing such extension does not extend the district
boundary along a street or road.
(Ord. 171, passed 1-18-1972, Art. III, § 305; Ord. 1997-04, passed 3-18-1997)
PART 4: DISTRICT REGULATIONS
A: C - CONSERVATION DISTRICT
Section
   
27-401   District purpose
   
27-402   Basic use regulations
   
27-403   Basic spatial regulations
§ 27-401 DISTRICT PURPOSE.
   To conserve those areas predominated by steep slopes; to protect essential
watershed, stream valley and floodplain areas; to ensure open space necessary
to the health, safety and welfare of the citizens; and to permit development
and activities compatible and appropriate thereto.
(Ord. 171, passed 1-18-1972, Art. IV, § 401; Ord. 1997-04, passed 3-18-1997)
§ 27-402 BASIC USE REGULATIONS.
   In this district, buildings, structures and lots shall be subject to the
following basic use regulations.
   (A)   Uses by right. The following uses, limited to one principal use per
lot, are permitted by right in the C District:
      (1)   Agriculture;
      (2)   Bed and breakfast inn;
      (3)   Family day care home;
      (4)   Forest reserves;
      (5)   Greenhouse, horticultural nursery;
      (6)   Group home;
      (7)   Home occupation;
      (8)   Neighborhood park or playground;
      (9)   Public conservation areas and structures for the conservation of
open space, water, soil and wildlife resources;
      (10)   Sale of agricultural products raised or produced on the premises;
      (11)   Signs, as permitted by and subject to the related regulations of
this chapter;
      (12)   Single-family detached dwelling;
      (13)   Accessory structures and uses associated with, but incidental to,
the above uses; and
      (14)   No-impact home-based business.
   (B)   Uses by special exception. The following uses, limited to one
principal use per lot, shall be permitted as special exceptions when authorized
by the Zoning Hearing Board in accordance with the requirements of this
chapter:
      (1)   Communication transmitting and receiving facility;
      (2)   Half-way house;
      (3)   Kennel;
      (4)   Public/semi-public buildings and facilities;
      (5)   Public/semi-public utility building or service structure; and
      (6)   Accessory structures and uses associated with, but incidental to,
the above uses.
(Ord. 171, passed 1-18-1972, Art. IV, § 402; Ord. 1993-2, passed 2-16-1993;
Ord. 1997-04, passed 3-18-1997)
§ 27-403 BASIC SPATIAL REGULATIONS.
   In this district, all buildings, structures and lots shall be subject to the
following basic spatial related regulations which shall be considered minimum
standards.
   (A)   Lot requirements.
      (1)   Area. The lot area and lot area per dwelling unit shall be not less
than one acre.
      (2)   Width. The lot width at the front setback line shall be not less
than 200 feet.
   (B)   Setback requirements. Each lot shall have front, side and rear
setbacks of not less than the depth and width indicated below:
      (1)   Front setback - depth. Fifty feet;
      (2)   Side setback - width. Thirty feet each; and
      (3)   Rear setback - depth. Fifty feet.
   (C)   Lot coverage.
      (1)   The lot coverage by all buildings and structures shall be not
greater than 15%.
      (2)   At least 50% of the lot shall be wooded or permanently planted with
trees and shrubs.
   (D)   Building height. No limit.
   (E)   Off-street parking and loading. Off-street parking, loading and
unloading areas shall be provided in accordance with the related regulations of
this chapter.
   (F)   Decorative canopies. Whenever an existing building has no front
setback, the owner thereof shall be authorized to construct a decorative canopy
above the first floor, provided that the canopy shall not extend more than 24
inches over the sidewalk and shall have a height at its lowest point of at
least eight feet ten inches. Whenever a decorative canopy is to be constructed
on any building which will not extend more than 36 inches beyond such building,
such canopy shall not be considered as part of the building for the purpose of
determining the depth of a front setback.
   (G)   Performance standards. All residential commercial, and industrial uses
shall comply with the performance standards set forth in §
27-509 of this chapter. Residential performance standards deal with density and
lot coverage requirements, while commercial and industrial performance
standards deal with lot area and nuisance and hazard abatement requirements.
(Ord. 171, passed 1-18-1972, Art. IV, § 403; Ord. 190, passed 9-16-1975; Ord.
1993-2, passed 2-16-1993; Ord. 1997-04, passed 3-18-1997)
B: R-S - RESIDENTIAL - SUBURBAN DISTRICT
Section
   
27-411   District purpose
   
27-412   Basic use regulations
   
27-413   Basic spatial regulations
§ 27-411 DISTRICT PURPOSE.
   To provide for the orderly expansion of typical suburban residential
development; to authorize conditional or supplemental uses incidental with
suburban living; to assure the efficient use of land available for such
development within the borough; and to provide for the orderly development of
those uses desirable to meet the community needs for such conditional or
supplemental uses, as well as those of a social, cultural and civic nature; but
to exclude purely commercial or industrial activities incompatible with
suburban residential living.
(Ord. 171, passed 1-18-1972, Art. IV, § 411; Ord. 213, passed 3-29-1979; Ord.
1997-04, passed 3-18-1997)
§ 27-412 BASIC USE REGULATIONS.
   In this district, buildings, structures and lots shall be subject to the
following basic use regulations.
   (A)   Uses by right. The following uses, limited to one principal use per
lot, are permitted by right in the R-S District:
      (1)   Bed and breakfast inn;
      (2)   Crops and gardening;
      (3)   Domiciliary care home;
      (4)   Family day care home;
      (5)   Group home;
      (6)   Public/semi-public buildings and facilities;
      (7)   Public/semi-public utility building or service structure;
      (8)   Signs, as permitted by and subject to the requirements of this
chapter;
      (9)   Single-family dwelling (attached, detached, or semi-detached);
      (10)   Two-family dwelling (a single-family dwelling cannot be converted
into a two-family dwelling);
      (11)   Accessory structures and uses associated with, but incidental to,
the above uses, excluding home occupations; and
      (12)   No-impact home-based business.
   (B)   Conditional uses. The following uses, limited to one principal use per
lot except as otherwise permitted by this chapter, shall be permitted as
conditional uses in the R-S District when authorized by the Planning Commission
and Borough Council, subject to the additional requirements set forth below:
      (1)   Mobile home park (mobile home lots within the mobile home park
shall comply with the requirements for single-family detached dwellings);
      (2)   Multi-family dwellings in combination with a professional/business
office complex, constructed on a lot with a minimum gross area of one acre or
in accordance with the lot area requirements of §
27-413(A)(1)(d), whichever is greater; and
      (3)   Professional/business office complex, constructed on a lot with a
minimum gross area of one acre or in accordance with the lot area requirements
of §
27-413(A)(1)(d), whichever is greater.
   (C)   Additional requirements for conditional uses. The following shall be
considered by the Planning Commission and Borough Council in addition to any
other requirements set forth in the zoning ordinance or the subdivision and
land development ordinance (Chapter 22 of this code of ordinances).
      (1)   There shall be determined that there is a need for the use in the
area proposed, or that there is a need within the borough for such use and
other space is unavailable in other zones.
      (2)   There shall be determined that there is sufficient area to
effectively screen the conditional use from adjacent or nearby differing uses.
      (3)   There shall be as part of the requirements under the land
development article, sufficient safeguard for parking, traffic control,
screening and setbacks that can be implemented to remove any potential adverse
influence the use may have on adjoining or nearby uses.
      (4)   There shall be requirements for architectural and aesthetic
blending with surrounding improved areas or potential uses of surrounding
areas.
   (D)   Uses by special exception. The following uses, limited to one
principal use per lot, shall be permitted as special exceptions in the R-
S District when authorized by the Zoning Hearing Board in accordance with the
requirements of this chapter:
      (1)   Cemetery;
      (2)   Convalescent or nursing home;
      (3)   Funeral home, mortuary;
      (4)   Group day care home;
      (5)   Home occupation;
      (6)   Hospital;
      (7)   House of worship;
      (8)   Medical clinic;
      (9)   Multi-family dwelling(s) (a single-family or two-family dwelling
cannot be converted into a multi-family dwelling);
      (10)   Neighborhood park or playground;
      (11)   School; and
      (12)   Accessory structures and uses associated with, but incidental to,
the above uses.
   (E)   Prohibited use. There shall be no retail sales establishments
conducted within the R-S District, except as otherwise may be permitted as a
home occupation.
(Ord. 171, passed 1-18-1972, Art. IV, § 412; Ord. 213, passed 3-29-1979; Ord.
1993-2, passed 2-16-1993; Ord. 1997-04, passed 3-18-1997)
§ 27-413 BASIC SPATIAL REGULATIONS.
   In this district, all buildings, structures, and lots shall be subject to
the following spatial related regulations which shall be considered as minimum
standards.
   (A)   Lot requirements.
      (1)   Area. Lot area, not less than the following, shall be provided for
each principal use hereafter established in this district, unless otherwise
required by this chapter.
         (a)   Single-family detached dwelling. Ten thousand square feet per
dwelling unit;
         (b)   Single-family attached dwelling. Two thousand square feet per
dwelling unit;
         (c)   Single-family semi-detached or two-family dwelling. Six thousand
square feet per dwelling unit;
         (d)   Multi-family dwelling(s) and/or professional/business office
complex. Each individual dwelling unit or office of which shall be considered a
unit:
            1.   One-story. Two thousand square feet per unit;
            2.   Two- to three-story. One thousand five hundred square feet per
unit; and
            3.   More than three-story. One thousand square feet per unit.
         (e)   All other uses. Ten thousand square feet.
      (2)   Width. Lot width not less than the following shall be provided for
each principal use hereafter established in this district, unless otherwise
required by this chapter. The lot width at the front setback line shall be not
less than:
         (a)   Sixty-five feet with lot area less than 10,000 square feet,
except in the case of single-family attached dwellings which shall have a
minimum lot width of 20 feet;
         (b)   Eighty feet with lot area at least 10,000 square feet but less
than 20,000 square feet; and
         (c)   One hundred feet with lot area of 20,000 square feet or greater.
   (B)   Setback requirements. Each lot shall have front, side and rear
setbacks of not less than the depth and width indicated below:
      (1)   Front setback - depth. Thirty feet;
      (2)   Side setback - width. Fifteen feet each (may be reduced to 12 feet
in the case of a single-family dwelling on a lot having a width of not more
than 90 feet); a single-family semi-detached dwelling shall have only one side
setback and, in the case of single-family attached dwellings, only the end
units shall have a side setback; and
      (3)   Rear setback - depth. Thirty feet.
   (C)   Lot coverage. The lot coverage by all buildings and structures shall
be not greater than 30%.
   (D)   Building height. No building shall be erected to a height in excess of
35 feet.
   (E)   Off-street parking and loading. Off-street parking, loading and
unloading areas shall be provided in accordance with the related regulations of
this chapter.
   (F)   Decorative canopies. Whenever an existing building has no front
setback, the owner thereof shall be authorized to construct a decorative canopy
above the first floor, provided that the canopy shall not extend more than 24
inches over the sidewalk and shall have a height at its lowest point of at
least eight feet ten inches. Whenever a decorative canopy is to be constructed
on any building which will not extend more than 36 inches beyond such building,
such canopy shall not be considered as part of the building for the purpose of
determining the depth of a front setback.
   (G)   Performance standards. All residential, commercial, and industrial
uses shall comply with the performance standards set forth in §
27-509 of this chapter. Residential performance standards deal with density and
lot coverage requirements, while commercial and industrial performance
standards deal with lot area and nuisance and hazard abatement requirements.
(Ord. 171, passed 1-18-1972, Art. IV, § 413; Ord. 190, passed 9-16-1975; Ord.
213, passed 3-29-1979; Ord. 1997-04, passed 3-18-1997)
C: R-U - RESIDENTIAL - URBAN DISTRICT
Section
   
27-421   District purpose
   
27-422   Basic use regulations
   
27-423   Basic spatial regulations
§ 27-421 DISTRICT PURPOSE.
   To provide for the preservation and orderly redevelopment of existing
residential areas where adequate public services and facilities are essential
for the health, safety and general welfare of the population are available; to
prevent the overcrowding of land through the application of maximum housing
densities; to provide for the public convenience and avoid undue congestion of
the streets; to exclude activities of a commercial, industrial or other nature
not compatible with the residential environment; and to otherwise create
conditions conducive to carrying out the purpose of this chapter.
(Ord. 171, passed 1-18-1972, Art. IV, § 421; Ord. 1997-04, passed 3-18-1997)
§ 27-422 BASIC USE REGULATIONS.
   In this district, buildings, structures and lots shall be subject to the
following basic use regulations.
   (A)   Uses by right. The following uses, limited to one principal use per
lot, are permitted by right in the R-U District:
      (1)   Cemetery;
      (2)   Crops and gardening;
      (3)   Family day care home;
      (4)   Group home;
      (5)   Home occupation;
      (6)   House of worship;
      (7)   Medical clinic;
      (8)   Multi-family dwelling(s) of three or less stories (a single-family
or two-family dwelling cannot be converted into a multi-family dwelling);
      (9)   Neighborhood park or playground;
      (10)   Public/semi-public buildings and facilities;
      (11)   Public/semi-public utility building or service structure;
      (12)   School;
      (13)   Signs, as permitted by and subject to the requirements of this
chapter;
      (14)   Single-family dwelling (attached, detached, and semi-detached);
      (15)   Two-family dwelling or two-family conversion dwelling;
      (16)   Accessory uses and structures associated with, but incidental to,
the above uses; and
      (17)   No-impact home-based business.
   (B)   Uses by special exception. The following uses, limited to one
principal use per lot except as otherwise permitted by this chapter, shall be
permitted as special exceptions in the R-U District when authorized by the
Zoning Hearing Board in accordance with the requirements of this chapter:
      (1)   Bed and breakfast inn;
      (2)   Boarding house, rooming house;
      (3)   Clubs and lodges of a fraternal nature;
      (4)   Convalescent or nursing home;
      (5)   Domiciliary care home;
      (6)   Dwelling unit(s) in combination with a professional office or
business office;
      (7)   Funeral home, mortuary;
      (8)   Group day care home;
      (9)   Group quarters;
      (10)   Hospital;
      (11)   Multi-family dwelling(s) greater than three stories in height (a
single-family or two-family dwelling cannot be converted into a multi-family
dwelling);
      (12)   Personal service business in combination with a multi-family
dwelling, provided that the business is located on the first floor and/or
basement level of the building;
      (13)   Professional office, business office;
      (14)   Public/semi-public parking lot or garage; and
      (15)   Accessory structures and uses associated with, but incidental to,
the above uses.
(Ord. 171, passed 1-18-1972, Art. IV, § 422; Ord. 1981-1, passed 2-17-1981;
Ord. 1997-04, passed 3-18-1997)
§ 27-423 BASIC SPATIAL REGULATIONS.
   In this district, all buildings, structures and lots shall be subject to the
following basic spatial related regulations which shall be considered as
minimum standards:
   (A)   Lot area requirement. Lot area, not less than the following, shall be
provided for each principal use hereafter established in this district, unless
otherwise required by this chapter.
      (1)   Single-family detached dwelling. Six thousand square feet per
dwelling unit;
      (2)   Single-family attached dwelling. One thousand eight hundred square
feet per dwelling unit;
      (3)   Single-family semi-detached or two-family dwelling. Three thousand
square feet per dwelling unit;
      (4)   Multi-family dwellings and two-family conversion dwellings. Shall
have a lot area per dwelling unit which shall be not less than the following:
         (a)   One-story. Two thousand square feet per dwelling unit;
         (b)   Two-story. One thousand five hundred square feet per dwelling
unit;
         (c)   Three story. One thousand five hundred square feet per dwelling
unit; and
         (d)   More than three-story. One thousand square feet per dwelling
unit.
      (5)   Professional or business office. When considering lot area
requirements for a professional or business office, each individual office in
the same structure shall be considered as a single-family detached dwelling
unit; and
      (6)   All other uses. Six thousand square feet.
   (B)   Setback requirements. Each lot shall have front, side and rear
setbacks of not less than the depth and width indicated below:
      (1)   Front setback - depth. Twenty-five feet;
      (2)   Side setback - width. Ten feet each, a single-family semi-detached
dwelling shall have only one side setback and, in the case of single-family
attached dwellings, only the end units shall have a side setback; and
      (3)   Rear setback - depth. Twenty feet.
   (C)   Lot coverage. The lot coverage by all building and structures shall
not be greater than 40%.
   (D)   Building height. No building, excluding multi-family dwellings as a
special exception, shall be extended to a height in excess of 35 feet.
   (E)   Off-street parking and loading.
      (1)   Generally. Off-street parking, loading and unloading areas shall be
provided in accordance with the related regulations of this chapter.
      (2)   Professional office parking.
         (a)   At least two off-street parking spaces for each 300 square feet
of floor area or fraction thereof utilized for professional or business offices
shall be provided in addition to the off-street parking as may be required for
multi-family dwelling units combined with such professional or business offices
in accordance with the related regulations of this chapter.
         (b)   If it be determined by the Zoning Officer that the professional
office parking requirements in subsection (E)(2)(a) above are insufficient,
prior to issuing a zoning permit, the Zoning Officer may require that there be
one parking space for each professional utilizing such office space plus one
parking space for each employee or associate plus one parking space for each 21
square feet of area contained in the reception room, waiting room, examination
room or conference room area.
   (F)   Decorative canopies. Whenever an existing building has no front
setback, the owner thereof shall be authorized to construct a decorative canopy
above the first floor, provided that the canopy shall not extend more than 24
inches over the sidewalk and shall have a height at its lowest point of at
least eight feet ten inches. Whenever a decorative canopy is to be constructed
on any building which will not extend more than 36 inches beyond such building,
such canopy shall not be considered as part of the building for the purpose of
determining the depth of a front setback.
   (G)   Performance standards. All residential, commercial and industrial uses
shall comply with the performance standards set forth in §
27-509 of this chapter. Residential performance standards deal with density and
lot coverage requirements, while commercial and industrial performance
standards deal with lot area and nuisance and hazard abatement requirements.
(Ord. 171, passed 1-18-1972, Art. IV, § 423; Ord. 190, passed 9-16-1975; Ord.
1981-1, passed 2-17-1981; Ord. 1997-04, passed 3-18-1997)
D: T-C - TOWN CENTER DISTRICT
Section
   
27-431   District purpose
   
27-432   Basic use regulations
   
27-433   Basic spatial regulations
§ 27-431 DISTRICT PURPOSE.
   To provide for the continued development of community centers typical of
towns and village settlements common to rural and semi-rural areas in an
orderly manner; to exclude uses which would not be compatible with such areas;
and to otherwise create conditions conducive to carrying out the purposes of
this chapter.
(Ord. 171, passed 1-18-1972, Art. IV, § 431; Ord. 1997-04, passed 3-18-1997)
§ 27-432 BASIC USE REGULATIONS.
   In this district, buildings, structures and lots shall be subject to the
basic use regulations set forth in this section.
   (A)   Uses by right. The following uses, limited to one principal use per
lot, are permitted by right in the T-C District:
      (1)   Adult or child day care center, nursery school;
      (2)   Bed and breakfast inn;
      (3)   Boarding house, rooming house;
      (4)   Commercial school;
      (5)   Domiciliary care home;
      (6)   Eating establishment;
      (7)   Family day care home;
      (8)   Funeral home, mortuary;
      (9)   Group home;
      (10)   Group quarters;
      (11)   Home occupation;
      (12)   Hotel or motel;
      (13)   House of worship;
      (14)   Medical clinic;
      (15)   Multi-family or two-family conversion dwelling, not exceeding
three dwelling units;
      (16)   Multi-family dwelling, not exceeding four dwelling units (a
single-family or two- family dwelling cannot be converted into a four unit
multi-family dwelling);
      (17)   Neighborhood park or playground;
      (18)   Personal service business;
      (19)   Professional office, business office;
      (20)   Professional/business office complex;
      (21)   Public/semi-public buildings and facilities;
      (22)   Public/semi-public parking lot or garage;
      (23)   Public/semi-public utility buildings and service structures;
      (24)   Retail store or shop;
      (25)   School;
      (26)   Signs, as permitted by and subject to the requirements of this
chapter;
      (27)   Single-family dwelling (attached, detached, and semi-detached);
      (28)   Two-family dwelling; and
      (29)   Accessory structures and uses associated with, but incidental to,
the above uses.
   (B)   Uses by special exception. The following uses, limited to one
principal use per lot, shall be permitted as special exceptions in the T-
C District when authorized by the Zoning Hearing Board in accordance with the
requirements of this chapter:
      (1)   Clubs and lodges of a fraternal nature;
      (2)   Commercial parking lot or garage;
      (3)   Indoor commercial recreation establishment;
      (4)   Multi-family conversion dwelling, exceeding three dwelling units;
      (5)   Multi-family dwellings, exceeding four dwelling units;
      (6)   Personal care boarding home;
      (7)   Service station or convenience store dispensing fuel (see §
27-514); and
      (8)   Accessory structures and uses associated with, but incidental to,
the above uses.
   (C)   Uses by conditional use. 
      (1)   The sale or manufacturing of alcoholic beverages intended for
consumption either on or off premises shall be permitted only by conditional
use in the T-C District for only the following:
         (a)   Eating establishment;
         (b)   Brewery or micro-brewery;
         (c)   Distillery or micro-distillery;
         (d)   Tavern;
         (e)   Clubs and lodges of a fraternal nature;
         (f)   Bed and breakfast inn;
      (2)   In addition to the general requirements of conditional use, in §
27-703, the sale or manufacturer of alcoholic beverages shall also be subject
to the following:
         (a)   The facility shall be operated and maintained at all times in
compliance with the Pennsylvania Liquor Code, rules, and regulations of the
Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board (PLCB) and all applicable federal, state and
local laws, ordinances, rules and regulations.
         (b)   The owner or manager of the facility shall advise the borough of
any violations of law charges or citations issued by the Pennsylvania Liquor
Control Board (PLCB), Pennsylvania State Police (PSP) or other law enforcement
agency within 24 hours of receipt.
         (c)   The establishment or facility shall have a minimum seating
requirement of 25 people.
         (d)   The operating hours shall be from 9:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. with
the sale of alcohol beginning at opening time but shall end at 10:00 p.m., and
the closing of the facility shall be no later than 11:00 p.m.
         (e)   All owners and managers and servers of alcoholic beverages at
the facility shall successfully complete Responsible Alcohol Management Program
(RAMP) Certification.
         (f)   The owner or manager of the facility shall provide to the
borough the name and contact telephone number of a management individual for
the purpose of handling complaints.
         (g)   Within 24 hours of receipt, the owner or manager of the facility
shall advise the borough of any violations of law charges or citations issued
by the Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board (PLCB), Pennsylvania State Police
(PSP) or other law enforcement agency.
         (h)   The owners, managers and employees of the establishment shall
use reasonable efforts to prevent loitering of customers on the public sidewalk
or other public areas outside.
         (i)   The owners, managers and employees of the establishment shall
sweep and clear any and all debris on the sidewalk adjacent to the
establishment immediately after the business closes each day.
   (D)   Multi-use building. Two or more individual uses permitted in the T-
C District, whether permitted by right or by special exception, may be
established within a single building provided that the regulations established
in this chapter for each individual use are satisfied, e.g., parking, special
exception approval. The principal building itself, however, shall be considered
as a unit for purposes of lot area and setback requirements; such provisions
shall not be cumulative for the individual uses established.
(Ord. 171, passed 1-18-1972, Art. IV, § 432; Ord. 1997-04, passed 3-18-1997;
Ord. 2025-1, passed 9-9-2025)
§ 27-433 BASIC SPATIAL REGULATIONS.
   In this district, all buildings, structures and lots shall be subject to the
following basic spatial related regulations which shall be considered as
minimum standards:
   (A)   Lot area requirements. Lot area not less than the following shall be
provided for each principal use hereafter established in the T-C District,
unless otherwise required by this chapter:
      (1)   Single-family detached dwelling. Four thousand five hundred square
feet per dwelling unit;
      (2)   Single-family attached dwelling. One thousand eight hundred square
feet per dwelling unit;
      (3)   Single-family semi-detached or two-family dwelling. Three thousand
square feet per dwelling unit;
      (4)   Multi-family dwellings, and multi-family or two-family conversions
dwellings. Shall have a lot area per dwelling unit which shall be not less than
the following:
         (a)   One-story. Two thousand square feet per dwelling unit;
         (b)   Two-story. One thousand five hundred square feet per dwelling
unit;
         (c)   Three-story. One thousand five hundred square feet per dwelling
unit; and
         (d)   More than three-story. One thousand square feet per dwelling
unit.
      (5)   All other uses. Four thousand five hundred square feet.
   (B)   Setback requirements. Each lot shall have front, side, and rear
setbacks of not less than the depth and width indicated below:
      (1)   Front setback - depth. Ten feet. (The reduction of the required
front yard to conform to existing building lines provision of the general
regulations of this chapter shall not be permitted south of York Street nor
north of Church Street);
      (2)   Side setback - width. Five feet each; provided that when mutual
agreement is provided in writing by the adjoining property owners, no side
setback shall be required where two or more commercial uses adjoin side to
side; however, in no case shall common walls be permitted between properties of
separate ownership. In the case of a series of adjoining structures abutting
and paralleling a public right-of-way, an unobstructed passage of at least 20
feet in width shall be provided at grade level at intervals not more than 400
feet apart. (A single-family semi-detached dwelling shall have only one side
setback and, in the case of single-family attached dwellings, only the end
units shall have a side setback);
      (3)   Rear setback - depth. Twenty feet; and
      (4)   Special buffering. Except in the case of multi-family dwellings,
the Zoning Hearing Board may require additional setbacks and screen planting as
deemed necessary to adequately buffer uses permitted as special exceptions when
such would abut residential properties or districts.
   (C)   Lot coverage. The lot coverage by all buildings and structures shall
not be greater than 50%.
   (D)   Building height. No building shall be extended to a height in excess
of 50 feet.
   (E)   Off-street parking and loading. Off-street parking, loading and
unloading areas shall be provided in accordance with the related regulations of
this chapter.
   (F)   Decorative canopies. Whenever an existing building has no front
setback, the owner thereof shall be authorized to construct a decorative canopy
above the first floor, provided that the canopy shall not extend more than 24
inches over the sidewalk and shall have a height at its lowest point of at
least eight feet ten inches. Whenever a decorative canopy is to be constructed
on any building which will not extend more than 36 inches beyond such building,
such canopy shall not be considered as part of the building for the purpose of
determining the depth of a front setback.
   (G)   Performance standards. All residential, commercial and industrial uses
shall comply with the performance standards set forth in §
27-509 of this chapter. Residential performance standards deal with density and
lot coverage requirements, while commercial and industrial performance
standards deal with lot area and nuisance and hazard abatement requirements.
(Ord. 171, passed 1-18-1972, Art. IV, § 433; Ord. 190, passed 9-16-1975; Ord.
1997-04, passed 3-18-1997)
E: C-H - COMMERCIAL - HIGHWAY DISTRICT
Section
   
27-441   District purpose
   
27-442   Basic use regulations
   
27-443   Basic spatial regulations
§ 27-441 DISTRICT PURPOSE.
   To provide reasonable standards for the development of highway-oriented
commercial uses along the roadside in areas where such uses already exist and
where, due to the character of undeveloped land, the development of highway
commercial uses is feasible and appropriate. The standards of this district are
designed to separate access roads from major thoroughfares, to minimize traffic
congestion, and to protect adjoining residential districts.
(Ord. 171, passed 1-18-1972, Art. IV, § 441; Ord. 1997-04, passed 3-18-1997)
§ 27-442 BASIC USE REGULATIONS.
   In this district, buildings, structures and lots shall be subject to the
basic use regulations listed below. In addition, the sale or manufacturing of
alcoholic beverages intended for consumption either on or off the premises
shall require conditional use approval set forth in subsection (B) below.
   (A)   Uses by right. The following uses, limited to one principal use per
lot, are permitted by right in the C-H District:
      (1)   Adult or child day care center;
      (2)   Adult regulated facility;
      (3)   Animal hospital, kennel;
      (4)   Commercial recreation establishment (indoor or outdoor);
      (5)   Contractor’s office or shop;
      (6)   Eating establishment;
      (7)   Hotel or motel;
      (8)   Medical clinic;
      (9)   Mini-storage facility;
      (10)   Mobile home sales lot;
      (11)   Personal service business;
      (12)   Professional office, business office;
      (13)   Professional/business office complex;
      (14)   Public, semi-public or commercial parking lot or garage;
      (15)   Public/semi-public utility building or service structure;
      (16)   Retail store or shop;
      (17)   Service station or convenience store dispensing fuel (see § 27-
514);
      (18)   Shopping center or mall;
      (19)   Signs as permitted by and subject to the requirements of this
chapter;
      (20)   Small processing establishment;
      (21)   Tavern;
      (22)   Vehicle sales, rental, service and/or repair facility;
      (23)   Vehicle washing facility;
      (24)   Accessory structures and uses associated with, but incidental to,
the above uses;
      (25)   Medical marijuana dispensary, subject to the following specific
standards:
         (a)   A medical marijuana dispensary must be legally registered in the
Commonwealth and possess a current valid medical marijuana permit from the
Pennsylvania Department of Health.
         (b)   A medical marijuana dispensary may only dispense medical
marijuana in an indoor, enclosed, permanent and secure building and shall not
be located in a trailer, cargo container, mobile or modular unit, mobile home,
recreational vehicle or other motor vehicle.
         (c)   A medical marijuana dispensary may not operate on the same site
as a facility used for growing and processing medical marijuana.
         (d)   Medical marijuana dispensaries shall have a single secure public
entrance and shall implement appropriate security measures to deter and prevent
the theft of marijuana and unauthorized entrance into areas containing medical
marijuana.
         (e)   A medical marijuana dispensary shall:
            1.   Not have a drive-in service;
            2.   Not have an outdoor seating area;
            3.   Not have an outdoor vending area;
            4.   Prohibit the administering of, or the consumption of medical
marijuana on the premises; and
            5.   Not offer direct or home delivery service.
         (f)   A medical marijuana dispensary may dispense only medical
marijuana to certified patients and caregivers and shall comply with all
lawful, applicable health regulations.
         (g)   The medical marijuana dispensary may not be located within 1,000
feet of the property line of an educational institution or a day care center.
This distance shall be measured in a straight line from the closest exterior
wall of the building or portion thereof in which the business is conducted or
proposed to be conducted, to the closest property line of the protected use,
regardless of the municipality in which it is located.
         (h)   Any medical marijuana facility lawfully operating shall not be
rendered in violation of these provisions by the subsequent location of any
uses referenced in subsection (A)(25)(g) above.
         (i)   Off-street parking and loading: off-street parking, loading and
unloading areas shall be provided in accordance with the related regulations of
the code. All loading and off-loading areas shall be within secure
environments.
         (j)   All external lighting shall comply with the code.
      (26)   Medical marijuana grower/processor, subject to the following
specific standards:
         (a)   A medical marijuana grower/processor may only grow medical
marijuana in an indoor, enclosed and secure building which includes electronic
locking system, electronic surveillance and other features required by the
Department of Health. The grower/processor facility shall not be located in a
trailer, cargo container, mobile or modular unit, mobile home, recreation
vehicle or other motor vehicle.
         (b)   The floor area of a medical marijuana grower/processor shall
include sufficient space for production, secure storage of marijuana seeds,
related finished product cultivation and marijuana related material used in
production and cultivation or for required laboratory testing.
         (c)   There shall be no emission of dust, fumes, vapors, odors or
waste into the environment from any facility where medical marijuana growing,
processing or testing occurs.
         (d)   Marijuana remnants and by-products shall be secured and properly
disposed of in accordance with Department of Health policy and shall not be
placed within any unsecured exterior refuse containers.
         (e)   The grower/processor shall provide only wholesale products to
other medical marijuana facilities. Retail sales and dispensing of medical
marijuana and related products are prohibited at medical marijuana grower/
processor facilities.
         (f)   The medical marijuana grower/processor may not be located within
1,000 feet of the property line of an educational institution or a day care
center. This distance shall be measured in a straight line from the closest
exterior wall of the building or portion thereof in which the business is
conducted or proposed to be conducted, to the closest property line of the
protected use, regardless of the municipality in which it is located.
         (g)   Any medical marijuana grower/processor lawfully operating shall
not be rendered in violation of these provisions by the subsequent location of
any uses referenced in subsection (A)(26)(f).
         (h)   Off-street parking and loading: off-street parking, loading and
unloading areas shall be provided in accordance with the related regulations of
the code. All loading and off-loading areas shall be within secure
environments.
         (i)   All external lighting shall comply with the code.
   (B)   Uses by conditional use. 
      (1)   The sale or manufacturing of alcoholic beverages intended for
consumption either on or off premises shall be permitted only by conditional
use in the C-H District for the following:
         (a)   Eating establishment;
         (b)   Brewery or micro-brewery;
         (c)   Distillery or micro-distillery;
         (d)   Tavern;
         (e)   Clubs and lodges of a fraternal nature;
         (f)   Bed and breakfast inn;
         (g)   Hotel;
         (h)   Motel;
         (i)   Adult cabaret;
         (j)   In conjunction with any other use.
      (2)   In addition to the general requirements of conditional use, in §
27-703, the sale or manufacturer of alcoholic beverages shall also be subject
to the following:
         (a)   The facility shall be operated and maintained at all times in
compliance with the Pennsylvania Liquor Code, rules, and regulations of the
Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board (PLCB) and all applicable federal, state and
local laws, ordinances, rules and regulations.
         (b)   The owner or manager of the facility shall advise the borough of
any violations of law charges or citations issued by the Pennsylvania Liquor
Control Board (PLCB), Pennsylvania State Police (PSP) or other law enforcement
agency within 24 hours of receipt.
         (c)   The establishment or facility shall have a minimum seating
requirement of 25 people.
         (d)   The operating hours shall be from 9:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. with
the sale of alcohol beginning at opening time but shall end at 10:00 p.m., and
the closing of the facility shall be no later than 11:00 p.m.
         (e)   All owners and managers and servers of alcoholic beverages at
the facility shall successfully complete Responsible Alcohol Management Program
(RAMP) Certification.
         (f)   The owner or manager of the facility shall provide to the
borough the name and contact telephone number of a management individual for
the purpose of handling complaints.
         (g)   The owners, managers and employees of the establishment shall
use reasonable efforts to prevent loitering of customers on the public sidewalk
or other public areas outside.
         (h)   The owners, managers and employees of the establishment shall
sweep and clear any and all debris on the sidewalk adjacent to the
establishment immediately after the business closes each day.
(Ord. 171, passed 1-18-1972, Art. IV, § 442; Ord. 1997-04, passed 3-18-1997;
Ord. 2022-1, passed 12-13-2022; Ord. 2025-1, passed 9-9-2025)
§ 27-443 BASIC SPATIAL REGULATIONS.
   In this district, all buildings, structures, and lots shall be subject to
the following basic spatial related regulations which shall be considered as
minimum standards.
   (A)   Lot area requirements. None.
   (B)   Setback requirements. Each lot shall have front, side and rear
setbacks of not less than the depth and width indicated below:
      (1)   Front setback - depth. Fifty feet;
      (2)   Side setback - width. Ten feet when abutting a public service
drive, 20 feet elsewhere, provided that when a mutual agreement is provided in
writing by the adjoining property owners, no side setback shall be required
where two or more commercial uses adjoin side to side; however, in no case
shall common walls be permitted between properties of separated ownership. In
the case of a series of adjoining structures abutting and paralleling a public
right-of-way, an unobstructed passage of at least 20 feet in width shall be
provided at grade level at intervals not more than 400 feet apart;
      (3)   Rear setback - depth. Thirty feet; and
      (4)   Buffer yards. Buffer yards required (may include required setback
area):
         (a)   Where abutting a residential district, a buffer yard of not less
then 25 feet shall be required;
         (b)   Where abutting a stream, a buffer yard of not less than 15 feet
in width, measured from the edge of the stream shall be required;
         (c)   All of the foregoing buffer yards shall be planted and
maintained with a vegetative material to include a row of evergreen screen
planting; and
         (d)   Buffer yards other than interior side or rear buffer yards may
be crossed by access roads and services drives not more than 35 feet in width.
   (C)   Lot coverage.
      (1)   The lot coverage by all buildings and structures shall not be
greater than 30%.
      (2)   Not less than 10% of the lot area shall be covered with a
vegetative material.
   (D)   Building height. No building or structure shall be erected to a height
in excess of 35 feet.
   (E)   Off-street parking and loading. Off-street parking, loading and
unloading areas shall be provided in accordance with the related regulations of
this chapter.
   (F)   Decorative canopies. Whenever an existing building has no front
setback, the owner thereof shall be authorized to construct a decorative canopy
above the first floor, provided that the canopy shall not extend more than 24
inches over the sidewalk and shall have a height at its lowest point of at
least eight feet ten inches. Whenever a decorative canopy is to be constructed
on any building which will not extend more than 36 inches beyond such building,
such canopy shall not be considered as part of the building for the purpose of
determining the depth of a front setback.
   (G)   Performance standards. All residential, commercial and industrial uses
shall comply with the performance standards set forth in §
27-509 of this chapter. Residential performance standards deal with density and
lot coverage requirements, while commercial and industrial performance
standards deal with lot area and nuisance and hazard abatement requirements.
(Ord. 171, passed 1-18-1972, Art. IV, § 443; Ord. 190, passed 9-16-1975; Ord.
1997-04, passed 3-18-1997)
F: M-C - MANUFACTURING - COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
Section
   
27-451   District purpose
   
27-452   Basic use regulations
   
27-453   Basic spatial regulations
§ 27-451 DISTRICT PURPOSE.
   To provide for the expansion and orderly development of uses of a light
industrial and heavy commercial nature where such uses already exist and where
such are appropriate to the character of the area; to minimize traffic
congestion; to exclude uses not appropriate to such areas; to protect adjacent
residential uses; and to otherwise create conditions conducive to carrying out
the purposes of this chapter.
(Ord. 171, passed 1-18-1972, Art. IV, § 451; Ord. 1997-04, passed 3-18-1997)
§ 27-452 BASIC USE REGULATIONS.
   In this district, buildings, structures and lots shall be subject to the
following basic use regulations.
   (A)   Uses by right. The following uses, limited to one principal use per
lot, are permitted by right in the M-C District:
      (1)   Adult or child day care center;
      (2)   Agricultural equipment sales, service, and/or repair facility;
      (3)   Contractor’s office or shop;
      (4)   Fuel storage and supply;
      (5)   Heavy storage sales and/or service facility; e.g., warehouse,
building material yard, construction equipment and commercial vehicles;
      (6)   Industrial activities;
      (7)   Industrial or business park;
      (8)   Mini-storage facility;
      (9)   Professional office, business office;
      (10)   Professional/business office complex;
      (11)   Public semi-public, or commercial parking lot or garage;
      (12)   Public buildings and facilities;
      (13)   Public utility building or service structure;
      (14)   Research laboratory;
      (15)   Signs, as permitted by and subject to the requirements of this
chapter;
      (16)   Wholesale establishment; and
      (17)   Accessory structures and uses associated with, but incidental to,
the above uses.
   (B)   Conditional uses.
      (1)   The following use, limited to one principal use per lot except as
otherwise permitted by this chapter, shall be permitted as a conditional use in
the M-C District, when authorized by the Planning Commission and Borough
Council:
      (2)   Junkyard, subject to the following specific standards.
         (a)   No material shall be placed in any junkyard in such a manner
that it is capable of being transferred out of the junkyard by wind, water or
other natural causes.
         (b)   All paper, rags, cloth and other fibers shall be stored, and all
activities involving the same, except loading and unloading, shall be
conducted, within a fully enclosed building.
         (c)   All junkyard materials and activities not within a fully
enclosed building shall be surrounded by an eight-foot high sight-tight
(opaque) fence and maintained in good condition. Any gate in such fence shall
be similarly constructed and maintained and must be kept locked at all times
when the junkyard is not in operation.
         (d)   The storage of hazardous materials is prohibited.
         (e)   No junkyard materials may be stored or stacked higher than eight
feet, provided however that no such materials are visible from adjoining
properties and roads.
         (f)   All junkyard materials shall be stored in such a manner as to
prevent the breeding or harboring of rats, insects or other vermin, as well as
to prevent fire hazards.
(Ord. 171, passed 1-18-1972, Art. IV, § 452; Ord. 1997-04, passed 3-18-1997)
§ 27-453 BASIC SPATIAL REGULATIONS.
   In this district, all buildings, structures, and lots shall be subject to
the following basic spatial regulations which shall be considered as minimum
standard.
   (A)   Lot area requirements. None.
   (B)   Setback requirements. Each lot shall have front, side and rear
setbacks of not less than the depth and width indicated below:
      (1)   Front setback - depth. Ten feet;
      (2)   Side setback - width. Ten feet when abutting a public service
drive, 20 feet elsewhere, provided that when a mutual agreement is provided in
writing by the adjoining property owners, no side setback shall be required
where two or more commercial uses adjoin side to side; however, in no case
shall common walls be permitted between properties of separated ownership. In
the case of a series of adjoining structures abutting and paralleling a public
right-of-way, an unobstructed passage of at least 20 feet in width shall be
provided at grade level at intervals not more than 400 feet apart;
      (3)   Rear setback. None, except any required buffer yard; and
      (4)   Buffer yards. Buffer yards required (may include required setback
area):
         (a)   Where abutting a residential district, a buffer yard of not less
then 20 feet shall be required;
         (b)   Where abutting a street that abuts a residential district, a
buffer yard of not less than 15 feet measured from the street line shall be
required;
         (c)   Where abutting a stream, a buffer yard of not less than 15 feet
in width, measured from the edge of the stream shall be required;
         (d)   All of the foregoing buffer yards shall be planted and
maintained with a vegetative material to include a row of evergreen screen
planting; and
         (e)   Buffer yards may be crossed by access drives and service drives
not more than 35 feet in width.
   (C)   Lot coverage. The lot coverage by all buildings and structures shall
not be greater than 50%.
   (D)   Decorative canopies. Whenever an existing building has no front
setback, the owner thereof shall be authorized to construct a decorative canopy
above the first floor, provided that the canopy shall not extend more than 24
inches over the sidewalk and shall have a height at its lowest point of at
least eight feet ten inches. Whenever a decorative canopy is to be constructed
on any building which will not extend more than 36 inches beyond such building,
such canopy shall not be considered as part of the building for the purpose of
determining the depth of a front setback.
   (E)   Performance standards. All residential, commercial and industrial uses
shall comply with the performance standards set forth in §
27-509 of this chapter. Residential performance standards deal with density and
lot coverage requirements, while commercial and industrial performance
standards deal with lot area and nuisance and hazard abatement requirements.
(Ord. 171, passed 1-18-1972, Art. IV, § 453; Ord. 190, passed 9-16-1975; Ord.
1997-04, passed 3-18-1997)
PART G: P-C - PLANNED COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
Section
   
27-461   District purpose
   
27-462   Planned commercial area
   
27-463   Basic use regulations
   
27-464   Basic spatial regulations
§ 27-461 DISTRICT PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the P-C Planned Commercial District is to provide and require
unified and organized arrangement of building service and parking areas,
together with adequate circulation and open space, all planned and designed as
integrated units, in a manner so as to provide and constitute efficient, safe,
convenient and attractive shopping areas.
(Ord. 171, passed 1-18-1972, Art. IV, § 461; Ord. 1986-1, passed 8-12-1986;
Ord. 1997-04, passed 3-18-1997)
§ 27-462 PLANNED COMMERCIAL AREA.
   The zoning map shall be amended by establishing a P-C, Planned Commercial
District, to the west of South Baltimore Street and south of Butler Street,
which district shall be bounded as shown on a plan prepared by Edward E.
Kirkbride, A.R.A., dated April 7, 1986, extending westwardly from South
Baltimore Street a distance of 387 feet, more or less, and extending southward
from Butler Street along South Baltimore Street a distance of 648 feet, more or
less.
(Ord. 171, passed 1-18-1972, Art. IV, § 462; Ord. 1986-1, passed 8-12-1986;
Ord. 1997-04, passed 3-18-1997)
§ 27-463 BASIC USE REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Uses by right. The uses set forth below, limited to one principal use
per lot, are permitted by right in the P-C District. Within this district,
alcoholic beverages shall not be sold for either on- or off-premises
consumption in conjunction with any use.
      (1)   Eating establishment, excluding drive-through facilities;
      (2)   Indoor commercial recreation establishment;
      (3)   Personal service business;
      (4)   Professional office, business office;
      (5)   Professional/business office complex;
      (6)   Public buildings and facilities; and
      (7)   Retail store or shop.
   (B)   Permitted accessory uses/structures located on the same lot with the
permitted principal use.
      (1)   Off-street parking and loading pursuant to §
27-507;
      (2)   Signs pursuant to §
27-511; and
      (3)   Other accessory structures and uses, provided they are associated
with and clearly incidental to the principal use.
(Ord. 171, passed 1-18-1972, Art. IV, § 463; Ord. 1986-1, passed 8-12-1986;
Ord. 1997-04, passed 3-18-1997)
§ 27-464 BASIC SPATIAL REGULATIONS.
   In this district, all buildings, structures and lots shall be subject to the
following basic spatial related regulations which shall be considered as
minimum standards:
   (A)   Lot requirements.
      (1)   Minimum area. Twenty thousand square feet; and
      (2)   Minimum width. One hundred feet.
   (B)   Setback requirements. Each lot shall have front, side and rear
setbacks of not less than the depth and width indicated below:
      (1)   Front setback. Minimum of 50 feet;
      (2)   Each side setback. Minimum of 50 feet, except when a residential
district is adjacent to the side setback, in which case the minimum side
setback shall be 100 feet;
      (3)   Mutual agreement. When a mutual agreement is subscribed by the
adjoining commercial property owners, no side setback shall be required where
two commercial uses adjoin side by side; however, in no case shall common walls
be permitted between properties of separate ownership. In the case of such a
series of adjoining structures on lots of single and separate ownership
abutting and paralleling a public right-of-way, an unobstructed passage of at
least 20 feet in width shall be provided at grade level at intervals not more
than 400 feet apart; and
      (4)   Rear setback. Minimum of 50 feet, except when a residential
district is adjacent to the rear setback, in which case the minimum rear
setback shall be 100 feet.
   (C)   Maximum lot coverage and building height.
      (1)   Maximum building coverage. Forty percent; and
      (2)   Impervious coverage. No lot shall be covered by more than 80% with
impervious surface, including, but not limited to principal and accessory
buildings, driveways and walkways, and parking areas.
   (D)   Maximum building height. No building shall be extended to a height in
excess of 35 feet.
   (E)   Off-street parking and loading. Off-street parking, loading and
unloading areas shall be provided in accordance with the related regulations of
this chapter.
   (F)   Access and traffic control.
      (1)   No Planned Commercial District shall be permitted unless the main
entrance leads from a street, road or state route having a minimum 40 feet wide
cartway.
      (2)   All means of ingress or egress to any public street or state route
shall be located at least 200 feet from any other intersecting street or
streets and shall be designed to conduct traffic in a safe manner. The
developer shall be responsible for the purchase, erection and maintenance of
any necessary traffic control devices and the construction of additional
acceleration or deceleration lanes as may be required by the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation or by the borough.
   (G)   Interior circulation. Interior access ways shall be designed so as to
prevent the blocking of vehicles entering or leaving the site. Areas provided
for loading or unloading of trucks and/or other vehicles or for servicing of
shops for rubbish collection or other services shall be adequate in size and
shall be so arranged that they may be used without blocking or interfering with
interior circulation and parking facilities.
   (H)   Channelization of vehicular movement.
      (1)   All parking areas which provide for more than 50 parking spaces
shall have raised landscaped islands at least five feet wide with curbs at the
ingress and egress of driveways from service drives and streets the full length
of a parking space to prevent encroachment of moving vehicles into parking
spaces.
      (2)   There shall be a raised landscaped island at each end of a row of
parking spaces. Such islands shall be the length of two parking spaces and at
least five feet in width.
      (3)   The edge of all paved areas shall have a continuous curb or stall
and blocks to prevent unsafe circulation of vehicles.
   (I)   Landscaping standards for channelization islands.
      (1)   All raised landscaped channelization islands and required setback
areas shall be landscaped with a mixture of grass, trees and shrubs, or other
materials to restrict blowing trash, retard water runoff, and deter improper
and unsafe access and site use by the public.
      (2)   All landscaping plant material shall be kept in excellent
condition. Dead plant material shall be replaced.
      (3)   Rock landscape areas shall be allowed.
      (4)   Trees, shrubs or flowers shall not be placed within 2 feet of a
curb to prevent damage of plant materials by auto bumpers.
   (J)   Lighting. Lighting for buildings, signs, access drives, and parking
areas shall be so arranged as not to reflect toward public streets or cause
annoyance to surrounding property owners or residents.
   (K)   Shopping cart storage. Establishments furnishing carts or mobile
baskets shall provide definite areas on the site for the storage of said carts.
Storage areas shall be clearly marked and designated for the storage of
shopping carts and/or mobile baskets.
   (L)   Screening.
      (1)   All property lines abutting residential districts, in the borough
or an adjoining municipality along the side yard or rear yard, shall be
appropriately screened by fences, walls, evergreen or other year-round planting
and/or other suitable enclosures of a minimum height of four feet and a maximum
height of five feet for walks and fences.
      (2)   If trees, evergreen hedges or other types of year-round plants are
used, landscaped areas shall be provided at least five feet in width along the
entire interior of the entire property line.
   (M)   Storage of trash or rubbish. Storage areas of trash and rubbish shall
be completely screened and all organic rubbish shall be contained in covered
vermin-proof containers. No such storage area shall be permitted within any
required yard space.
   (N)   Site plan review and approval. A proposed Planned Commercial Center
shall be subject to the provisions of the borough’s subdivision and land
development ordinance (Chapter 22 of this code of ordinances) and the
procedures established by said ordinance for approval of subdivision/land
development plans shall be followed in obtaining approval for any development
within the P-C District.
   (O)   Performance standards. All residential, commercial and industrial uses
shall comply with the performance standards set forth in § 27-509 of this
chapter. Residential performance standards deal with density and lot coverage
requirements, while commercial and industrial performance standards deal with
lot area and nuisance and hazard abatement requirements.
(Ord. 171, passed 1-18-1972, Art. IV, § 464; Ord. 1986-1, passed 8-12-1986;
Ord. 1997-04, passed 3-18-1997)
H: MU-C MIXED USE CENTER DISTRICT
Section
   
27-471   District purpose
   
27-472   Basic use regulations
   
27-473   Basic spatial regulations
   
27-474   Design regulations
§ 27-471 DISTRICT PURPOSE.
   To provide for the redevelopment of an underutilized area of the borough
into a sustainable mixed-use center which meet the goals and objectives and
concept plan set forth in the borough’s 1999 comprehensive plan amendment. The
objectives relate to the following goals: to protect and/or enhance the area;
to maximize the area’s land use potential; to provide the area with safe and
adequate access, an internal roadway network, and public sanitary sewer and
water; and to develop with a sensitivity to the area’s environmental elements.
(Ord. 171, passed 1-18-1972; Ord. 2000-1, passed 5-9-2000, § 3)
§ 27-472 BASIC USE REGULATIONS.
   In this district, buildings, structures and lots shall be subject to the
basic use regulations set forth in this section.
   (A)   Uses by right. The following uses are permitted by right in the MU-
C District:
      (1)   Residential uses:
         (a)   Single-family attached dwelling; and
         (b)   Multi-family dwelling.
      (2)   Recreational uses:
         (a)   Community center; and
         (b)   Neighborhood park/playground.
      (3)   Public/semi-public uses:
         (a)   Public/semi-public buildings or service structure;
         (b)   Public/semi-public utility building or service structure; and
         (c)   Public/semi-public parking lot or garage.
      (4)   Office/institutional uses:
         (a)   Business office;
         (b)   Contractor’s office or shop;
         (c)   Medical clinic;
         (d)   Professional office; and
         (e)   Professional/business office complex.
      (5)   Commercial uses:
         (a)   Adult or child day care;
         (b)   Artisan studio/galleries;
         (c)   Bed and breakfast inn;
         (d)   Country inn;
         (e)   Building supply establishment;
         (f)   Eating establishment, excluding drive-through service.
Restaurants with outdoor eating areas on sidewalks or courtyards shall meet the
following standards.
            1.   A minimum of five feet of sidewalk along the curb and leading
to the entrance to the establishment shall be maintained free of tables and
other encumbrances to allow for pedestrian circulation.
            2.   Planters, posts with ropes or other removable enclosures are
encouraged and shall be used as a way of defining the area occupied by the
eating establishment.
            3.   Extended awnings, canopies or large umbrellas shall be
permitted and located to provide shade in accordance with the following
standards. No awning or canopy shall extend more than 24 inches over the
sidewalk and shall have a height at its lowest point of at least eight feet ten
inches. Whenever a decorative canopy is to be constructed on any building,
which will not extend more than 36 inches beyond such building, such canopy
shall not be considered as part of the building for the purpose of determining
the depth of a front setback.
            4.   Outdoor eating establishments shall be required to provide
additional outdoor trash receptacles.
            5.   The operators of the outdoor eating establishments shall be
responsible for maintaining a clean, litter-free and well-kept appearance
within the immediate area of activities.
         (g)   Farmers market;
         (h)   Home occupations (accessory);
         (i)   Indoor commercial recreation establishment;
         (j)   Personal service business, excluding adult regulated facility;
         (k)   Retail store or shop;
         (l)   Small processing establishment;
         (m)   Specialty center, no use shall occupy more than 3,000 square
feet gross floor area;
         (n)   Tavern shall meet the following additional conditions.
            1.   The site shall be located a minimum of 150 feet from any
school, child or adult daycare facility, community or senior center, or church.
            2.   The proposed use shall not be detrimental to the neighborhood
due to hours of operation, light and/or litter.
            3.   The proposed use shall not constitute a nuisance to the
neighborhood due to noise or loitering outside the building.
            4.   No alcoholic beverages may be advertised on the exterior of
the building, including but not limited to banners, awnings, umbrellas or
lighted window signs.
         (o)   Wholesale establishment.
      (6)   Multi-use building uses:
         (a)   Commercial (first floor)/residential (upper floors);
         (b)   Commercial (first floor)/office (upper floors);
         (c)   Office (first floor)/residential (upper floors); and
         (d)   Existing buildings may be converted to multi-use buildings of
the types in subsections (A)(6)(a), (A)(6)(b) or (A)(6)(c) above.
      (7)   Accessory structures and uses associated with, but incidental to,
the above uses.
   (B)   Mix of uses. In order to maintain the character of the mixed-use area
and to avoid the site being dominated by one use the following mix of uses
shall be maintained.
      (1)   No more than 40% of the district’s total area shall be occupied by
residential uses.
      (2)   At least 50% of the residential uses shall be a part of a multi-use
structure.
      (3)   No more than 20% of the district’s total area shall be occupied by
single-use buildings occupying lots of one-half acre or more. Under no
circumstances shall a single-use building be allowed on a lot greater than one
acre unless the lot of a larger size existed on the effective date of this
chapter amendment.
(Ord. 171, passed 1-18-1972; Ord. 2000-1, passed 5-9-2000, § 3)
§ 27-473 BASIC SPATIAL REGULATIONS.
   In this district, all buildings, structures and lots shall be subject to the
following basic spatial related regulations, which shall be considered as
minimum standards.
   (A)   Lot area and bulk requirements. Lot area and bulk requirements shall
be provided for each principal use hereafter established for the MU-C District
in accordance with the area and bulk requirements table located at the end of
this chapter.
   (B)   Site development standards.
      (1)   Building facades shall be constructed and maintained parallel to
the curbline with the exception of passages for pedestrian access. Setbacks and
variations are addressed in the area and bulk regulations table.
      (2)   The street elevation of principal structures shall have at least
one street oriented entrance.
      (3)   Parking facilities shall be located in the rear or side yard. Under
no circumstances shall parking be located in the front yard.
      (4)   Sidewalk display of retail merchandise are permitted, provided
that:
         (a)   At least five feet of clearance is maintained at the storefront
entrance for adequate and uncluttered pedestrian access;
         (b)   The display is located against the building wall and does not
extend more than two feet into the sidewalk; and
         (c)   The display area does not exceed 75% of the length of the
storefront.
(Ord. 171, passed 1-18-1972; Ord. 2000-1, passed 5-9-2000, § 3)
§ 27-474 DESIGN REGULATIONS.
   In this district, all buildings, structures, and lots shall be subject to
the following basic design regulations.
   (A)   Streetscape plan.
      (1)   A streetscape plan developed by a registered landscape architect
shall be submitted with the submission of land development plans.
      (2)   The streetscape plan shall show and describe at a minimum the
location of street trees, sidewalks, lighting standards and landscaped areas.
      (3)   (a)   The streetscape plan shall assign responsibility for tree
maintenance, including watering, fertilizing, pruning, pest control and
monitoring for hazardous limbs.
         (b)   It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to maintain
all streetscapes outside of the public right-of-way.
   (B)   Sidewalks.
      (1)   Sidewalks shall be provided adjacent to all public streets and
constructed as shown in the mixed use center amenities specifications and shall
be a minimum of five feet in width.
      (2)   Sidewalks to be dedicated to the borough for public access shall be
contained within the public right-of-way.
   (C)   Lighting.
      (1)   Lighting in public areas shall meet the style and specifications as
shown in the mixed use center amenities specifications and in accordance with
the borough’s subdivision and land development ordinance (
Chapter 22 of this code of ordinances).
      (2)   Lighting in private areas shall be consistent in style with that
described for public areas. Pole-mounted lights in private areas shall not
exceed a total height of 18 feet from the finished grade to the top of
fixtures.
   (D)   Street trees.
      (1)   Street trees shall be planted within the street right-of-way in a
planting strip having a minimum width of five feet in accordance with mixed use
center amenities specifications.
      (2)   Trees shall be planted a maximum of 40 feet apart and in accordance
with the borough’s subdivision and land development ordinance (
Chapter 22 of this code of ordinances).
   (E)   Parking.
      (1)   Parking shall comply with §
27-507 of this chapter.
      (2)   The following additional standards shall apply to parking lots in
the MU-C District.
         (a)   Parking lots shall not be located closer than ten feet to a
public right-of-way.
         (b)   Parking lot layout, landscaping, buffering and screening shall
prevent direct views of parked vehicles from streets and sidewalks.
            1.   Parking lots shall be surrounded by a minimum three-foot high
(at maturity), year-round visually impervious screen, hedge or wall in
accordance with §
22-506(F)(3) of the borough’s subdivision and land development ordinance (
Chapter 22 of this code of ordinances).
            2.   If trees, evergreen or other year-round plants are used,
landscaped areas shall be provided at least five feet in width.
            3.   The height shall decrease where driveways approach sidewalks
or walkways, in order to provide adequate visibility of pedestrians from motor
vehicles and shall not interfere with clear sight triangle requirements.
         (c)   For parking lots over 20 spaces, at least 5% of the interior
parking area shall be landscaped with plantings and one tree of at least two
and one-half inch caliper at planting shall be provided for each ten spaces.
            1.   A mixture of hardy flowering and/or decorative evergreen and
deciduous trees may be planted.
            2.   Evergreens shall be used for screening the lot perimeter and
deciduous trees for shade within the lot in accordance with the borough’s
subdivision and land development ordinance (
Chapter 22 of this code of ordinances).
            3.   The area around the tree and under the overhang of vehicles
shall be mulched, planted with shrubs or ground cover, or covered with paving
materials.
         (d)   Parking lots shall contain clearly defined internal pedestrian
walkways linking the lot to the principal building on site and to the nearest
walkway.
         (e)   Shared parking lots are encouraged in accordance with §
27-507(A)(5). On-street parking in front of the use may be included in the
calculation of available spaces.
      (3)   The following standards shall apply to other parking facilities.
         (a)   On-street parking shall be allowed but only in a configuration
parallel to the curb.
         (b)   No automobile garage doors shall face directly onto a public
street, other than a secondary service street.
   (F)   Screening.
      (1)   All nonresidential, single-family attached dwelling or multi-family
dwelling uses abutting residential districts or single-family detached or semi-
detached dwelling uses shall be screened the entire length of the abutting
property line.
         (a)   Screening shall include fences, walls, evergreens or year-round
planting and/or other suitable enclosures of a minimum height of four feet for
vegetation and a maximum height of four feet for walls and fences.
         (b)   If trees, evergreen or other year-round plants are used,
landscaped areas shall be provided at least five feet in width.
      (2)   Storage of trash and utility areas shall be screened through a
minimum four feet tall, impervious wall, fence or landscaping.
   (G)   Greenways and drainage buffers.
      (1)   Greenways shall be utilized on lots to preserve existing woodlands
and drainage ways.
      (2)   The greenway shall connect with the adjoining lot to form a
greenways network within the district.
      (3)   Greenways shall be designed in accordance with the mixed use center
amenities specifications; under no circumstances shall greenways be less than
20 feet wide.
   (H)   Signage. The following design standards shall apply to signs in the
MU-C District and shall be supplemented by the standards found in this chapter.
      (1)   Sign may not be internally lit.
      (2)   The following permanent signs shall be allowed as described in
Chart A Permitted Permanent Signs and Chart B Permitted Temporary Signs of this
chapter and as allowed herein.
         (a)   Permanent signs: P-1, P-2, P-3, P-4, P-5, P-6 and P-7;
         (b)   Temporary sign: T-1, T-2, T-3, T-4, T-5, T-6, T-7, T-8A, T-8B
and T-9 and T-10;
         (c)   One freestanding business sign meeting the following standards:
            1.   The maximum area shall not exceed three square feet;
            2.   The minimum setback from the right-of-way shall be five feet;
            3.   The maximum height shall be seven feet; and
            4.   The sign shall be located within four feet of the main
entrance of the business and shall not interfere with pedestrian or vehicular
circulation.
         (d)   Attached business sign meeting the following standards:
            1.   The maximum projection from the building shall not exceed six
inches;
            2.   The area shall not exceed 5% of the ground floor building
facade area or 24 square feet, whichever is less;
            3.   The maximum height is 15 feet above the front sidewalk
elevation;
            4.   The sign shall be affixed to the front facade of the building;
and
            5.   Limit of one sign per business.
         (e)   One attached sign, not exceeding six square feet in area, shall
be permitted on any side or rear entrance open to the public.
         (f)   One attached building directory sign identifying the occupants
of a business establishment, including upper story business uses meeting the
following standards:
            1.   The sign is located next to the entrance;
            2.   The sign shall not project more than six inches from the
building; and
            3.   The area of the sign shall not exceed three square feet, with
each tenant limited to one square foot.
         (g)   One projecting sign per business but not in conjunction with any
of the aforementioned signs. The sign shall meet the following standards:
            1.   The sign shall not exceed an area of six square feet;
            2.   The height of the lower edge of the sign shall be eight feet
or greater;
            3.   The distance from the building wall to the sign shall not
exceed six inches; and
            4.   The width shall not exceed three feet.
         (h)   One painted window or door sign (not both) shall meet the
following standards and shall be in addition to one of the aforementioned
signs:
            1.   The sign shall not exceed 10% of the window or door area or
four square feet, whichever is less; and
            2.   The sign shall be silk screened or hand painted.
         (i)   One awning sign, for ground floor uses only, meeting the
following standards:
            1.   The area shall not exceed ten square feet when acting as the
main business sign and shall not be in addition to an attached sign; and
            2.   The area shall not exceed four square feet when acting as an
auxiliary business sign and shall be located on the valance only.
(Ord. 171, passed 1-18-1972; Ord. 2000-1, passed 5-9-2000)
PART 5: GENERAL REGULATIONS
Section
   
27-501   Accessory buildings and structures
   
27-502   Floor area, habitable
   
27-503   Height regulations
   
27-504   Home occupation
   
27-505   Lot of record
   
27-506   Nonconformities
   
27-507   Off-street parking, loading and unloading
   
27-508   [Reserved]
   
27-509   Performance standard
   
27-510   Prohibited uses
   
27-511   Signs
   
27-512   Special uses
   
27-513   Uses not provided for
   
27-514   Service station or convenience store dispensing fuel
   
27-515   Vision obstruction
   
27-516   Fences
   
27-517   Setback modifications
   
27-518   Status of subdivision or land development plan
§ 27-501 ACCESSORY BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES.
   (A)   Accessory buildings and structures shall not be constructed in any
front yard.
   (B)   Accessory buildings and structures shall not be constructed in that
portion of the side yards that is the minimum open space required for side
setbacks as set forth under the applicable district regulations.
   (C)   An accessory building or structure may be erected within a rear yard
provided that:
      (1)   It shall be at least ten feet from the rear property line;
      (2)   It shall be at least ten feet from the nearest wall of the
principal building; or
      (3)   This may be reduced to five feet if no windows or other openings in
either building or structure are involved; or the accessory building or
structure may be integrated with the principal building by contiguous walls,
breezeway or other connection.
   (D)   An accessory building or structure shall not be used as a dwelling
unit or other living quarters, nor shall any business activities be conducted
within such buildings or structures.
   (E)   An accessory building or structure shall not be occupied by a
principal use.
(Ord. 171, passed 1-18-1972, Art. V, § 501; Ord. 1997-04, passed 3-18-1997)
§ 27-502 FLOOR AREA, HABITABLE.
   (A)   The minimum habitable floor area of any dwelling unit hereafter
established shall be 250 square feet for the first bedroom or sleeping area
plus 200 square feet for each additional bedroom or sleeping area contained
therein; provided that in the case of a single-family dwelling, the habitable
floor area shall not be less than 600 square feet.
   (B)   In any dwelling unit hereafter established, no bedroom or sleeping
area shall have a floor area of less than 100 square feet, excluding closet
space.
   (C)   At least one-half of the floor area of every habitable room shall have
a ceiling height of not less than seven feet and the floor area of that part of
any room where the ceiling height is less than five feet shall not be included
as part of the habitable floor area.
(Ord. 171, passed 1-18-1972, Art. V, § 502; Ord. 1997-04, passed 3-18-1997)
§ 27-503 HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   (A)   The height of any building may exceed the maximum permitted height by
one foot for each additional foot by which the width of each side yard exceeds
the minimum setback regulations for the district in which the building is
located.
   (B)   Height regulations shall not apply to spires, belfries, cupolas,
penthouses or domes not used for human occupancy, nor to chimneys, ventilators,
skylights, water tanks, bulkheads, utility poles and towers, television
antennae, silos, and ornamental or necessary mechanical appurtenances.
(Ord. 171, passed 1-18-1972, Art. V, § 503; Ord. 1997-04, passed 3-18-1997)
§ 27-504 HOME OCCUPATION.
   An accessory use customarily conducted entirely within a dwelling and
carried on by the inhabitants thereof, which use is clearly incidental and
secondary to the use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes and does not change
the character thereof. And further provided that no more than one employee,
other than the residents of the dwelling, shall be permitted. Home occupation
is deemed to include: barber, hairdresser, dressmaker, milliner, professional
office of attorneys, architects, landscape architects, engineers, accountants,
physicians, dentists, realtors, insurance agents and municipal officials. Off-
street parking of at least two spaces shall be provided in addition to the
spaces required for the dwelling.
(Ord. 171, passed 1-18-1972, Art. V, § 504; Ord. 1997-04, passed 3-18-1997)
§ 27-505 LOT OF RECORD.
   All applications for a zoning permit involving a lot held in single and
separate ownership at the effective date of this chapter which does not meet
the spatial requirements for the district in which it is located or, because of
unusual conditions such as shape and topography, the provision of the required
open spaces would, in the opinion of the applicant, be unreasonable, shall be
referred to the Zoning Hearing Board for a determination as to what extent, if
any, the requirements of this chapter may be varied in respect thereto.
(Ord. 171, passed 1-18-1972, Art. V, § 505; Ord. 1997-04, passed 3-18-1997)
§ 27-506 NONCONFORMITIES.
   A use legally established as of the effective date of this chapter as
amended which does not conform to the regulations of the district in which it
is located shall be subject to the following.
   (A)   Certification of nonconformance. A certification of nonconformance
shall be issued by the Zoning Officer for all uses and/or structures in
conflict with the regulations of the zone in which they are situated, when
requested by the owner thereof within one year after the effective date of this
chapter or any amendment creating the nonconformity.
   (B)   Continuation. Any lawful use of a structure or land existing at the
effective date of this chapter or any amendment creating the nonconformity may
be continued although such use does not conform to the provisions of this
chapter.
   (C)   Extensions.
      (1)   A nonconforming use of a building may be extended throughout the
building if no structural alterations are made therein.
      (2)   A nonconforming use may be extended upon a lot occupied by such use
and held in single and/or separate ownership at the effective date of this
chapter when authorized as a special exception, provided that such extension
does not replace a conforming use, and does not violate the yard requirements
of the zone in which the nonconforming use exists.
   (D)   Changes.
      (1)   If no structural alterations are made, any nonconforming use of a
structure, or structure and premises, may as a special exception be changed to
another nonconforming use provided that the Zoning Hearing Board, either by
general rule or by making findings in the specific case, shall find that the
proposed use is equally appropriate or more appropriate to the district than
the existing nonconforming use. In permitting such change, the Zoning Hearing
Board may require appropriate conditions and safeguard in accord with the
provisions of this chapter.
      (2)   Any structure, or structure and land in combination, in or on which
a nonconforming use is superseded by a permitted use, shall thereafter conform
to the regulations for the district, and the nonconforming use may not
thereafter be resumed.
   (E)   Nonconforming building. A nonconforming building which is damaged by
fire, explosion or act of nature, may be rebuilt and used for the same
purposes, provided that:
      (1)   The reconstruction of the building is commenced within one year
from the date of the destroying of the building and is carried to completion
with undue delay;
      (2)   The reconstructed building does not exceed in height, area, and
volume, the building as destroyed (subject to subsection (E)(3) below); and
      (3)   The reconstructed building shall comply with the area regulations
of the district in which it is located.
   (F)   Abandonment. When a nonconforming use of a structure, or structure and
premises in combination, is discontinued or abandoned for 12 consecutive months
or for 18 months during any three-year period (except when death, involuntary
or government action impedes access to or use of the premises), the structure,
or structure and premises in combination, shall not thereafter be used except
in conformity with the regulations of the district in which it is located.
   (G)   Zone changes. Whenever the boundaries of a zone shall be changed so as
to transfer an area from one zone to another zone of a different
classification, the foregoing provisions shall also apply to any nonconforming
uses or dimensional nonconformities existing therein or created thereby.
(Ord. 171, passed 1-18-1972, Art. V, § 506; Ord. 1993-2, passed 2-16-1993; Ord.
1997-04, passed 3-18-1997)
§ 27-507 OFF-STREET PARKING, LOADING AND UNLOADING.
   (A)   General regulations.
      (1)   Off-street parking facilities shall be provided to lessen
congestion in the streets. The facilities required herein shall be available
throughout the hours of operation of the particular business or use for which
such facilities are provided. As used herein, the term PARKING SPACE includes
either covered garage space or uncovered parking lot space located off the
public right-of-way.
      (2)   The design, surfacing, access and lighting of off-street parking,
loading and unloading facilities shall be in conformance with the related
provisions set forth in §§
22-506(G)(2) and
22-506(G)(3) of the borough’s subdivision and land development ordinance (
Chapter 22 of this code of ordinances) provided further that no off-street
parking, loading or unloading facility shall be located less than three feet
from any property line, unless such property line is also a street line, nor be
laid out in such a manner as would allow vehicles to project into any adjoining
property or street right-of-way.
      (3)   A parking garage may be located wholly or partly inside the walls
of the principal building, or attached to the outer walls. If separated from
the principal building, the garage shall conform to all accessory building
requirements.
      (4)   Parking spaces may be located on a lot other than that containing
the principal use with the approval of the Zoning Hearing Board.
      (5)   Two or more uses may provide for required parking in a common
parking lot if the total space provided is not less than the sum of the spaces
required for each use individually. However, the number of spaces required in a
common parking facility may be reduced below this total only as a special
exception to be approved by the Zoning Hearing Board in accordance with the
requirements of Article VI of this chapter and provided that it can be
demonstrated to the Zoning Hearing Board that the hours or days of peak parking
needed for the uses are so different that a lower total will provide adequately
for all uses served by the facility.
      (6)   The size of parking spaces, the surfacing of parking areas, and the
lighting of parking areas shall be in accordance with the requirements of §
22-506(G)(2) of the borough’s subdivision and land development ordinance (
Chapter 22 of this code of ordinances).
   (B)   Parking facilities required. Off-street parking spaces must be
provided for each building or structure erected, altered, enlarged or
converted; for each open space hereafter used; or for each principal use,
whichever will result in the greater number of spaces, in accordance with the
following schedule. Fractional numbers of parking spaces shall be increased to
the next whole number.
      (1)   Residential parking.
         (a)   Single-family dwelling: Two parking spaces for each dwelling
unit.
         (b)   Two-family dwelling: Two parking spaces for each dwelling unit.
         (c)   Multi-family dwellings including multi-family and two-family
conversions: Two parking spaces for each dwelling unit. A garage accessory to
an apartment house a multi-family dwelling or multi-family or two-family
conversion shall provide only for the storage of vehicles of the owner, tenants
and employees. The required number of parking spaces may be reduced to one and
one- half spaces per dwelling unit if the units are designed and erected to
only house elderly citizens.
         (d)   Boarding house or rooming house: One parking space for each
bedroom.
         (e)   Dwelling unit(s) in combination with a professional or business
office: One parking space per dwelling unit, in addition to the parking
required for the office.
         (f)   Group home: Two parking spaces.
         (g)   Group quarters: One parking space for two beds.
         (h)   Half-way house: One parking space for each occupant.
         (i)   Dwelling with accessory use (the parking requirements listed
below shall be in addition to the required parking for the dwelling unit):
            1.   Bed and breakfast inn: One per guest room;
            2.   Domiciliary care home; No additional parking spaces required;
            3.   Family day care home: No additional parking spaces required;
            4.   Group day care home: One parking space for each nonresident
employee plus two spaces for the day care facility; and
            5.   Home occupation; Two parking spaces.
         (j)   Animal hospital or kennel: One for each five boarding spaces,
plus one for each employee on the largest shift.
         (k)   Shopping center or mall: One for each 250 square feet of floor
area.
         (l)   Service stations, convenience store dispensing fuel, mobile home
sales lot, or vehicle sales, rental, service and/or repair facility: One
parking space for each 400 square feet of floor or ground area, plus one space
for 200 square feet of gross floor area devoted to a convenience store, or
sales/rental facility; plus one space for each employee on the largest shift.
         (m)   Vehicle washing facility: One parking space for each employee on
largest shift, plus sufficient stacking lanes shall be provided to prevent
vehicle back-up onto adjoining streets.
         (n)   Parking garage or parking lot: No parking space shall be
required in yard or setback areas; however, no parking shall be permitted on
the public rights-of-way.
         (o)   Hospital, convalescent or nursing home, or personal care
boarding home: One parking space for each three beds; plus one space for each
employee on the largest shift; plus one per each staff doctor.
         (p)   School: One parking space for each staff member, plus one space
per classroom in an elementary or junior high school, plus one space for each
five students of projected building capacity in a senior high school,
commercial school, or facility of higher education.
         (q)   Other commercial buildings: One parking space for each 400
square feet of floor area, plus one space for each employee, on the largest
shift.
         (r)   Mini-storage facility: Three spaces for the office, if provided;
plus the access to the storage units must provide for loading/unloading of
vehicles without impeding traffic flow through the facility.
         (s)   Clubs, lodges and other similar places: One parking space for
each 200 square feet of floor area, plus one for each employee on the largest
shift.
         (t)   Swimming pool: One parking space for each four persons of total
(legal) capacity or occupancy, plus one space for each employee on the largest
shift.
         (u)   Attached or unattached garage or carport: For the purpose of
this chapter, an attached or unattached garage or carport on the premises and
that portion of the driveway off the public right-of-way may be considered as
parking spaces. However, no portion of an access drive shall be considered as
parking spaces.
      (2)   Commercial/institutional/office parking. The requirements herein
may be modified and in some cases removed by the Zoning Hearing Board when it
is determined by the Board that public parking lots and facilities are
available in sufficient number to negate the need for parking on the premises.
Uses within the Town-Center District shall only be required to provide the
required parking for employees.
         (a)   House of worship, public/semi public building, cultural facility
or other similar place of public, semi-public or private assembly: One parking
space per five seats or one per each 250 square feet of gross floor area when
no seats are provided; plus one for each employee of the largest shift.
         (b)   Retail store or shop or adult book store: One parking space for
each 200 square feet of floor area for public use, plus one for each employee
of the largest shift.
         (c)   Eating establishment: One parking space for each 100 square feet
of floor area for public use or one for each four seats, whichever is greater;
plus one space for each employee of the largest shift.
         (d)   Tavern or adult cabaret: One parking space for each 50 square
feet of floor area for public use, plus one space for each employee on the
largest shift.
         (e)   Hotel or motel: One parking space for each guest sleeping room,
plus one space for each employee on the largest shift.
         (f)   Bowling alley, billiard room or miniature golf course: Two
parking spaces for each alley/lane/hole.
         (g)   Other commercial recreation establishments; One for each five
seats or five persons of total (legal) capacity or occupancy, plus one for each
employee on the largest shift.
         (h)   Personal service business; One parking space for each 800 square
feet of floor area, plus one per employee on the largest shift.
         (i)   Professional or business office, professional/business office
complex or medical clinic: At least one parking space for each 300 square feet
of floor area, plus one space for each employee on the largest shift.
         (j)   Animal hospital or kennel: One for each five boarding spaces,
plus one for each employee on the largest shift.
         (k)   Shopping center or mall: One for each 250 square feet of floor
area.
         (l)   Service stations, convenience store dispensing fuel, mobile home
sales lot, or vehicle sales, rental, service and/or repair facility: One
parking space for each 400 square feet of floor or ground area, plus one space
for 200 square feet of gross floor area devoted to a convenience store, or
sales/rental facility; plus one space for each employee on the largest shift.
         (m)   Vehicle washing facility: One parking space for each employee on
largest shift, plus sufficient stacking lanes shall be provided to prevent
vehicle back-up onto adjoining streets.
         (n)   Parking garage or parking lot: No parking space shall be
required in yard or setback areas; however, no parking shall be permitted on
the public rights-of-way.
         (o)   Hospital, convalescent or nursing home, or personal care
boarding home: One parking space for each three beds; plus one space for each
employee on the largest shift; plus one per each staff doctor.
         (p)   School: One parking space for each staff member, plus one space
per classroom in an elementary or junior high school, plus one space for each
five students of projected building capacity in a senior high school,
commercial school or facility of higher education.
         (q)   Other commercial buildings: One parking space for each 400
square feet of floor area, plus one space for each employee, on the largest
shift.
         (r)   Mini-storage facility: Three spaces for the office, if provided;
plus the access to the storage units must provide for loading/unloading of
vehicles without impeding traffic flow through the facility.
         (s)   Clubs, lodges and other similar places: One parking space for
each 200 square feet of floor area, plus one for each employee on the largest
shift.
         (t)   Swimming pool: One parking space for each four persons of total
(legal) capacity or occupancy, plus one space for each employee on the largest
shift.
         (u)   Funeral home: One parking space for each 100 square feet of
floor area for public use, plus one space for each employee on the largest
shift, plus one space for each piece of mobile equipment, such as hearses and
ambulances.
      (3)   Industrial parking.
         (a)   Industrial activities; heavy storage, sales, and/or service
facility; research laboratory, or small processing establishment: One parking
space for each two employees on the two largest shifts, but at least one space
for each 1,000 square feet of floor area.
         (b)   Truck terminal or wholesale establishment: One and one-half
parking spaces for each two employees on the two largest shifts.
         (c)   Industrial or business park: The parking requirements for each
individual use within the park must be satisfied.
         (d)   Visitors: Space shall be provided in addition to the above
parking requirements according to the specific needs as determined by the
Planning Commission. For the purpose of this chapter, salespeople and out-of-
town personnel are visitors.
   (C)   Loading and unloading space.
      (1)   In addition to the off-street parking space required herein, any
building erected, converted or enlarged in any district for commercial, office
building, manufacturing, wholesale, hospital or similar uses, shall provide
adequate off-street area for loading and unloading of vehicles according to the
following schedule:
 
Stores, manufacturing, wholesale, commercial
hospitals, laundry, mortuary, dry cleaning, and Under 8,000             1
similar uses
                                               8,000 to 40,000         2
                                               40,000 to 250,000       3
                                               Each additional 200,000 1
Office buildings, hotels                        Under 100,000           1
                                               100,000 to 300,000      2
                                               Over 300,000            3
 
      (2)   In no case where a building is erected, converted or enlarged for
commercial, manufacturing or business purposes shall the public rights-of-way
be used for loading or unloading of materials.
      (3)   The size, surfacing, and lighting of loading and unloading
facilities shall be in accordance with §
22-506(G)(3) of the borough’s subdivision and land development ordinance (
Chapter 22 of this code of ordinances).
   (D)   Professional office parking.
      (1)   At least two off-street parking spaces for each 300 square feet of
floor area or fraction thereof utilized for professional offices shall be
provided.
      (2)   If it be determined by the Zoning Officer that the professional
office parking requirements in subsection (D)(1) above is insufficient, prior
to issuing a zoning permit, the Zoning Officer may require that there be one
parking space for each professional utilizing such office space plus one
parking space for each employee or associate plus one parking space for each 21
square feet of area contained in the reception room, waiting room or
examination or conference room area.
(Ord. 171, passed 1-18-1972, Art. V, § 507; Ord. 213, passed 3-29-1979; Ord.
1997-04, passed 3-18-1997)
§ 27-508 [RESERVED].
§ 27-509 PERFORMANCE STANDARD.
   (A)   The purpose is to establish minimum environmental standards with which
all proposed land uses, and structures must comply. Evidence of ability to
comply shall be required prior to the issuance of a building permit or a
certificate of occupancy, and continued compliance shall be required during the
operation of such land uses and structures.
   (B)   Where in the opinion of the Zoning Hearing Board and the Borough
Council there is a probable violation of any performance standard set forth in
subsection (B)(4)(b) below, they are empowered to have a qualified technician
perform such investigations, measurements and analysis as may be necessary to
determine whether or not there is in fact a violation. Where a violation is
found the offender shall bear the cost incurred by the borough in retaining the
qualified technician.
      (1)   Residential densities. (Dwelling units per gross acre of land to be
developed for each purpose).
         (a)   Single-family detached dwellings. Shall not exceed three
dwelling units per acre.
         (b)   Single-family semi-detached or two-family dwellings. Shall not
exceed four dwelling units per acre.
         (c)   Single-family attached dwellings. Shall not exceed six dwelling
units per acre.
         (d)   Multi-family dwellings. Shall not exceed eight dwelling units
per acre.
      (2)   Lot coverage (residential).
         (a)   Single-family or two-family dwelling. See district regulations.
         (b)   Multi-family dwellings. Not over 40%, unless greater coverage is
permitted under the district regulations.
      (3)   Privacy. All new land developments and structures shall, be site
planning, location and orientation of structures, provide visual and acoustical
privacy between themselves and adjoining lots and structures. The conditions of
existing adjacent lots and structures shall govern the design of new lot
developments and structures in the question of privacy.
      (4)   Commercial and industrial standards.
         (a)   Lot area.
            1.   No minimum. The developer must submit a proposal for site
development including the basis upon which the need for the commercial and/or
industrial enterprise was determined.
            2.   The developer must demonstrate that the area proposed is
sufficient to provide for all structures, service areas and open spaces
necessary to the proper functioning of the proposed use.
         (b)   Nuisance and hazard abatement.
            1.   Noise. At no point on or beyond the boundary of any lot shall
the sound pressure level resulting from any use or activity, whether open or
enclosed, (except noise not directly under control of the property user, noises
resulting from the construction and maintenance of buildings and facilities,
including site preparation, and the noises of safety signals, warning devices,
railroads and automobile traffic) exceed the maximum permitted decibel levels
for the designated octave band as set forth in the table below:
Octave Band, Frequency In Cycles per Second Sound Pressure Level in Decibels
Octave Band, Frequency In Cycles per Second Sound Pressure Level in Decibels
0—74                                      73
75—149                                    68
150—299                                   60
300—599                                   53
600—1,999                                 47
1,200—2,399                               41
2,400—4,799                               35
4,800 and over                              33
 
            2.   Odors. No continuous, frequent or repetitive emission of odors
or odor-causing substances which would be offensive at or beyond any property
line will be permitted. The existence of an odor shall be presumed when the
concentration of the odor causing substance or substances in the air at any
point at or beyond the property line of the source exceeds the lowest
concentration listed as the odor threshold for such substance or substances in
Table III (Odor Thresholds) appearing in Chapter 5 of the Air Pollution
Abatement Manual, copyright 1952 by the Manufacturing Chemists Association, or
as subsequently amended. Substances not cited in said table shall be deemed
odorous when analysis by a competent technician demonstrates that a discernible
odor is being emitted.
            3.   Offensive area. All areas for parking, recreation, service,
utility equipment, waste receptacles and/or other elements which because of
their appearance, order and/or noise would be offensive to those occupying the
lot or adjoining lots or those on the street, shall be screened, landscaped or
otherwise treated to eliminate the offensive condition.
            4.   Lighting. Lighting of all types shall be directed so as to
reflect away from adjacent lots and public rights-of-way. There shall be no
more than 0.25 foot candles shining off the site, as measured vertically
between five and ten feet off the ground.
            5.   Landscaping. Natural landscaping elements, trees, shrubs,
rocks, streams, contours, are a valuable asset in the urban environment. All
site developments shall retain as much of the natural landscaping to a quality
comparable to that of the surrounding properties.
            6.   Smoke. It shall be unlawful for any person to permit the
emission of any smoke from any source whatever of a density equal to or greater
than the density described as No. 2 on the Ringelmann Chart, published by the
U.S. Bureau of Mines, (Powers’ Micro-Ringelmann Chart, McGraw-Hill Publishing
Company, 1954, may be used).
            7.   Toxic and noxious matters. No emission which would be
demonstrably injurious to human health, animals or plant life at or beyond the
boundaries of any lot will be permitted. Where such an emission could result
from an accident or equipment malfunction, adequate safeguards considered
standard for safe utilization of the toxic and noxious matters involved shall
be taken.
            8.   Radiation hazards. The handling of radioactive materials, the
discharge of such materials into air and water, and the disposal of radioactive
wastes, shall be in conformance with the applicable regulations of the Atomic
Energy Commission.
            9.   Fire and explosive hazards. The storage, utilization or
manufacture of solid materials or products ranging from free or active burning
to intense burning is permitted, but only if said materials or products are
stored, utilized or manufactured within completely enclosed building having
incombustible exterior and protected throughout by an automatic fire
extinguishing system. All activities involving the use and/or storage and/or
disposal of flammable or explosive material shall be provided with adequate
safety and protective devices against hazards of fire and explosion, as well as
with adequate firefighting and suppression equipment and devices standard to
the industry involved.
            10.   Glare and heat. Any operation producing intense glare or heat
shall be performed within an enclosure so as to completely obscure such
operation from view from any point along the property line, except during the
period of construction of the facilities to be used and occupied.
            11.   Electromagnetic radiation. In the interest of maintaining an
atmosphere fruitful to research, there shall be no electromagnetic interference
that adversely affects at any point the operation of any equipment other than
that belonging to the creator of such interference, or that is not in
conformance with the regulations of the Federal Communications Commission.
            12.   Fly ash, dust, fumes, vapors, gases and other forms of air
pollution. No emission which can cause any damage to health, to animals or
vegetation, or their forms of property, or which can cause any excessive
soiling at any point, and in no event any emission, from any chimney or
otherwise, of any solid or liquid particles in concentrations exceeding 0.3
grain per cubic foot of the conveying gas or air at any point shall be
permitted. This shall be measured at the point of emission.
            13.   Water. No emission of polluters (as defined by the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection) into a waterway or sewage
system extending beyond the property line shall be permitted.
         (c)   Minimum separation distance between buildings.
            1.   Purpose of building separation standard. Council hereby adopts
a standard for the separation of buildings, recognizing the need to provide for
construction of buildings which will provide for the health and safety of the
citizens of the borough. By establishing such standards, the borough will help
to ensure that the occupants of buildings will be provided a standard of safety
for exposure from adjoining buildings in case of fire, explosion, or other
emergency.
            2.   Applicability of building separation standard. A building
separation requirement of 25 feet shall apply to all occupied buildings, in all
zoning districts within the borough. Such 25 feet building separation standard
shall be measured along a straight line between one building and another, from
the outer portion of the exterior wall of the first building to the outer
portion of the exterior wall of the second building. Such measurement shall be
taken from a point where the buildings are closest together. Small buildings,
typically meant for back-yard storage, commonly referred to as “sheds”, are
considered to be unoccupied buildings. Such buildings, designed or used for
storage, not exceeding 196 square feet in area and 12 feet in height, shall
meet a minimum building separation requirement of ten feet. Such storage sheds
are only approved for back yard use. Section 27-501(3)(B) of the Zoning
ordinance, previously referencing separation standards of sheds, is hereby
repealed and eliminated.
            3.   Definition of occupancy. OCCUPANCY is a building that provides
enclosed space designed for human occupancy in which individuals congregate for
amusement, educational, domicile or similar purposes, or in which occupants are
engaged in labor.
            4.   Repealer and severability. Any ordinance, or part, thereof,
conflicting with this section shall be, and hereby is, repealed insofar as it
conflicts with this chapter. Further, the provisions of this section are
severable. If any sentence, clause or section of this Part is for any reason
found to be unconstitutional, illegal, or invalid, such unconstitutionally,
illegality, or invalidity shall not affect or impair any of the remaining
provisions of this section. It is hereby declared to be the intent of the
Borough Council that this section would have been adopted had such
unconstitutional, illegal or invalid sentence, clause, or section not been
included herein.
(Ord. 171, passed 1-18-1972, Art. V, § 509; Ord. 1997-04, passed 3-18-1997;
Ord. 1999-08, passed 12-11-1998; Ord. 2001-11, passed 2-12-2001)
§ 27-510 PROHIBITED USES.
   No lot, parcel, building, structure or portion thereof shall be hereafter
erected, altered or used within the borough as follows:
   (A)   Any trade, industry, business or other purpose that is noxious or
injurious by reason of odor, dust, smoke, gas, vibration, illumination or noise
beyond the levels permissible under the performance standards section of this
Part or otherwise creates a nuisance or hazard to public health, safety and
welfare;
   (B)   Any trade, industry or other use whose operation supports or promotes
the attraction, propagation or harboring of rats, flies, and other vectors in a
manner which cannot be controlled sufficiently to negate the threat of such to
the health and welfare of the public;
   (C)   Any asphalt plant, explosive and related product manufacturing and/or
processing, forging of metals (other than sheet), junk yard, quarrying, raising
and keeping of animals and fowl, rendering of fats and oils, tanning, tire
retreading, or other use deemed noxious or injurious by the Zoning Hearing
Board or Borough Council; and
   (D)   Any activity prohibited by other borough ordinances or by any state or
federal law or regulation.
(Ord. 171, passed 1-18-1972, Art. V, § 510; Ord. 1997-04, passed 3-18-1997)
§ 27-511 SIGNS.
   (A)   Existing signs. Any sign which lawfully existed and was maintained at
the effective date of this chapter may be continued, provided such sign is
constructed of durable materials and is kept in good condition and repair.
   (B)   General regulations applying to all signs.
      (1)   Determination of size.
         (a)   The size of the sign shall refer to the area of the sign facing,
including any border framing or decorative attachments. In the case of open
signs made up of letters, figures and designs, the space between such letters,
figures and designs shall be included. When such sign consists only of letters,
designs or figures engraved, painted, projected or in any manner affixed on a
wan, the total area of which such sign consists shall be considered the area of
said sign.
         (b)   Where a sign has two or more faces, the area of all faces shall
be included in determining the area of the sign, except that where two such
faces are placed back to back and at no point more than three feet from one
another, the area of the sign shall be taken as the area of one face if the two
faces are of equal area, or as the area of the larger face if the two faces are
of unequal size. Structural members and supports required by Building Codes and
not bearing advertising matter shall be excluded from the sign area.
      (2)   Location/projection of signs.
         (a)   Signs must be located so that they do not interfere with any
clear sight triangle as required by § 27-515 of this chapter and § 22-502 of
the borough’s subdivision and land development ordinance (Chapter 22 of this
code of ordinances).
         (b)   For all uses, an advertising sign and a business sign must be at
least 60 feet apart, and no sign exceeding 30 square feet in area may be
located within 75 feet of a residential district.
         (c)   A sign may protrude off of a building to project over a public
sidewalk area only a maximum of four feet, including the sign, from the
building and shall be located a minimum of ten feet off the ground.
         (d)   Sidewalk signs shall be placed in such a manner so as not to
extend more than three feet from the building line. In any event, a minimum
four-foot pedestrian area must be maintained from the curb to the sign so as
not to obstruct pedestrian traffic.
      (3)   Illumination of signs.
         (a)   Flashing, rotating and intermittent lights are not permitted.
         (b)   Signs permitted in the residential districts shall be
illuminated only by indirect lighting and shall not be illuminated between the
hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
         (c)   A sign may be illuminated only if the lighting is so screened
that it is not directed or reflected toward any residence or so it does not
hinder the vision of motorists.
         (d)   Signs which are illuminated in the colors red, green or amber,
either by colored bulbs or tubing, or in high reflection by the use of special
preparations such as fluorescent paint or glass, may not be located within a
radius of 200 feet of a street traffic light or similar safety device or from
the center of any street intersection.
      (4)   Painted advertising. Advertising painted upon, or displayed upon, a
barn or other building or structure shall be regarded as an advertising
signboard and the regulations pertaining thereto shall apply.
      (5)   Signs to be viewed from principally within a building. Nothing in
these regulations shall be construed as prohibiting signs intended for viewing
principally from within a building or signs temporarily attached to the inside
face of a display window, announcing a sale or similar feature. Such signs
shall be permitted in addition to any of the specific sign types designated on
the charts at the end of this chapter.
      (6)   Buntings and pennants. Buntings and pennants are permitted only to
announce the opening of a new business or industry, or in connection with a
civic event, and must be removed after 30 days.
      (7)   Construction and maintenance. Signs must be constructed of durable
materials, maintained in good condition, and not allowed to become dilapidated.
      (8)   Termination of enterprise. Each sign shall be removed when the
circumstances leading to its erection no longer apply, unless other required by
this chapter.
      (9)   Signs not provided for. Signs not specifically provided for in this
chapter shall be permitted only by special exception and shall be in general
conformance with the district regulations in which it is proposed.
   (C)   Permitted permanent signs. Only the types of permanent signs listed on
Chart A, which is included at the end of this chapter, shall be permitted
throughout the borough. Permanent signs must conform to the standards set forth
in Chart A, as well as satisfy the general regulations of subsection (B) above.
A building permit shall be required for all permanent signs, except P-3, P-4,
and P-5.
   (D)   Permitted temporary signs. Only the types of temporary signs listed on
Chart B, which is included at the end of this chapter, are permitted throughout
the borough. Temporary signs must conform to the standards set forth in Chart
B, which is included at the end of this chapter, as well as satisfy the general
regulations of subsection (B) above. A building permit shall not be required
for a temporary sign, unless it is a portable sign.
   (E)   Advertising signs. Advertising signs shall be permitted in the
industrial and commercial zones subject to the provisions of subsection (B)
above and the following criteria.
      (1)   Only one advertising sign per lot shall be permitted.
      (2)   No advertising sign shall exceed an overall size of 75 square feet,
nor exceed 35 feet in height.
      (3)   No advertising sign shall be located within 500 feet of another
advertising sign.
      (4)   All advertising signs shall be a minimum of 50 feet from all side
and rear property lines.
      (5)   All advertising signs shall be set back a minimum of 25 feet from
any street right-of-way line.
      (6)   No advertising sign shall obstruct the vision of motorists or
adjoining nonresidential uses which depend upon visibility for identification.
   (F)   Portable signs. Portable signs shall be permitted in the C-H and M-
C Districts subject to the provisions of subsection (B) above and the following
criteria.
      (1)   A sign permit must be obtained from the Borough Zoning Officer.
      (2)   No flashing lights are permitted.
      (3)   Only one portable sign shall be permitted per street frontage with
a minimum setback from the street line of ten feet or the building face.
      (4)   The placement of the sign shall not be located on the lot for more
30 consecutive days per event. In addition, the placement of the sign may not
exceed four events per year. However, special event signs for charitable or
non-profit organizations would be exempt from the requirement of only four
placements per year.
      (5)   The maximum height allowed shall be ten feet and the maximum
projection from any building shall be 12 inches.
      (6)   Removal shall occur within 15 days after the event.
   (G)   Maximum size. The maximum size permitted shall be 32 square feet; such
area shall not be included in the computation of maximum surface area for any
other type of permitted sign.
   (H)   Placement. The placement of such sign shall not interfere with traffic
or with sight distance at street intersections and accesses to the public
right-of-way.
(Ord. 2022-1, passed 12-13-2022)
§ 27-512 SPECIAL USES.
   (A)   Municipal buildings and uses. This section shall not apply to any
building of the borough if the Borough Council shall after a public hearing,
decide that such building or extension thereof or such use of any premises is
reasonably necessary for the convenience or welfare of the public, provided
that any municipal recreational building or use may be established without
holding such public hearing.
   (B)   Public utility buildings and uses.
      (1)   Generally. This section shall not apply to any existing or proposed
building or extension thereof, used or to be used by a public utility
corporation, if upon petition of such corporation, the Pennsylvania Public
Utility Commission shall, after a public hearing, decide that the present or
proposed situation of the building in question is reasonably necessary for the
convenience or welfare of the public.
      (2)   Essential services. The erection, construction, alteration, use and
maintenance by municipal or governmental agencies and public utilities or
public service corporations, of such facilities as are necessary for the
furnishing of adequate service by such agencies, utilities or public service
corporations, or for public health, safety or general welfare, including
underground or overhead electrical, gas, steam, or water transposal systems,
including poles, wires, lines, mains, drains, sewers, conduits, cables, fire
alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants, gas regulator and
measuring devices, including the structures in which they are housed, and other
similar equipment shall conform to the general character as to appearance and
structural material of the other structures within the district and provided
that, in residential districts such shall not include the storage of vehicles
or equipment necessary to the normal maintenance, repair or installation for
any utility. The installation of these “essential services” except
transformers, pumps, and similar equipment that cause any noise, odor, smoke or
other hazardous effect, shall be permitted without the requirements of a public
hearing by the Public Utility Commission or the Zoning Hearing Board.
(Ord. 171, passed 1-18-1972, Art. V, § 512; Ord. 1997-04, passed 3-18-1997)
§ 27-513 USES NOT PROVIDED FOR.
   Any use not specifically permitted either by right or by special exception
by this chapter shall be permitted by special exception in the district or
districts where, and to the extent that, similar and compatible uses are
permitted by right or by special exception provided that said use meets the
requirements for special exception as set forth in this chapter and in no way
is in conflict with the general purpose and intent of this chapter.
(Ord. 171, passed 1-18-1972, Art. V, § 513; Ord. 1993-2, passed 2-16-1993; Ord.
1997-04, passed 3-18-1997)
§ 27-514 SERVICE STATION OR CONVENIENCE STORE DISPENSING FUEL.
   In districts where permitted, such shall be subject to the following
safeguards and regulations.
   (A)   No service station shall be located closer than 500 feet to any lot
line of a school, hospital or public institution for human care.
   (B)   Gasoline pumps, lubricating or other dispensing devices shall be
located no less than 25 feet from any public right-of-way line.
   (C)   No repair work (other than minor motor adjustments) shall be performed
out-of-doors.
   (D)   No vehicles, including rental vehicles and trailers, shall be parked
or otherwise stored within any required yard area.
   (E)   No automobile parts, including tires, dismantled vehicles, equipment
including rental equipment other than vehicles and trailers, or similar
articles shall be stored out-of-doors; except that such may be temporarily
stored out-of-doors provided that such are entirely enclosed by a solid visual
screen fence or wall constructed of permanent materials to a height of at least
six feet and such stored articles do not extend above said screen; provided
further that no such storage area may extend into any required yard area.
   (F)   All other applicable regulations of this chapter shall be met.
(Ord. 171, passed 1-18-1972, Art. V, § 514; Ord. 1997-04, passed 3-18-1997)
§ 27-515 VISION OBSTRUCTION.
   On any corner lot, nothing shall be erected, placed, planted or allowed to
grow in such a manner as materially to impede vision between a height of two
and one-half feet and ten feet above the centerline grades of the intersecting
streets in the area bounded by the right-of-way lines of such corner lots and a
line joining points along said right-of-way lines 50 feet from the point of
intersection.
(Ord. 171, passed 1-18-1972, Art. V, § 515; Ord. 1997-04, passed 3-18-1997)
§ 27-516 FENCES.
   (A)   Fences may be erected, altered and maintained within and/or along the
front and within and/or along the sides of any front yard, provided that any
such fence shall not exceed four feet in height, and provided, further, that
such fence shall contain openings therein equal to at least 50% of the area.
   (B)   A solid fence of no more than six feet in height may be erected,
altered and maintained within and/or along the remainder of side yards and
within or along the rear of any lot when all other applicable regulations of
this chapter are met.
   (C)   A fence may be erected higher than six feet, in only the following
instance.
      (1)   A fence up to eight feet in height is permitted to enclose a
swimming pool, provided such fence and pool are not located within any building
setback area; and
      (2)   The lower six feet of any such fence may be solid and that all area
of fence which exceeds the height of six feet shall contain openings therein
equal to at least 50% of the area of said fence.
   (D)   A fence may be erected to a height in excess and/or location of that
otherwise than permitted by this chapter only by special exception granted by
the Zoning Hearing Board.
   (E)   No fence or other structure shall be erected or maintained within the
right-of-way of any street or alley, or at any location which may cause danger
to traffic on a street or public road by obstructing the view within the
requisite clear triangle.
   (F)   When a retaining wall condition exists, the height of the fence may be
established above the highest prevailing grade.
   (G)   If the fence is wood cover on wood frame, the framework must face onto
the interior of the lot, unless the fence is so designed as to provide equal
frame and cover area to adjoining yards. If the fence is open metal mesh,
supported by posts and frame of either pipe or wood, the posts and frames must
be on the interior of the mesh. If the fence is of masonry construction, a
finished surface must be provided on the exterior side.
(Ord. 171, passed 1-18-1972, Art. V, § 516; Ord. 1986-1, passed 8-12-1986; Ord.
1990-2, passed 11-20-1990; Ord. 1997-04, passed 3-18-1997)
§ 27-517 SETBACK MODIFICATIONS.
   (A)   Front setback.
      (1)   When the setback of existing buildings is greater than the minimum
required for the district in which located, the required setback of a building
hereafter erected shall be the same as or greater than the average setback of
existing buildings in the same block on the same side of the street.
      (2)   The front setback of a proposed building may be decreased in depth
to the average formed by the alignment of existing buildings within 100 feet on
each side of the proposed building, and within the same block, if such
alignment of existing buildings is less than the front setback requirement for
the district in which located.
   (B)   Rear setback. When a rear setback abuts service drive, a structure
shall not be erected closer than 25 feet from the centerline of said service
drive.
   (C)   Projections. No principal building, and no part of a principal
building shall be erected within, or shall project into, the required front,
side, or rear setback of a lot, except cornices, eaves and gutters, steps
chimneys or similar appurtenances, which may project into setback areas provide
that the projection is not more than 18 inches. However, covered porches,
stoops, patios and attached carports, whether enclosed or unenclosed shall be
considered as part of the principal building and shall not project into a
required setback area.
   (D)   Storage of material in yards. The outdoor display or storage of any
equipment or materials, other than incidental lawn ornaments, furniture, play
equipment, and vehicles parked on an all-weather surface, shall not be
permitted in any setback area required by this chapter.
(Ord. 171, passed 1-18-1972, Art. V, § 517; Ord. 1997-04, passed 3-18-1997)
§ 27-518 STATUS OF SUBDIVISION OR LAND DEVELOPMENT PLAN.
   (A)   From the time an application for approval of a subdivision or land
development plan, whether preliminary or final, is duly filed as provided in
the subdivision and land development ordinance (Chapter 22 of this code of
ordinances), and while such application is pending approval or disapproval, no
enactment or amendment of the zoning regulations shall affect the decision on
such applications adversely to the applicant and the applicant shall be
entitled to a decision in accordance with the provision of the zoning
regulations as it stood at the time the application was duly filed. In
addition, when a preliminary application has been duly approved, the applicant
shall be entitled to final approval in accordance with the terms of the
approved preliminary application as hereinafter provided. However, if an
application is properly and finally denied, any subsequent application shall be
subject to the intervening change in the zoning regulations.
   (B)   When a preliminary or final subdivision or land development plan has
been approved, or approved subject to conditions acceptable to the applicant,
no subsequent enactment or amendment in the zoning regulations shall be applied
to affect adversely the right of the applicant to commence and to complete any
aspect of the approved development in accordance with the terms of such
approval within five years from such approval. Where final approval is preceded
by preliminary approval, the five-year period shall be counted from the date of
the preliminary approval.
(Ord. 171, passed 1-18-1972, Art. V, § 518; Ord. 1997-04, passed 3-18-1997)
PART 6: AMENDMENTS, VALIDITY AND ENACTMENT
Section
   
27-601   Powers and duties; general
   
27-602   Public hearings
   
27-603   Variances
   
27-604   Special exceptions
§ 27-601 POWERS AND DUTIES; GENERAL.
   (A)   Membership of Board.
      (1)   The membership of the Board shall, upon the determination of the
Borough Council, consist of either three or five residents of the borough
appointed by resolution of the Borough Council. The terms of office of a three-
member board shall be three years and shall be so fixed that the term of office
of one member shall expire each year.
      (2)   The terms of office of a five-member board shall be five years and
shall be so fixed that the term of office of one member shall expire each year.
If a three-member board is changed to a five-member board, the members of the
existing three-member board shall continue in office until his or her term of
office would expire under prior law. The Borough Council shall appoint two
additional members to the Board with terms scheduled to expire in accordance
with the provisions of this subsection (A). The Board shall promptly notify the
Borough Council of any vacancies which occur. Appointments to fill vacancies
shall be only for the unexpired portion of the term. Members of the Board shall
hold no other office in the borough.
      (3)   The Borough Council may appoint by resolution at least one but not
more than three residents of the borough to serve as alternate members of the
Board. The term of office of an alternate member shall be three years.
      (4)   When seated pursuant to the provision of subsection (B) below, an
alternate shall be entitled to participate in all proceedings and discussions
of the Board of the same and full extent as provided by law for Board members,
including specifically the right to cast a vote as a voting member during the
proceedings, and shall have all the powers and duties set forth in this Part
and as otherwise provided by law.
      (5)   Alternates shall hold no other office in the borough. Any alternate
may participate in any proceeding or discussion of the Board but shall not be
entitled to vote as a member of the Board nor be compensated pursuant to § 907
of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as reenacted and amended,
being 53 P.S. §§ 10101 et seq. unless designated as a voting alternative member
pursuant to subsection (B) below.
   (B)   Organization of Board. The Board shall elect from its own membership
its officers, who shall serve annual terms as such and may succeed themselves.
For the conduct of any hearing and the taking of any action, a quorum shall be
not less than a majority of all the members of the Board, bur the Board may
appoint a Hearing Officer for its own membership to conduct any hearing on its
behalf and the parties may waive further action by the Board as provided in §
27-602. If, by reason of absence or disqualification of a member, a quorum is
not reached, the Chairperson of the Board shall designate as many alternate
members of the Board to sit on the Board as may be needed to provide a quorum.
Any alternate member of the Board shall continue to serve on the Board in all
proceedings involving the matter or case for which the alternate was initially
appointed until the Board has made a final determination of the matter or case.
Designation of an alternative pursuant to this subsection (B) shall be made on
a case-by-case basis in rotation according to declining seniority among all
alternates. The Board may make, alter and rescind rules and forms for its
procedure, consistent with ordinances of the municipality and laws of the
Commonwealth. The Board shall keep full public records of its business, which
records shall be the property of the borough and shall submit a report of its
activities to the Borough Council as requested by the Borough Council.
   (C)   Powers. The Zoning Hearing Board shall have exclusive jurisdiction to
hear and render final decisions in the following matters:
      (1)   Substantive challenges to the validity of any land use ordinance
except those brought before the Borough Council pursuant to §§ 609.1 and 916.1
(a)(2) of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as reenacted and
amended;
      (2)   Challenges to the validity of a land use ordinance raising
procedural questions or alleged defects in the process of enactment or adoption
which challenges shall be raised by an appeal taken within 30 days after the
effective date of said ordinance;
      (3)   Appeals from the determination of the Zoning Officer, including,
but not limited to, the granting or denial of any permit, or failure to act on
the application therefor; the issuance of any cease and desist order or the
registration or refusal to register any nonconforming use, structure or lot;
      (4)   Appeals from a determination by the Borough Engineer or the Zoning
Officer with reference to the administration of any floodplain or flood hazard
ordinance or such provisions within a land use ordinance;
      (5)   Applications for variance from the terms of the zoning ordinance
and flood hazard ordinance or such provisions within a land use ordinance,
pursuant to §
27-603;
      (6)   Applications for special exceptions under the zoning ordinance or
floodplain or flood hazard ordinance or such provision within a land use
ordinance, pursuant to §
27-604;
      (7)   Appeals from the determination of any officer or agency charged
with the administration of any performance density provision of the zoning
ordinance;
      (8)   Appeals from the Zoning Officer’s determination under § 916.2,
Procedure to Obtain Preliminary Opinion, of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, as reenacted and amended; and
      (9)   Appeals from the determination of the Zoning Officer or Borough
Engineer in the administration of any land use ordinance or provision thereof
with reference to sedimentation and erosion control and stormwater management
insofar as the same related to development not involving subdivision and land
development or planned residential development applications.
   (D)   Board calendar. Each application or appeal, filed with the borough in
the proper form and containing the required data, must be numbered serially and
be placed upon the calendar of the Board by the Secretary. Applications and
appeals must be assigned for hearing in the order in which they appear on the
calendar. However, for good reason, the Board may order the advance of an
application or appeal. A hearing must be held within 60 days from the date of
the appeal or application is filed, unless the applicant has agreed, in
writing, to the extension of time.
(Ord. 171, passed 1-18-1972; Ord. 1993-2, passed 2-16-1993; Ord. 1997-04,
passed 3-18-1997)
§ 27-602 PUBLIC HEARINGS.
   (A)   Notice: conduct of meetings. Public notice shall be given and written
notice shall be given to the applicant, the Zoning Officer, to each property
owner within 200 feet of the property involved and to any person who, at least
two weeks prior to the scheduled public hearing, has made request for the same.
The Borough Secretary, upon notification by the Secretary of the Zoning Hearing
Board, shall give written notice by personal delivery or by regular mail or
said persons at their last known address at least 14 days, but not more than 30
days, prior to the date of hearing, stating the time and place of the hearing
and the particular nature of the matter to be considered at the hearing. If
mailed, the notice shall be deemed to be given on the date mailed. In addition
to the written notice provided herein, written notice of the hearing shall be
conspicuously posted on the affected tract of land at least one week prior to
the hearing.
      (1)   The Borough Council may prescribe reasonable fees with respect to
hearings before the Zoning Hearing Board. Fees for said hearings may include
compensation of the Secretary and members of the Zoning Hearing Board, notice
and advertising costs and necessary administrative overhead connected with the
hearing. The costs, however, shall not include legal expenses of the Zoning
Hearing Board, expense for engineering, architectural or other technical
consultants or expert witness costs.
      (2)   The hearings shall be conducted by the Board or the Board may
appoint any member as a Hearing Officer. The decision, or, where no decision is
called for, the findings shall be made by the Board; however, the appellant or
the applicant, as the case may be, in addition to the borough, may, prior to
the decision of the hearing, waiver decision or findings by the Board and
accept the decision of the Hearing Officer as final.
      (3)   Formal rules of evidence shall not apply, but irrelevant,
immaterial or unduly repetitious evidence may be excluded.
      (4)   The Board or Hearing Officer shall not communicate, directly or
indirectly, with any party or his or her representatives in connection with any
issue involved except upon notice and opportunity for all parties to
participate; shall not take notice of any communication, reports, staff
memoranda or other materials except advice from their solicitor, unless the
parties are afforded an opportunity to contest the material so noticed; and
shall not inspect the site or its surroundings with any party or his or her
representative unless all parties are given an opportunity to be present.
   (B)   Representation; statements.
      (1)   Parties to the hearings shall be the borough, any person affected
by the application who has made timely appearance of record before the Board,
and any other person, including civic or community organizations permitted to
appear by the Board. The Board shall have the power to require that all persons
who wish to be considered parties enter appearances in writing on forms
provided by the Board for that purpose. The parties shall have the right to be
represented by counsel and shall be afforded the opportunity to respond and
present evidence and argument and cross-examine adverse witnesses on all
relevant issues.
      (2)   Statements are to be made in the following order or as the
Chairperson may direct:
         (a)   Applicant or appellant;
         (b)   Zoning Officer and other officials; and
         (c)   Any private citizen.
      (3)   The applicant or appellant must be given an opportunity for
rebuttal.
   (C)   Witnesses. The Chairperson or Acting Chairperson of the Board or the
Hearing Officer presiding shall have power to administer oaths and issue
subpoenas to compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of relevant
documents and papers, including witnesses and documents requested by the
parties.
   (D)   Decision procedure. The Board or the Hearing Officer, as the case may
be, shall render a written decision or, when no decision is called for, make
written findings on the application within 45 days after the hearing before the
Board or Hearing Officer. Where the application is contested or denied, each
decision shall be accompanied by findings of fact and conclusions based thereon
together with the reasons therefor. Conclusions based on any provisions of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code or of any ordinance, rule or
regulation shall contain a reference to the provision relied on and the reasons
why the conclusion is deemed appropriate in the light of the facts found. If
the hearing is conducted by a Hearing Officer, and there is no stipulation that
his or her decision of findings is final, the Board shall make his or her
report and recommendations available to the parties within 45 days and the
parties shall be entitled to make written representations thereon to the Board
prior to final decision or entry of findings, and the Board’s decision shall be
entered no later than 30 days after the report of the Hearing Officer. Where
the Board fails to render the decision within the period required by this
subsection (D), or fails to hold the required hearing within 60 days from the
date the appeal or application is filed with the borough, the decision shall be
deemed to have been rendered in favor of the applicant, unless the applicant
has agreed in writing or on the record to an extension of time. When a decision
has been rendered in favor of the applicant because of the failure of the Board
to meet or render a decision as herein-above provided, the Board shall give
public notice of said decision within ten days from the last day it could have
met to render a decision in the same manner as provided in subsection (D)(1)
below. Nothing in this subsection (D) shall prejudice the right of any party
opposing the application to appeal the decision to a court of competent
jurisdiction.
      (1)   A copy of the final decision or, where no decision is called for,
of the findings, shall be delivered to the applicant personally or mailed to
him or her not later than the day following its date. To all other persons who
have filed their name and address with the Board not later than the last day of
the hearing, the Board shall provide by mail or otherwise, brief notice of the
decision or findings and a statement of the place at which the full decision or
findings may be examined.
      (2)   Whenever the Board imposes a condition or conditions with respect
to the granting of an application or appeal, this condition must be stated in
the order of the Board and in the permit issued pursuant to the order by the
Zoning Officer. This permit remains valid only as long as the conditions or
conditions upon which it is granted or the conditions imposed by this chapter
are adhered to.
   (E)   Records. The Board or the Hearing Officer, as the case may be, shall
keep a stenographic record of the proceedings. The appearance fee for a
stenographer shall be shared equally by the applicant and the Board. The cost
of the original transcript shall be paid by the Board if the transcript is
ordered by the Board or Hearing Officer, or shall be paid by the person
appealing from the decision of the Board if such appeal is made, and in either
event the cost of additional copies shall be paid by the person requesting such
copy or copies. In other cases, the party requesting the original transcript
shall bear the cost thereof.
(Ord. 171, passed 1-18-1972; Ord. 1993-2, passed 2-16-1993; Ord. 1997-04,
passed 3-18-1997)
§ 27-603 VARIANCES.
   (A)   Filing of variance.
      (1)   An application may be made to the Zoning Hearing Board for a
variance where it is alleged that the provisions of this chapter inflict
unnecessary hardship upon the applicant. The application must be on a form
provided for that purpose by the Zoning Officer. It must be filed with the
Board and copies given to the Zoning Officer and Borough Planning Commission.
      (2)   The applicant must provide all the information requested on the
form, together with any other information and data that may be required to
advise the Board of the variance, whether such information is called for by the
official form or not.
      (3)   Unless otherwise specified or extended by the Board, a variance
authorized by it expires if the applicant fails to obtain a building permit or
use certificate within six months from the date of the authorization of the
variance.
   (B)   Referral to Planning Commission. All applications for a variance shall
be referred to the Planning Commission for a report.
   (C)   Standards for variance. Where there is unnecessary hardship, the Board
may grant a variance in the application of the provisions of this chapter
provided the following findings are made where relevant in a given case:
      (1)   There are unique physical circumstances or conditions, including
irregularity, narrowness or shallowness of lot size or shape, or exceptional
topographical or other physical conditions peculiar to the particular property,
and that the unnecessary hardship is due to such condition and not the
circumstances or conditions generally created by the provisions of this chapter
in the neighborhood or zone in which the property is located;
      (2)   Because of such physical circumstances or conditions, there is no
possibility that the property can be developed in strict conformity with the
provisions of this chapter and that the authorization of a variance is
therefore necessary to enable the reasonable use of the property;
      (3)   The unnecessary hardship has not been created by the appellant;
      (4)   The variance, if authorized, will not alter the essential character
of the neighborhood or zone in which the property is located, nor substantially
or permanently impair the appropriate use or development of adjacent property,
nor be detrimental to the public welfare; and
      (5)   The variance, if authorized, will represent the minimum variance
that will afford relief and will represent the least modification possible of
the regulation in issue.
   (D)   Conditions. In granting any variance, the Board may attach such
reasonable conditions and safeguards as it may deem necessary to implement the
purposes of this chapter.
(Ord. 171, passed 1-18-1972; Ord. 1993-2, passed 2-16-1993; Ord. 1997-04,
passed 3-18-1997)
§ 27-604 SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   Filing of special exceptions.
      (1)   For any use permitted by special exception, a special exception
must be obtained from the Zoning Hearing Board.
      (2)   In addition to the in formation required on the special exception
and building permit applications, the following information must be provided
with the application:
         (a)   Ground floor plans and elevations of proposed structures;
         (b)   Names and addresses of adjoining owners; and
         (c)   Unless otherwise specified or extended by the Zoning Hearing
Board, a special exception authorized by the Board expires if the applicant
fails to obtain, where required to do so, a building permit or use certificate
within six months of the date of the authorization of the special exception.
   (B)   Temporary special exceptions.
      (1)   A temporary special exception must be obtained from the Zoning
Hearing Board for any nonconformity which is or will be seasonal or is or will
be in the public interest.
      (2)   The Zoning Hearing Board may grant a temporary special exception
for a nonconforming use or structure, existing or new, which:
         (a)   Is beneficial to the public health or general welfare;
         (b)   Is necessary to promote the proper development of the community;
or
         (c)   Is seasonal in nature.
      (3)   (a)   The temporary special exception may be issued for a period
not exceeding one year, and may be renewed for an aggregate period not
exceeding three years.
         (b)   The nonconforming structure or use must be completely removed
upon the expiration of the special exception without cost to the borough.
   (C)   Referral to Planning Commission. All applications for a special
exception shall be referred to the Borough Planning Commission for a report.
   (D)   Conditions. The Zoning Hearing Board, in passing upon special
exception applications, may attach conditions considered necessary to protect
the public welfare and the comprehensive plan, including conditions which are
more restrictive than those established for other uses in the same zone.
   (E)   Application of extent-of-use regulations.
      (1)   The extent-of-use regulations as set forth in this chapter must be
followed by the Zoning Hearing Board.
      (2)   Where no extent-of-use regulations are set forth for the particular
use, the Board must impose extent-of-use requirements as necessary to protect
the public welfare and the comprehensive plan.
   (F)   General standards.
      (1)   A special exception may be granted when the Zoning Hearing Board
finds from a preponderance of the evidence produced at the hearing that:
         (a)   The proposed use, including its nature, intensity and location,
is in harmony with the orderly and appropriate development of the zone;
         (b)   Adequate water supply, sewage disposal, storm drainage and fire
and police protection are or can be provided for the use;
         (c)   The use of adjacent land and buildings will not be discouraged
and the value of adjacent land and buildings will not be impaired by the
location, nature and height of buildings, walls and fences;
         (d)   The use will have proper location with respect to existing or
future streets giving access to it, and will not create traffic congestion or
cause industrial or commercial traffic to use residential streets; and
         (e)   The specific standards set forth for each particular use of
which a special exception may be granted have been met.
      (2)   The applicant for a special exception shall have the burden of
proof, which shall include the burden of going forward with the evidence and
the burden of persuasion on all questions of fact which are to be determined by
the Zoning Hearing Board.
   (G)   Special standards. In addition to the general standards for all
special exceptions as contained in subsection (F) above the specific standards
for particular uses as listed in Part 5 must be met prior to the granting of a
special exception.
(Ord. 171, passed 1-18-1972; Ord. 1993-2, passed 2-16-1993; Ord. 1997-04,
passed 3-18-1997)
PART 7: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Section
   
27-701   Permits
   
27-702   Enforcement; Zoning Officer
   
27-703   Conditional uses
   
27-704   Amendments
   
27-705   Fees
   
27-706   Appeals
   
27-707   Causes of action
   
27-708   Enforcement remedies
§ 27-701 PERMITS.
   (A)   Building permits.
      (1)   A building permit, which must be obtained from the Zoning Officer,
shall be required for the erection, enlargement, repair, alteration, moving or
demolition of any structure, except temporary signs, as set forth in this
chapter. Work on the proposed construction and/or development shall begin with
six months and shall be completed within 12 months after the date of issuance
of the building permit or the permit shall expire unless a time extension is
granted, in writing, by the Zoning Officer. Time extensions shall be granted
only if a written request is submitted by the applicant which sets forth
sufficient and reasonable cause for the Zoning Officer to approve such a
request. The permit application must be accompanied by a site plan showing as
necessary to demonstrate conformity to this chapter the following information:
         (a)   Lot. The location and dimensions of the lot;
         (b)   Streets. Names and widths of abutting streets and highways;
         (c)   Structures and yards. Locations, dimensions and uses of existing
and proposed structures and yards on the lot and, as practical, of any existing
structures within 100 feet of the proposed structures but off the lot; and
         (d)   Improvements. Proposed off-street parking and loading areas,
access drives and walks. Proposed sewage disposal system.
      (2)   For lots less than one-half acre, the site plan must be at the
scale of one inch equals 20 feet; for larger lots, the site plan must be at
scale of one inch equals 40 feet. The north point must be shown on all site
plans.
   (B)   Use certificates. A use certificate, certifying compliance with this
chapter, must be obtained from the Zoning Officer for any new building or
structure as set forth below or for any change of use of a building, structure
or land as set forth below before such new building, structure or use or change
of use is occupied or established:
      (1)   Use of a building or structure erected, structurally altered or
extended, or moved after effective date of this chapter;
      (2)   Use of vacant land, except for agricultural purposes;
      (3)   Any change in a conforming use of a building, structure or land;
      (4)   Any change from a nonconforming use of a building, structure or
land to a conforming use;
      (5)   Any change in the use of a building, structure or land from that
permitted by any variance of the Zoning Hearing Board; and
      (6)   The applications for a use certificate must include a statement of
the intended use and any existing use of the building, structure or land. No
certificate shall be issued for any premises used for human occupancy not
connected to and served by the public water and sanitary sewer systems of the
borough, or not to be so served upon such occupancy. The certificate continues
in effect as long as the use of the building, structure or land for which it is
granted conforms with this chapter.
(Ord. 171, passed 1-18-1972; Ord. 1993-2, passed 2-16-1993; Ord. 1997-04,
passed 3-18-1997)
§ 27-702 ENFORCEMENT; ZONING OFFICER.
   (A)   Appointment and powers. For the administration of this chapter, a
Zoning Officer, who may not hold any elective office in the borough, shall be
appointed by the Borough Council. The Zoning Officer shall meet qualifications
established by the borough and shall be able to demonstrate to the satisfaction
of the borough a working knowledge of municipal zoning. The Zoning Officer
shall administer this chapter in accordance with its literal terms, and shall
not have the power to permit any construction or any use or change of use which
does not conform to this chapter. The Zoning Officer is the enforcement officer
for this chapter. He or she issued all building permits, use certificates, and
at direction of the Zoning Hearing Board, special exceptions and variances. The
Zoning Officer may identify and register nonconforming uses and nonconforming
structures together with the reasons why they were identified as
nonconformities. The Zoning Officer may conduct inspections and surveys to
determine compliance or noncompliance with the terms of this chapter with
consent of the owner.
   (B)   Forms. The Zoning Officer must provide a form or forms approved by the
Borough Solicitor for:
      (1)   Building permits;
      (2)   Special exceptions;
      (3)   Use certificates;
      (4)   Appeals;
      (5)   Variances; and
      (6)   Registration of nonconforming uses and nonconforming buildings or
structures.
   (C)   Transmittal of papers. Upon receipt of an application for a special
exception, variance or a notice of appeal, the Zoning Officer must transmit to
the Secretary of the Zoning Hearing Board and to the Borough Planning
Commission, copies of all papers constituting the record upon the special
exception, variance or appeal.
   (D)   Action on building permits. Within 15 days, except for holidays, after
receipt of an application for a building permit, the Zoning Officer must grant
or refuse the permit. If the application conforms to the applicable
requirements of the building permit ordinance and this chapter, the Zoning
Officer must grant a permit. If the permit is not granted, the Zoning Officer
must state in writing the grounds for refusal.
   (E)   Action on use certificates. Within 15 days, except holidays, after
receipt of an application for a use certificate, the Zoning Officer must grant
or refuse the certificate. If the specifications and intended use conform in
all respects with the provisions of this chapter, the Zoning Officer must issue
a certificate to that effect. Otherwise, he or she must state in writing the
grounds for refusal.
   (F)   Revoking permits/approvals. The Zoning Officer shall revoke a permit
or approval issued under the provisions of this chapter in the case of any
false statement or misrepresentation of a fact in an application or on the
plans on which the permit or approval was based. Any permit issued in error
shall in no case be construed as waiving any provision of this chapter and such
permit may be revoked.
   (G)   Civil enforcement proceedings. Upon determining that a violation of
any of the provisions of this chapter exists, the Zoning Officer may initiate
civil enforcement proceedings. To initiate a civil enforcement proceeding, the
Zoning Officer must send an enforcement notice to the owner of record of the
parcel on which the violation has occurred, to any person who has filed a
written request to receive enforcement notices regarding that parcel, and to
any other person requested in writing by the owner of record. An enforcement
notice shall state at least the following:
      (1)   The name of the owner of record and any other person against whom
the borough intends to take action;
      (2)   The location of the property in violation;
      (3)   The specific violation with a description of the requirements which
have not been met, citing in each instance the applicable provision(s) of this
chapter;
      (4)   Steps for compliance must be commenced within 15 days of the date
of the notice and all steps for compliance must be completed within 60 days of
the date of the notice;
      (5)   The recipient of the notice has the right to appeal to the Zoning
Hearing Board within 15 days of the date of this notice, in which case such
appeal shall be heard in accordance with the procedures set forth in § 27-602
of this chapter; and
      (6)   Failure to comply with the notice within the time specified, unless
extended by appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board, constitutes a violation, and
sanctions may be imposed, including judgment of $500 per day, court costs,
attorney fees, sheriff’s sale or judicial sale of your property in the event of
nonpayment of such judgment, and equitable relief and injunction.
   (H)   Records.
      (1)   The Zoning Officer must keep record of:
         (a)   All applications for building permits, use certificates, special
exceptions and variances and all actions taken on them, together with any
conditions imposed by the Zoning Hearing Board;
         (b)   All complaints of violations of provisions of this chapter and
the action taken on them;
         (c)   All plans submitted; and
         (d)   Registered nonconforming uses and nonconforming buildings and
structures.
      (2)   All such records and plans shall be available for public
inspection.
   (I)   Reports. At intervals of not greater than six months, the Zoning
Officer must report to the Borough Council:
      (1)   The number of building permits and use certificates issued; and
      (2)   The number of complaints of violations received and the action
taken on these complaints.
   (J)   Other actions. Nothing herein contained shall restrict, nor shall in
any manner be construed to restrict, the borough from instituting any
appropriate action or proceeding, in equity or at law, or otherwise, to
prevent, restrain, correct or abate, or seek damages, costs, fees and expenses
for the same, for any violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 171, passed 1-18-1972; Ord. 1993-2, passed 2-16-1993; Ord. 1997-04,
passed 3-18-1997)
§ 27-703 CONDITIONAL USES.
   (A)   Filing of conditional uses. For any use permitted by conditional use,
approval for such use must be obtained from the Borough Council. In addition to
the information required on the building permit application, the conditional
use application must show:
      (1)   Ground floor plans and elevations of proposed structures;
      (2)   Names and addresses of adjoining owners; and
      (3)   Unless otherwise specified or extended by the Borough Council, a
conditional use authorized by the Council expires if the applicant fails to
obtain, where required to do so, a building permit or use certificate within
six months of the date of the authorization of the conditional use.
   (B)   Referral to Planning Commission. All applications for a conditional
use shall be referred to the Borough Planning Commission for a report, which
shall be considered at the hearing for said use.
   (C)   Conditions. The Borough Council, in considering conditional use
applications, may attach conditions considered necessary to protect the public
welfare and the comprehensive plan, including conditions which are more
restrictive than those established for other uses in the same district if
Borough Council deems such to be appropriate.
   (D)   Application of specific regulations. Any specific regulations set
forth for a particular conditional use must be followed by Borough Council.
Where no specific regulations are set forth for a particular use, the Borough
Council must impose requirements as necessary to protect the public welfare and
the comprehensive plan.
   (E)   General standards.
      (1)   A conditional use may be granted when the Borough Council finds
from a preponderance of evidence produced at the hearing that:
         (a)   The proposed use, including its nature, intensity and location,
is in harmony with the orderly and appropriate development of the district in
which located;
         (b)   Adequate water supply, sewage disposal, storm drainage, and fire
and police protection are or can be provided for the use;
         (c)   The use of adjacent land and buildings will not be discouraged
and the value of adjacent land will not be impaired by the location, nature and
height of buildings, walls and fences;
         (d)   The use will have proper location with respect to existing and
future streets giving access to it and will not create traffic congestion or
cause industrial or commercial traffic to use residential streets; and
         (e)   The specific standards set forth for each particular conditional
use for which approval may be granted have been satisfied.
      (2)   The applicant for a conditional use shall have the burden of proof,
which shall include the burden of going forward with the evidence and the
burden of persuasion on all questions of fact which are to be determined by the
Borough Council.
   (F)   Public hearings.
      (1)   A public hearing shall be held within 60 days of the applicant’s
request, unless the applicant has agreed in writing to an extension of time.
      (2)   The public hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the
requirements set forth in §
27-602, including subsections (A) through (E) above, except that any reference
made therein to the “Zoning Hearing Board” or “Board” shall be changed to the
“Borough Council” or “Council”.
(Ord. 171, passed 1-18-1972; Ord. 1993-2, passed 2-16-1993; Ord. 1997-04,
passed 3-18-1997)
§ 27-704 AMENDMENTS.
   (A)   Generally. The Borough Council may, from time to time, amend,
supplement or repeal any of the regulations and provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   Public hearing(s).
      (1)   Before voting on the enactment of any amendment, the Borough
Council shall hold a public hearing thereon, pursuant to public notice. In the
case of an amendment other than that prepared by the Borough Planning
Commission, the Borough Council shall submit each such amendment to the Borough
Planning Commission at least 30 days prior to the hearing on such proposed
amendment to provide the Planning Commission an opportunity to submit
recommendations.
      (2)   If after any public hearing held upon an amendment, the proposed
amendment is changed substantially, or is revised to include land previously
not affected by it, the Borough Council shall hold another public hearing,
pursuant to public notice, before proceeding to vote on the amendment.
   (C)   County Planning Commission review. At least 30 days prior to the
hearing on any amendment by the Borough Council, the borough shall submit the
proposed amendment to the County Planning Commission for recommendations.
   (D)   Amendments involving zoning map changes. If the proposed amendment
involves a zoning map change, notice of the required public hearing shall be
conspicuously posted by the borough along the perimeter of the tract to notify
potentially interested citizens. The affected tract or area shall be posted at
least one week prior to the date of the hearing.
   (E)   Enactment of amendments.
      (1)   (a)   Proposed amendments shall not be enacted unless notice of
proposed enactment is given in the manner set forth in this section, and shall
include the time and place of the meeting at which passage will be considered,
a reference to a place within the borough where copies of the proposed
amendment may be examined without charge or obtained for a charge not greater
than the cost thereof. The Borough Council shall publish the proposed amendment
once in one newspaper of general circulation in the borough not more than 60
days nor less than seven days prior to passage.
         (b)   Publication of the proposed amendment shall include either a
full text thereof or the title and a brief summary, prepared by the Borough
Solicitor and setting forth all the provisions in reasonable detail.
      (2)   If the full text is not advertised, then:
         (a)   A copy thereof shall be supplied to the newspaper in general
circulation in the borough at the time the public notice is published;
         (b)   An attested copy of the proposed ordinance shall be filed by the
county law library or other county offices designated by the County
Commissioners, who may impose a fee no greater than that necessary to cover the
actual costs of storing the ordinance;
         (c)   In the event substantial amendments are made in the proposed
amendment, before voting upon enactment, the borough shall, at least the ten
days prior to enactment, re-advertise in one newspaper of general circulation
in the borough, a brief summary setting forth all the provisions in reasonable
detail together with a summary of the amendments; and
         (d)   Within 30 days after enactment of any amendment to the zoning
ordinance, a copy of the amendment shall be forwarded to the County Planning
Commission.
   (F)   Landowner curative amendments. A landowner who desires to challenge on
substantive grounds the validity of any ordinance or map or any provision
thereof, which prohibits or restricts the use or development of land in which
he or she has an interest may submit a curative amendment to the Borough
Council with a written request that his or her challenge and proposed amendment
be heard and decided as provided for, and in accordance with the procedures set
forth in § 609.1 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as reenacted
and amended, being 53 P.S. §§ 10101 et seq.
   (G)   Municipal curative amendments. If the borough determines that its
zoning ordinance or any portion thereof is substantially invalid, the borough
shall declare by formal action, its zoning ordinance or portions thereof
substantially invalid and propose to prepare a curative amendment to overcome
such invalidity as provided for, and in accordance with the procedures set
forth in, § 609.2 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as
reenacted and amended.
(Ord. 171, passed 1-18-1972; Ord. 1993-2, passed 2-16-1993; Ord. 1997-04,
passed 3-18-1997)
§ 27-705 FEES.
   The Borough Council shall by resolution establish fees for all applications,
permits or appeals provided for by this chapter to defray the costs of
advertising; mailing notices; and processing, inspecting and copying
applications, permits and use certificates. The fee schedule shall be available
at the borough office for inspection.
(Ord. 171, passed 1-18-1972; Ord. 1993-2, passed 2-16-1993; Ord. 1997-04,
passed 3-18-1997)
§ 27-706 APPEALS.
   Any person aggrieved or affected by provision of this chapter or decision of
the Zoning Officer, Borough Engineer, Zoning Hearing Board or Borough Council
may appeal in the manner set forth in either Article IX or X-A of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as reenacted and amended, being 53
P.S. §§ 10101 et seq., whichever is applicable.
(Ord. 171, passed 1-18-1972; Ord. 1993-2, passed 2-16-1993; Ord. 1997-04,
passed 3-18-1997)
§ 27-707 CAUSES OF ACTION.
   In case any building, structure, landscaping or land is, or is proposed to
be, erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, converted, maintained or used
in violation of this chapter, the Borough Council or, with approval of the
Borough Council, an officer of the borough, or any aggrieved owner or tenant of
real property who shows that his or her property or person will be
substantially affected by the alleged violation, in addition to any other
remedies or proceedings, may institute any appropriate action or proceeding to
prevent, restrain, correct or abate such building, structure, landscaping or
land, or to prevent, in or about such premises, any act, conduct, business or
use constituting a violation. When any such action is instituted by a landowner
or tenant, notice of that action shall be served upon the Borough Council at
least 30 days prior to the time the action is begun by serving a copy of the
complaint on the borough. No such action may be maintained until such notice
has been given.
(Ord. 171, passed 1-18-1972; Ord. 1993-2, passed 2-16-1993; Ord. 1997-04,
passed 3-18-1997)
§ 27-708 ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES.
   (A)   Any person, partnership, corporation or other entity who or which has
violated or permitted the violation of the provisions of this chapter shall
upon being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced by
the borough, pay a judgment of not more than $500 plus all court costs,
including reasonable attorney fees incurred by the borough as a result thereof.
No judgment shall commence or be imposed, levied or payable until the date of
the determination of a violation by the magisterial district judge. If the
defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the borough may enforce
the judgment pursuant to the applicable rules of civil procedure. Each day that
a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation, unless the
magisterial district judge determining that there has been a violation further
determines that there was a good faith basis for the person, partnership or
corporation violating this chapter to have believed that there was no such
violation, in which event there shall be deemed to have been only one such
violation until the fifth day following the date of the determination of a
violation by the magisterial district judge and thereafter each day that a
violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
   (B)   All judgments, costs and reasonable attorney fees collected for the
violation of this chapter shall be paid over to the borough.
(Ord. 171, passed 1-18-1972; Ord. 1993-2, passed 2-16-1993; Ord. 1997-04,
passed 3-18-1997)
PART 8: INTERPRETATION, VALIDITY, REPEALER AND EFFECTIVE DATE
Section
   
27-801   Interpretation
   
27-802   Validity
   
27-803   Repealer
   
27-804   Effective date
§ 27-801 INTERPRETATION.
   The provisions of this chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements to
meet the purposes of this chapter. When provisions of this chapter impose
greater restrictions than those of any statute, other ordinance or regulations,
the provisions of this chapter shall prevail. When provisions of any statute,
other ordinance or regulation impose greater restrictions than those of this
chapter, the provisions of such statute, ordinance or regulation shall prevail.
(Ord. 171, passed 1-18-1972; Ord. 1993-2, passed 2-16-1993; Ord. 1997-04,
passed 3-18-1997)
§ 27-802 VALIDITY.
   If any section, clause, provision or portion of this chapter shall be held
invalid or unconstitutional by a recognized court of the Commonwealth, such
decision shall not affect the legality of the remaining sections, clauses,
provisions or portions of this chapter.
(Ord. 171, passed 1-18-1972; Ord. 1993-2, passed 2-16-1993; Ord. 1997-04,
passed 3-18-1997)
§ 27-803 REPEALER.
   All borough ordinances or parts thereof in conflict with this chapter or
inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter are hereby repealed to the
extent necessary to give this chapter full force and effect.
(Ord. 171, passed 1-18-1972; Ord. 1993-2, passed 2-16-1993; Ord. 1997-04,
passed 3-18-1997)
§ 27-804 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   The passage of this chapter amending in part the borough’s zoning ordinance,
Ordinance 171, as amended, enacted January 18, 1972, shall in no way be deemed
to invalidate or repeal any provisions of said ordinance, except as
specifically provided herein.
(Ord. 171, passed 1-18-1972; Ord. 1993-2, passed 2-16-1993)
PART 9: ZONING MAP AMENDMENTS
Section
   
27-901   Zoning map amendments
§ 27-901 ZONING MAP AMENDMENTS.
   (A)   The following tax parcels, in their entireties, are to be within the
M-C District, which District adjoins certain portions of certain lands:
      Tax man Parcels 1/62, 1/62B, 1/62E and 1/62F, said subject lands being
located westwardly from South Second Street and Franklin Street in the Borough
of Dillsburg.
   (B)   The Dillsburg Borough Zoning Map is hereby amended to designate the
following area as included within the MU-C Mixed Use Center District:
      All that area within the Borough of Dillsburg, York County, Pennsylvania,
beginning at the intersection of the easterly right-of-way line of U.S. Route
15 with the westerly right-of-way line of North Baltimore Street (Pennsylvania
Route 74); thence, southwesterly along the easterly right-of-way line of U.S.
Route 15 to its intersection with the easterly right-of-way line of North Third
Street; thence, southeasterly along the easterly right-of-way line of North
Third Street to its intersection with the southerly right-of-way line of West
Harrisburg Street; thence, southeasterly and easterly along the southerly
right-of-way line of West Harrisburg Street to its intersection with the
easterly right-of-way line of Second Street; thence, northerly along the
easterly right-of-way line of North Second Street 86 feet plus/minus to its
intersection with the most southerly line of Tax Parcel 2-42; thence, easterly
along said line of Tax Parcel 2-42, 36 feet plus/minus; thence, northerly along
the line between Tax Parcel 2-42 to the west and Tax Parcel 2-39A to the east
15 feet plus/minus; thence, eastwardly on the line between Tax Parcel 2-42 to
the north and Tax Parcels 2-39A, 2-39, and 2-38 to the south 83 feet plus/
minus; thence, northerly along the line between Tax Parcel 2-42 to the west and
Tax Parcel 2-37 to the east 97 feet plus/minus to the southerly right-of-way
line of an unnamed alley; thence, eastwardly along the southerly right-of-way
line of the unnamed alley 82 feet plus/minus to the easterly right-of-way line
of a second unnamed alley; thence, northerly along the easterly right-of-way
line of the second unnamed alley 1,140 feet plus/minus to a point at the
southerly most line of Tax Parcel 2-2B, said point being southwardly 42 feet
plus/minus from the northerly line of Tax Parcel 2-3; thence, westwardly along
the line between Tax Parcel 2-2B to the north and Tax Parcel 2-19 to the south
67 feet plus/minus; thence, northerly on the line between Tax Parcel 2-2B to
the east and Tax Parcel 22 to the west 92 feet plus/minus to a point; thence,
easterly along the line between Tax Parcel 2-2B to the south and Tax Parcel 2-
2 to the north 67 feet plus/minus along the line between Tax Parcels 2-2B and
2-2 to a point on said line, said point having heretofore been on the boundary
between the C-H Zone and the R-U Zone between which two zones Tax Parcel 2-
2 was divided; thence northerly through Tax Parcel 2-2, following the same line
as the heretofore mentioned former boundary line between the C-H Zone and the
R-U Zone a distance of 309 feet plus/minus to a point on the northerly line of
Tax Parcel 2-2 and the southerly line of Tax Parcel 2-1A; thence eastwardly
along the line between Tax Parcels 2-2 and 2-1A 206 feet plus/minus to the
westerly right-of-way line of North Baltimore Street (Pennsylvania Route 74);
thence, northerly along the westerly right-of-way line of North Baltimore
Street (Pennsylvania Route 74) to its intersection with the easterly right-of-
way line of U.S. Route 15, the place of BEGINNING.
   (C)   The Dillsburg Borough Zoning Map is hereby amended to designate the
following area as included within the Residential-Urban (R-U) District, being
redesignated from the Commercial-Highway (C-H) District:
      All that western portion of Tax Parcel 2-2B within the Borough of
Dillsburg, York County, Pennsylvania, more fully described herein:
      Beginning at a point, said point being the most northwest corner of Tax
Parcel 2-2B and also being westwardly 262 feet plus/minus from the westerly
right-of-way line of North Baltimore Street (Pennsylvania Route 74); thence
eastwardly along the line between Tax Parcel 2-2B to the south and Tax Parcel
2-2 to the north, 64 feet plus/minus to a point on line; thence leaving said
line between Tax Parcel 2-2B and Tax Parcel 2-2 and through lands of Tax Parcel
2-2B southeasterly 50 feet plus/minus to a point, said point being at the most
northwesterly corner of adjoining Tax Parcel 2-3; thence southerly along the
line between Tax Parcel 2-2B to the west and Tax Parcel 2-3 to the east, 42
feet plus/minus to a point at the southerly most line of Tax Parcel 2-2B;
thence westwardly along the line between Tax Parcel 2-2B to the north and Tax
Parcel 2-19 to the south 80 feet plus/minus to a point on said line; thence
northerly on the line between Tax Parcel 2-2B to the east and Tax Parcel 2-2 to
the west; 92 feet plus/minus to a point, the place of BEGINNING.
   (D)   The Zoning Map of the Borough of Dillsburg is hereby amended as
follows:
      A portion of Tax Parcel Number 58-01-62B will be changed from
Manufacturing- Commercial (M-C) to Residential-Urban (R-U) enabling the
complete parcel to be within the same zoning district.
   (E)   The Zoning Map of the Borough of Dillsburg is hereby amended as
follows:
      A portion of Tax Parcel Number 58-01-98 will be changed from
Manufacturing- Commercial (M-C) to Residential-Suburban (R-S) enabling the
complete parcel to be within the same zoning district.
   (F)   The Zoning Map of the Borough of Dillsburg is hereby amended as
follows:
      A portion of Tax Parcel Number 58-02-49E will be changed from Residential
Urban (R-U) to Commercial Highway (C-H) enabling the complete parcel to be
within the same zoning district.
   (G)   The Zoning Map of the Borough of Dillsburg is hereby amended as
follows:
      A portion of Tax Parcel Number 58000OC0098E will be changed from Planned
Commercial (P-C) to Residential-Suburban (R-S).
   (H)   The Zoning Map of the Borough of Dillsburg is hereby amended as
follows:
      A portion of Tax Parcel Number 58000OC01170000000 will be changed from
Conservation (C) to Commercial/Highway (C-H) per attached legal description of
zoning adjustment, which is adopted by reference as if set out in length
herein.
(Ord. 171, passed 1-18-1972; Ord. 1999-09, passed12-14-1999; Ord. 2000-1,
passed 5-9-2000, §§ 4, 5; Ord. 2005-2, passed 6-14-2005; Ord. 2005-3, passed 8-
9-2005; Ord. 2010-6, passed 12-14-2010; Ord. 2007-3, passed 4-10-2007; Ord.
2015-1, passed 1-13-2015)
BOROUGH OF DILLSBURG ZONING MAP
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/94f7604698164d47ce09a94755960d75f49d81c0/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1613.png]
 
ATTACHMENT 1: DIAGRAMS
   ILLUSTRATIONS OF RESIDENTIAL DWELLING TYPES
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/94f7604698164d47ce09a94755960d75f49d81c0/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1615.png]
 
 
   DIAGRAM DEPICTING SELECTED ZONING TERMS AS APPLICABLE TO INTERIOR LOTS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/94f7604698164d47ce09a94755960d75f49d81c0/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1617.png]
 
   DIAGRAM DEPICTING CERTAIN ZONING TERMS AS APPLICABLE TO CORNER LOTS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/94f7604698164d47ce09a94755960d75f49d81c0/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1619.png]
 
 
   DIAGRAM DEPICTING CERTAIN ZONING TERMS AS APPLICABLE TO A DOUBLE OR REVERSE
FRONTAGE LOT
(DOUBLE FRONTAGE LOTS ARE NOT PERMITTED)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/94f7604698164d47ce09a94755960d75f49d81c0/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1621.png]
 
   DIAGRAM DEPICTING CERTAIN ZONING TERMS AS APPLICABLE TO TRIPLE FRONTAGE LOTS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/94f7604698164d47ce09a94755960d75f49d81c0/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1623.png]
   
(Ord. 171, passed 1-18-1972, Art. V, § 511; Ord. 1981-1, passed 2-17-1981; Ord.
1987-1, passed 4-21-1987; Ord. 1997-04, passed 3-18-1997)
ATTACHMENT 2: TABLE
MU-C District Area and Bulk Requirements Table
            Uses
            Residential                         Recreational Nonresidentiala
Requirement Single-Family Attached Multi-Family
MU-C District Area and Bulk Requirements Table
                 Uses
                 Residential
Requirement      Single-Family    Multi-Family     Recreational Nonresidentiala
                 Attached
Lot area (sq.    1,800            8,800            10,000       5,000
ft.) minimum
Lot area (sq.    4,500            NA               43,560c      43,560c
ft.) maximum
Lot width (ft.)  20b              80               80           25
minimum
Lot width (ft.)  NA               115              150          NA
maximum
Yard
requirements                                                  
(ft.)
   Front yard 5                10               15           0
minimumd
   Front yard 20               20               NA           10
maximum
   Side yard  8c               10               15           5
minimumd
   Side yard  12c              NA               NA           20
maximum
   Rear yard  20               20               20           20
minimumd
Maximum building 35               45               45           45
height (ft.)
Maximum building
coverage (% of   60               60               60           70
total lot area)
Minimum non-
impervious       30               30               30           10
surface (% of
total lot area)
                 4 dwelling units 8 dwelling units
Maximum building in a row, 100    in a building,   100 feet in  100 feet in
size             feet in length   95 feet in       length       length
                                  length
Minimum interior NA               25               15           15
yards (feet)
a   Refers to all public/semi-public, office/institutional, commercial and
multi-use building uses listed in §
27-472(A)
b   Calculated width per dwelling unit
c   Setback for the end of each row of attached units
d   Interpreted as the minimum setback line
e   Applies to new lots only, lot existing as of the effective date of this
chapter amendment shall not be considered nonconforming lots; however, under no
circumstances shall these lots be enlarged
 
(Ord. 171, passed 1-18-1972, Art. V, § 511; Ord. 1981-1, passed 2-17-1981; Ord.
1987-1, passed 4-21-1987; Ord. 1997-04, passed 3-18-1997)
ATTACHMENT 3: CHART A
Permitted Permanent Signs
                              Minimum                    Maximum
          Maximum   Maximum   Setback Maximum  Maximum   Projection Zones
Sign Type Number    Area      From    Height   Height    From Bldg. Permitted
          Permitted Permitted Right-  Attached Freestand (Att.
                              Of-Way                     Sign)
Permitted Permanent Signs
                                                       Minimum                    Maximum
                                Maximum      Maximum   Setback Maximum  Maximum   Projection Zones
Sign Type                       Number       Area      From    Height   Height    From Bldg. Permitted
                                Permitted    Permitted Right-  Attached Freestand (Att.
                                                       Of-Way                     Sign)
P-1: All signs and signals                             No
owned and operated by the       No limit     No limit  limit   No limit No limit  No limit   All
borough
P-2: Identification and
information for public and      1
semi-public facilities, such as freestanding 20 sq.            Height                        Where use
schools, house of worship,      and 1        ft. per   10 ft.  of       10 ft.    12 in.     is
public utilities, clubs,        attached     sign              building                      permitted
hospitals, libraries,
historical and the like
P-3: Nameplates identifying     1 per        2 sq. ft.         Height
owner or resident of private    dwelling     per sign  5 ft.   of       6 ft.     12 in.     All
property (excluding mailbox)    unit                           building
P-4: Nameplates identifying     1 per                          Height
home occupation (shall only     dwelling     2 sq. ft. 5 ft.   of       6 ft.     12 in.     All
list owner name and/or          unit         per sign          building
occupation)
P-5: Signs indicating the
private nature of a road,
driveway or other premises and               2 sq. ft.
signs controlling the use of    No limit     per sign  5 ft.   No limit 6 ft.     12 in.     All
private property, such as
prohibition of hunting, fishing
or trespassing
                                2 per street                   Height
P-6: On-site directional signs  frontage     2 sq. ft. 2 ft.   of       6 ft.     12 in.     All
                                used as      per sign          building
                                access
                                                                                             All with
                                                                                             permissio
                                                                                             n of
                                                                                             landowne
                                                                                             r on
                                             2 sq. ft.         Height                        which
P-7: Off-site directional signs 1 per lot    per sign  2 ft.   of       3 ft.     12 in.     sign is
                                                               building                      placed;
                                                                                             not on
                                                                                             traffic
                                                                                             or
                                                                                             utility
                                                                                             poles
P-8: Identification sign for a  1 per street 20 sq.            Height                        Where use
residential subdivision or      entrance     ft. per   10 ft.  of       10 ft.    12 in.     is
multi-family development        (max. of 2/  sign              building                      permitted
                                dev.)
P-9: Business/office signs for the purpose of identification of a permitted use on the property on
which the use exists (excludes complexes such as shopping centers, malls, multi-use buildings and
industrial parks)
                                             1 sq. ft.
                                             per
                                             lineal
P-9A: Freestanding business                  ft. of
sign, excludes individual       1 per street lot       10 ft.  NA       25 ft.    NA         T-C, C-H,
stores, offices or businesses   frontage     frontage;                                       M-C, P-C
in a complex                                 not to
                                             exceed 50
                                             sq. ft.
                                             per sign
                                             1 sq. ft.
                                             per
P-9B: Freestanding business/                 lineal
office sign, excludes                        ft. of
individual stores, offices, or  1            lot       10 ft.  NA       15 ft.    NA         R-S, R-U
business in a complex                        frontage;
                                             not to
                                             exceed 10
                                             sq. ft.
                                             6% of the
                                             total
                                4 per street wall area
                                frontage + 2 to which
P-9C Attached business/office   on one       the sign
sign, excludes individual       nonfrontage  is                Height                        T-C, C-H,
stores or businesses in a       wall when a  attached; NA      of       NA        12 in.     M-C, P-C
complex                         building has not to            building
                                only 1       exceed a
                                street       total of
                                frontage     150 sq.
                                             ft. for
                                             all signs
P-9D: Attached business/office  1 per street 6 sq. ft.         Height
sign, excludes stores, offices  frontage     per sign  NA      of       NA        12 in.     R-S, R-U
or businesses in a complex                                     building
P-10: Business/office signs for shopping centers, malls, other similar complexes. multi-use buildings,
professional/business office complexes, and industrial/business parks and other similar complexes
                                             1 sq. ft.
                                             per
P-10A: Freestanding business                 lineal
sign for complex                             ft. of
Note: Individual stores,        1 per street lot       10 ft.  NA       35 ft.    NA         T-C, C-H,
offices and businesses are      frontage     frontage;                                       M-C, P-C
prohibited from having                       not to
individual freestanding signs                exceed 50
                                             sq. ft.
                                             per sign
P-10B: Freestanding business
sign for complex                             Not to
Note: Individual stores,        1 per street exceed 20 10 ft.  NA       15 ft.    NA         R-S, R-U
offices and business are        frontage     sq. ft.
prohibited from having                       per sign
individual freestanding signs
                                             1/2 sq.
                                             ft. per
                                             lineal
                                             ft. of
                                             wall onto         Height
P-10C: Attached business/office 1 per street which     NA      of       NA        12 in.     T-C, C-H,
sign for complex                frontage     sign is           building                      M-C, P-C
                                             to be
                                             affixed,
                                             not to
                                             exceed 50
                                             sq. ft.
                                             1/2 sq.
                                             ft. per
                                             lineal
                                             ft. of
                                             wall onto         Height
P-10D: Attached business/office 1 per street which     NA      of       NA        12 in.     R-S, R-U
sign for complex                frontage     sign is           building
                                             to be
                                             affixed,
                                             not to
                                             exceed 10
                                             sq. ft.
                                             2 sq. ft.
                                             per 1
P-10E: Attached business/office              lineal
sign for individual stores,     1 per        ft. of            Height                        T-C, C-H,
offices or businesses within a  outside wall wall      NA      of       NA        12 in.     M-C, P-C
complex                                      frontage,         building
                                             not to
                                             exceed 40
                                             sq. ft.
P-10F: Attached business/office                                Height
sign for individual stores,     1 per        6 sq. ft. NA      of       NA        12 in.     R-S, R-U
offices or businesses within a  outside wall per sign          building
complex
P-11: advertising sign; see §               75 sq.            Height
24-511(E) for additional        1 per lot    ft.       25 ft.  of       35 ft.    12 in.     C-H, M-C
regulations                                                    building
 
(Ord. 171, passed 1-18-1972, Art. V, § 511; Ord. 1981-1, passed 2-17-1981; Ord.
1987-1, passed 4-21-1987; Ord. 1997-04, passed 3-18-1997)
ATTACHMENT 4: CHART B
Permitted Temporary Signs
                              Minimum                    Maximum
          Maximum   Maximum   Setback Maximum  Maximum   Projection Zones
Sign Type Number    Area      From    Height   Height    From Bldg. Permitted
          Permitted Permitted Right-  Attached Freestand (Att.
                              Of-Way                     Sign)
Permitted Temporary Signs
                                                                                                   Minimum                       Maximum
                                                                            Maximum      Maximum   Setback    Maximum  Maximum   Projection Zones
Sign Type                                                                   Number       Area      From       Height   Height    From Bldg. Permitted
                                                                            Permitted    Permitted Right- Of- Attached Freestand (Att.
                                                                                                   Way                           Sign)
                                                                            1 per each
                                                                            separate     12 sq.               Height
T-1: Signs identifying architects, engineers, contractors or others engaged firm         ft. per   10 ft.     of       10 ft.    12 in.     All
in construction work on the premises where their work is proceeding         involved in  sign                 building
                                                                            work on the
                                                                            site
   Sign to be removed within 15 days of completion of work or occupancy of
the building whichever comes first
T-2: Real estate signs on individual properties that are for sale, rent or  1 per street 6 sq. ft. 10 ft. or  Height
lease, or which have been sold, rented or leased                            frontage of  per sign  building   of       10 ft.    12 in.     All
                                                                            the lot                face       building
   Signs to be removed within 15 days of sale, rent or lease agreement                                                              
                                                                                                                                            Where use
                                                                                                                                            is
T-3: Signs announcing proposed housing developments, or commercial,         1 per street 20 sq.    25 ft. or  Height                        permitted
industrial or other nonresidential development.                             frontage     ft. per   building   of       10 ft.    12 in.     and
                                                                                         sign      face       building                      develop-
                                                                                                                                            ment
                                                                                                                                            approved
   Signs to be removed upon 75% completion of development or within two                                                             
years of erection of the sign whichever occurs first
T-4: Signs advertising the temporary sale of agricultural and horticultural              6 sq. ft. 10 ft. or  Height
products raised on property from which it is being sold                     2 per lot    per sign  building   of       6 ft.     12 in.     All
                                                                                                   face       building
   To be displayed only when products are on sale; not to exceed 15 days                                                            
after cessation of sales operations
                                                                                                                                            All, with
                                                                                                                                            permission
                                                                                         6 sq. ft.                                          of
                                                                                         per sign,                                          landowner
T-5: Temporary directional signs of premises available or in process of                  with                 Height                        on which
development                                                                 NA           length    3 ft.      of       3 ft.     12 in.     sign is
                                                                                         not to               building                      placed;
                                                                                         exceed 4                                           not on
                                                                                         ft.                                                traffic or
                                                                                                                                            utility
                                                                                                                                            poles
   Such signs shall be placed at least 500 feet apart and shall be remove                                                           
upon completion of the development
                                                                                                                                            All, with
                                                                                                                                            permission
                                                                                                                                            of
                                                                                                                                            landowner
                                                                                         2 sq. ft.            Height                        on which
T-6: Other temporary directional signs                                      No limit     per sign  3 ft.      of       3 ft.     12 in.     sign is
                                                                                                              building                      placed;
                                                                                                                                            not on
                                                                                                                                            traffic or
                                                                                                                                            utility
                                                                                                                                            poles
   Not to exceed one week of placement                                                                                              
T-7: Signs announcing grand openings, new ownership, change of use on the   1 per lot    20 sq.    30 ft. or  Height                        Where use
site of the permitted use                                                   (attached or ft. per   building   of       10 ft.    12 in.     is
                                                                            freestanding sign      face       building                      permitted
   Signs shall be removed after 7 days                                                                                              
T-8: Temporary signs announcing a special civic event not normally
associated with a location or a location’s use (does not include yard/                                                               
garage sales or special business promotion sales)
                                                                            1 per        20 sq.    10 ft. or  Height
T-8A: On the site of the event                                              frontage     ft. per   building   of       10 ft.    12 in.     All
                                                                                         sign      face       building
   Not to exceed 30 days and sign shall be removed within 15 days followi                                                           
the conclusion of the event
                                                                                                                                            All, with
                                                                                                                                            the
                                                                                                                                            permission
                                                                                                                                            of the
                                                                                                   10 ft. or  Height                        landowner
T-8B: On a location away from the site of the event                         No limit     6 sq. ft. building   of       10 ft.    12 in.     on which
                                                                                         per sign  face       building                      the sign
                                                                                                                                            is placed;
                                                                                                                                            not on
                                                                                                                                            traffic or
                                                                                                                                            utility
                                                                                                                                            poles
   Not to exceed 90 days placement and must be removed immediately                                                                  
following the event
                                                                                                                                            All, with
                                                                                                                                            the
                                                                                                                                            permission
                                                                                                                                            of the
                                                                                                   10 ft. or  Height                        landowner
T-9: Signs for a political election                                         No limit     16 sq.    building   of       10 ft.    12 in.     on which
                                                                                         ft.       face       building                      the sign
                                                                                                                                            is placed;
                                                                                                                                            not on
                                                                                                                                            traffic or
                                                                                                                                            utility
                                                                                                                                            poles
   Signs shall be removed by the political party or candidate within 15                                                             
days following the primary or general election to which they refer
T-10: Sidewalk sign for a commercial business                               1 per        6 sq. ft. See § 24- NA       4 ft.     NA         T-C
                                                                            frontage     per sign  511
   Shall be displayed only during normal business hours                                                                             
                                                                                                              See §
T-11: Portable sign                                                                                        27-511                       
                                                                                                              (F)
 
(Ord. 171, passed 1-18-1972, Art. V, § 511; Ord. 1981-1, passed 2-17-1981; Ord.
1987-1, passed 4-21-1987; Ord. 1997-04, passed 3-18-1997)
APPENDIX
The following ordinances and resolutions are no longer of general interest,
primarily because they are of an historical or one-time nature only, the
provisions of which were primarily completed directly after enactment. Because
the enactments are mainly of an historical or administrative interest, it has
not been considered necessary to include the entire text. Rather, the
enactments are arranged in groups, according to subject matter, and, within
each group, listed by title in chronological order. Annual budget and tax
enactments have been listed only in the Key to the Disposition of All
Ordinances. Anyone desiring to read the full text of any of these enactments
may do so by consulting the original records of the municipality.
The enactments included in this Appendix are grouped under the following
headings:
      Appendix
         
A.   ANNEXATION OF TERRITORY
         
B.   BOND ISSUES AND LOANS
         
C.   FRANCHISES AND SERVICES
         
D.   GOVERNMENTAL AND INTERGOVERNMENTAL AFFAIRS
         
E.   PLAN APPROVAL
         
F.   PUBLIC PROPERTY
         
G.   SEWERS
         
H.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
         
I.    WATER
         
J.   ZONING; PRIOR ORDINANCES
APPENDIX A: ANNEXATION OF TERRITORY
[Reserved for future enactments.]
APPENDIX B: BOND ISSUES AND LOANS
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
1985-3        11-19-1985  Approving the issuance of guaranteed water revenue
                          note to finance project.
                          Approving the issuance by Dillsburg Borough Authority
1998-2        6-16-1998   of its guaranteed water revenue bonds, series of
                          1998, in an aggregate principal amount of $3,105,000.
R-2000-6      2-8-2000    Authorizing the issuance of tax and revenue
                          anticipation note, Series 2000.
R-2001-4      - -2001     Incur indebtedness for the purpose of paving certain
                          alleys within the borough.
                          Increasing the indebtedness of the Borough of
2004-6        6-8-2004    Dillsburg, York County, Pennsylvania by the issue of
                          a general obligation note in the amount of $400,000
                          for sundry purposes.
                          Incurring nonelectoral debt to be evidenced by a
                          general obligation note, Series 2012, in the maximum
2012-2        3-13-2012   principal amount of $260,000 to provide funds for and
                          towards a project consisting of acquiring and/or
                          improving property for park and recreational
                          purposes.
                          Increasing the indebtedness of the borough by
2021-1        5-19-2021   directing the issuance of a general obligation note
                          in the maximum principal amount of $2,500,000 for the
                          construction of a new municipal building.
                         
 
 
APPENDIX C: FRANCHISES AND SERVICES
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
                          Metropolitan Edison Company and York Telephone and
                          Telegraph Company (General Telephone Company), their
                          successors and assigns, are hereby granted the right
                          to construct, maintain, replace, re-locate and
                          continue to maintain poles, wires, line guy wires,
144           3-1-1979    cross-arms and other electric or telephone
                          transmission lines and necessary supporting equipment
                          in and over the public thoroughfares of the borough
                          for the purpose of serving the residents of the
                          borough with electricity and telephone service;
                          subject, however, to such taxes as may be lawfully
                          imposed thereon.
                          The Borough of Dillsburg shall enter into a contract
                          with Metropolitan Edison Company, a public utility,
1990-3        8-19-1990   in substantially the same form as a contract
                          containing specifications for electric street
                          lighting services.
                          Approving the assignment application and the
R-2000-13     8-8-2000    assignment to Adelphia GS Cable, LLC or to any
                          wholly-owned affiliate of Adelphia as described in
                          the assignment application and purchase agreement.
                          Approving additional streetlights for Autumn Woods
R-2002-15     1-14-2003   and entering into a contract with Metropolitan Edison
                          Company for furnishing such lighting.
                          Approving additional streetlights for Pheasant Ridge
R-2004-2      3-9-2004    and entering into a contract with Metropolitan Edison
                          Company for furnishing such lighting.
                          Approving streetlight upgrades at the intersection of
                          Baltimore Street and Harrisburg Street in the square
R-2004-12     11-9-2004   within the borough and entering into a contract with
                          Metropolitan Edison Company for furnishing such
                          lighting.
2004-2        11-9-2004   Amending the existing television cable licensing
                          agreement.
                          Approving a streetlight upgrade located at 403 North
R-2004-13     12-14-2004  Baltimore Street within the borough and entering into
                          a contract with Metropolitan Edison Company for
                          furnishing such lighting.
R-2005-17     9-13-2005   Consenting to assignment and change of control of
                          cable television franchise.
                          Approving eight streetlights for the Chestnut Hollow
R-2005-29     12-13-2005  Development Phase 1 and entering into a contract with
                          Metropolitan Edison Company for furnishing such
                          lighting.
2008-8        11-3-2008   Authorizing execution of a cable franchise agreement
                          between the borough and Verizon Pennsylvania, Inc.
                          Authorizing execution of a cable franchise agreement
2010-3        10-12-2010  between the borough and Comcast of Colorado/
                          Pennsylvani a/West Virginia, LLC.
                         
 
 
APPENDIX D: GOVERNMENTAL AND INTERGOVERNMENTAL AFFAIRS
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
Ord./   Date
Res.    Passed Description
No.
               Approving an additional water project undertaken by Dillsburg Borough
188     6-3-   Authority; authorizing the execution of a temporary supplemental lease;
        1975   covenanting to enter into a permanent supplemental lease; and authorizing other
               necessary action.
192     11-18- Authorizing the execution of an amendment to a temporary supplemental lease.
        1975
144     3-1-   Approves, ratifies and confirms all actions heretofore taken in the creation of
        1979   the Northern York County Joint School Authority.
1981-2  3-17-  Approving and adopting an amendment to the Articles of Incorporation of
        1981   Dillsburg Borough Authority.
1981-3  4-21-  Authorizing the Borough of Dillsburg to join with other local government units
        1981   in the purchase of shares in the state local government investment trust.
1984-1  5-15-  Authorizing Council to assume control of a trust fund developed from unspent
        1984   contributions from the sesquicentennial celebration.
        2-21-  Signifying its intention and desire to organize an Authority under the
1989-2  1989   Pennsylvania Act of May 2, 1945, P.L. 382, known as the Municipality
               Authorities Act of 1945, as amended and supplemented (the “Act”).
1992-1  2-11-  Establishing grounds for the imposition of connection fees, customer facility
        1992   fees and tap on fees applicable to new service connections to the water system.
        11-9-  Providing for adoption of proposed amendments to the Articles of Incorporation
1999-06 1999   of Dillsburg Borough Authority so as to change the name of said authority and
               to increase the number of members of the board of said Authority.
        11-9-  Approving proposed amendments of the Articles of Incorporation of Dillsburg
1999-10 1999   Area Authority to add to the purposes and increase the municipal members of
               said authority.
R-2000- 1-3-   Designating a Chief Administrative Officer for the Dillsburg Borough non-
1       2000   uniformed employee pension fund.
R-2000- 1-11-  Appointing Donald Will to the Borough of Dillsburg Zoning Hearing Board.
2       2000
               The firm of Kochenauer, Earnest, Smyser & Burg, C.P.A., York, Pennsylvania, is
R-2000- 1-11-  appointed to perform a complete audit of Dillsburg Borough under the laws of
3       2000   the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania for the year 1999 and report the findings as
               required by law.
        1-11-  Recognizing the services performed for the Borough of Dillsburg and its
R2000-4 2000   citizens by Richard T. Thomas throughout the tenure of his service as a
               Dillsburg Borough Council member.
R-2000- 1-11-  Recognizing the services performed for the Borough of Dillsburg and its
5       2000   citizens by Ray E. Byers throughout the tenure of his service as a Dillsburg
               Borough Council member.
R-2000- 2-8-   Establishing a Youth Aid Panel in the Northern York County School District.
7       2000
R-2000- 3-14-  Establishing the fee schedule for borough employees and consultants.
9       2000
R-2000- 4-11-  Supporting a comprehensive study of potential community uses of the Northern
11      2000   York County School District Middle School.
R-2000- 10-10- Repealed by R-2005-15.
14      2000
R-2000- 10-10- Establishing the position of Borough Fire Marshal, and appointing David H.
16      2000   Witmer, Borough Manager as the Fire Marshal for Dillsburg Borough.
R-2000- 10-10- Appointing David H. Witmer, Borough Manager, as the Zoning/Code Enforcement
17      2000   officer for the Borough of Dillsburg.
R-2000- 10-10- Instituting certain actions relative to the preparation of a joint municipal
18      2000   comprehensive plan for Northern York County Municipalities.
        10-10- Approving application of Monroe Township to join as a member of Dillsburg Area
2000-5  2000   Authority and approving a proposed amendment of Articles of Incorporation of
               such authority to enlarge its service area.
R-2000- 11-14- Designating a Chief Administrative Officer (CAO) of the Borough of Dillsburg
19      2000   non-uniformed employees pension plan.
R-2000- 11-14- Appointing a Delinquent Tax Collector for the collection of certain delinquent
20      2000   taxes due and owing the borough.
R.2000- 11-14- Designating the West Shore Tax Bureau as its collection agent, appointing an
21      2000   Income Tax Officer, and assigning the representative and alternate
               representative to the Board of Directors of said bureau.
        11-14- Adopting the Pennsylvania State Association of Boroughs master plan and trust
2000-8  2000   the joinder agreement as the Borough of Dillsburg non-uniformed employees
               pension plan.
R-2000- 12-12- Establishing the meeting schedule for the year 2001.
24      2000
R-2000- 12-12- Establishing the salary/compensati on for the Borough Tax Collector.
25      2000
R-2000- - -    Appointing persons to serve the Borough of Dillsburg for the year 2001.
26      2000
R-2001- - -    Providing for a mutual aid agreement for emergency services, between the
1       2000   Borough of Dillsburg and Carroll Township.
R-2001- 9- -   Providing an endorsement of the Route 15 feasibility study.
2       2001
R-2001- 10-9-  Designating the West Shore Tax Bureau as its collection agent, appointing an
3       2001   Income Tax Officer, and assigning the representatives and alternate
               representative to the Board of Directors of said bureau.
R-2001- - -    Appointing persons to serve the Borough of Dillsburg for the year 2001.
5       2001
R-2001- 12-11- Appointing a Delinquent Tax Collector for the collection of certain delinquent
7       2001   taxes due and owing the borough.
R-2001- 12-11- Appointing an Auditor for the Borough of Dillsburg for the year 2002.
8       2001
R-2001- 12-11- Recognizing the services performed for the Borough of Dillsburg and its
09      2001   citizens by Darwin Moyer throughout the tenure of his service as a Dillsburg
               Borough Council member.
R-2001- 12-11- Recognizing the services performed for the Borough of Dillsburg and its
10      2001   citizens by Gregory W. Wonders throughout the tenure of his service as
               Dillsburg Borough’s Tax Collector.
R-2001- 12-11- Recognizing the services performed for the Borough of Dillsburg and its
11      2001   citizens by John J. Richardson, Jr. throughout the tenure of his service as a
               Dillsburg Borough Planning Commission member.
R-2001- 12-11- Creating the Dillsburg Downtown Redevelopment Authority.
12      2001
R-2002- 3-12-  Rescinded, abolished and vacated by R-2005-18.
2       2002
R-2002- - -    Approving and authorizing the reconstruction of the remaining portion of South
3       2002   Second Street.
R-2002- 5-14-  Appointing the members of the Dillsburg Community Emergency Response Team.
7       2002
R-2002- 10-8-  Designating the West Shore Tax Bureau as its collection agent, appointing an
8       2002   Income Tax Officer, and assigning the representative and alternate
               representative to the Board of Directors of said bureau.
R-2002- - -    Appointing persons to serve the Borough of Dillsburg for the year 2003.
9       2002
R-2002- 12-10- Adopting an open records policy for the Borough of Dillsburg.
10      2002
R-2002- 12-10- Appointing a Delinquent Tax Collector for the collection of certain delinquent
11      2002   taxes due and owing the borough.
R-2002- 12-10- Appointing an auditor for the Borough of Dillsburg for the year 2002.
12      2002
R-2002- 12-10- Establishing the meeting schedule for the year 2003.
13      2002
2002-5  3-11-  Amending and updating the Borough of Dillsburg non- uniformed employees pension
        2003   plan.
R-2003- 3-11-  Establishing the distribution of pension funds to former employees of the
2       2003   borough who are now employees of the Dillsburg Area Authority.
R-2003- 4-8-   Proclaiming support for the men and women who serve in the Armed Forces of our
3       2003   country.
2003-3  5-13-  Changing the function of the Logan Park Authority to be an operating authority.
        2003
2003-3A 5-13-  Appointing the present members and changing their operational function.
        2003
R-2003- 7-8-   Recognizing the services performed for the Borough of Dillsburg and its
4       2003   citizens by George A. Tjiattas throughout the tenure of his service as the
               Mayor of Dillsburg.
R-2003- 10-8-  Designating the West Shore Tax Bureau as its collection agent, appointing an
5       2003   Income Tax Officer, and assigning the representative and alternate
               representative to the Board of Directors of said bureau.
R-2003- 11-11- Declaring support for the creating the Northern York Community Services
6       2003   Committee.
R-2003- 11-11- Commemorating George A. Tjiattas for his many years of service to the Borough
7       2003   Planning Commission and the Northern York County Regional Planning Effort.
R-2003- 12-9-  Appointing an auditor for the Borough of Dillsburg for the year 2003.
8       2003
R-2003- 12-9-  Appointing a Delinquent Tax Collector for the collection of certain delinquent
10      2003   taxes due and owing the borough.
R-2003- 12-9-  Establishing the meeting schedule for the year 2004.
11      2003
R-2003- 12-9-  Appointing persons to serve the Borough of Dillsburg for the year 2004.
12      2003
R-2003- 12-9-  Recognizing the services performed for the Borough of Dillsburg and its
13      2003   citizens by Tammy Miller throughout the tenure of her service as a member of
               Dillsburg Borough Council.
R-2004- 1-13-  Appointing Ronald L. Rosenberger to the Borough of Dillsburg Zoning Hearing
1       2004   Board.
R-2004- 4-13-  Creating a Board of Appeals for the Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code.
3       2004
R-2004- - -    Recognizing the services performed for the Borough of Dillsburg and its
4       2004   citizens by Kathy Bostic throughout the tenure of her service as a member of
               Dillsburg Borough Council.
R-2004- - -    Recognizing the services performed for the Borough of Dillsburg and its
5       2004   citizens by Jered L. Hock, Esq. throughout the tenure of his service as
               Solicitor to Borough Council.
R-2004- 9-14-  Declaring its intent to follow the schedules and procedures for disposition of
6       2004   records as set forth in the Municipal Records Manual, approved July 16, 1993.
R-2004- 9-20-  Appointing Mark W. Allshouse, Esq. as the Solicitor of the Borough of
9       2004   Dillsburg.
R-2004- 10-12- Designating the West Shore Tax Bureau as its collection agent, appointing an
10      2004   Income Tax Officer, and assigning the representative and alternate
               representative to the Board of Directors of said bureau.
R-2004- - -    Recognizing the services performed for the Board of Dillsburg, its citizens and
11      2004   the citizens of the surrounding Dillsburg area by Keith Miller throughout the
               tenure of his service as police officer of Carroll Township.
R-2004- 12-14- Appointing persons to serve the Borough of Dillsburg for the year 2005.
14      2004
R-2004- 12-14- Establishing the meeting schedule for the year 2005.
15      2004
R-2004- 12-14- Appointing a Delinquent Tax Collector for the collection of certain delinquent
16      2004   taxes due and owing the Borough for the year 2005.
R-2004- 12-14- Recognizing the services performed for the Borough of Dillsburg and its
17      2004   citizens by Nancy Grove Nichols throughout the tenure of her service as a
               member of Dillsburg Borough Council.
R-2005- 2-8-   Appointing an auditor for the Borough of Dillsburg for the year 2004.
2       2005
R-2005- 2-8-   Appointing an interim Zoning/Code Enforcement Officer for the Borough of
3       2005   Dillsburg.
R-2005- 2-8-   Repealed by R-2005-15.
4       2005
R-2005- 2-8-   Designating a Chief Administrative Officer (CAO) of the Borough of Dillsburg
5       2005   non-uniformed employee pension plan.
R-2005- 2-8-   Appointing a third party agency building code official for the Borough of
6       2005   Dillsburg.
R-2005- 3-8-   Repealing R-2000-16. Establishing the position of Fire Marshal and appointing
1       2005   David Witmer as the Fire Marshal for Dillsburg Borough.
R-2005- 3-8-   Adopting and amending the Borough Emergency Operations Plan.
7       2005
R-2005- 3-8-   Authorizing participation in the Northern York Community Services Foundation’s
8       2005   Program.
R-2005- 4-12-  Fee schedule.
9       2005
R-2005- 5-10-  Opposing any proposal to eliminate the Community Development Block Grant
10      2005   Program.
R-2005- 5-10-  Authorizing the Borough Council President to sign the agility agreement with
11      2005   PennDOT.
R-2005- 6-14-  Authorizing membership in and ratifying the by-laws of the West Shore Council
12      2005   of Governments.
R-2005- 7-12-  Authorizing submission of applications for funding to the York County Planning
13      2005   Commission.
R-2005- 8-9-   Appointing a substitute stand-in solicitor for Borough Solicitor Mark W.
14      2005   Allshouse, Esq.
R-2005- 8-9-   Repealing Resolutions 2000-14 and 2005-4, and adopting a full- time Borough
15      2005   Manager.
R-2005- 9-13-  Rescinding, abolishing and vacating R-2002-2.
18      2005
R-2005- 10-11- Designating the West Shore Tax Bureau as collection agent, appointing an Income
19      2005   Tax Officer, and assigning the representative and alternate representative to
               the Board of Directors of said Bureau.
R-2005- 11-9-  Appointing a Delinquent Tax Collector.
20      2005
R-2005- 11-9-  Appointing an Auditor for the Tax Year 2005.
21      2005
R-2005- 11-9-  Appointing persons to serve the Borough of Dillsburg the Year 2005.
22      2005
R-2005- 11-9-  Appointing member of the Dillsburg Community Emergency Response Team.
23      2005
R-2005- 11-9-  Recognizing the services performed for the borough and its citizens by Eugene
24      2005   Fisler throughout his tenure as the Coordinator of Dillsburg Emergency
               Management Agency.
R-2005- 12-13- Establishing the meeting schedule for the year 2006.
25      2005
R-2005- 12-13- Recognizing the services performed for the Borough of Dillsburg and its
26      2005   citizens by Darwin Moyer throughout the tenure of his service as the Mayor of
               Dillsburg.
R-2005- 12-13- Recognizing the services performed for the Borough of Dillsburg and its
27      2005   citizens by Patricia Moyer throughout the tenure of her service as Dillsburg
               Borough’s Tax Collector.
R-2005- 12-13- Recognizing the services performed for the Borough of Dillsburg and its
28      2005   citizens by Harold “Hal” Anderson throughout the tenure of his service as a
               member of Dillsburg Borough Council.
R-2005- 12-13- Establishing an annual fire apparatus appropriation.
30      2005
R-2005- 12-13- Recognizing the services performed for the borough and its citizens by Scott
31      2005   McClintock throughout his service to the Citizens Hose No. 1 Fire Company.
2008-7  6-9-   Authorizing entry into an intergovernmenta l cooperative implementation
        2008   agreement.
        1-13-  Authorizing and empowering the West Shore Tax Bureau to impose and retain those
2009-1  2009   costs and fees associated with the collection of delinquent taxes in accordance
               with Act 192 of 2004.
2009-2  1-13-  Amending and updating the Borough of Dillsburg non- uniformed employees pension
        2009   plan.
               Authorizing an intergovernmenta l cooperation agreement among Carroll Township,
2011-3  11-7-  Dillsburg Borough, Franklintown Borough, Franklin Township, Monaghan Township,
        2011   Wellsville Borough and Warrington Township to create and jointly participate in
               the Northern York County Unified Emergency Management Agency (NEMA).
        11-7-  Amending the Borough of Dillsburg non- uniformed employees pension plan in
2011-5  2011   order to comply with the Pension Protection Act of 2006 and the Heroes Earnings
               Assistance and Tax Relief Act of 2008 (HEART).
2014-3  9-9-   Approving the intergovernmenta l cooperation agreement for the implementation
        2014   of the York County Regional Chesapeake Bay Pollutant Reduction Plan.
2014-5  12-9-  Amending the Borough of Dillsburg non- uniformed employees pension plan.
        2014
        2-10-  Authorizing an amended intergovernmenta l cooperation agreement for the
2015-2  2015   implementation of the York County Regional Chesapeake Bay Pollutant Reduction
               Plan.
2017-1  4-11-  Authorizing the borough to enter into an intergovernmenta l cooperation
        2017   agreement for the joint road maintenance of the borough’s public streets.
        9-12-  Authorizing an amended and restated intergovernmenta l cooperation agreement
2017-3  2017   for the implementation of the York County Regional Chesapeake Bay Pollutant
               Reduction Plan.
2023-1  9-12-  Amending the Borough of Dillsburg non-uniformed employees pension plan.
        2023
              
 
 
APPENDIX E: PLAN APPROVAL
 
Ord./ Date
Res.  Passed Description
No.
R-    7-11-  Approving the Act 537, being the Sewage Facilities Act, 35 P.S. §§ 750 et
2000- 2000   seq., sewage facilities plan update.
12
R-    7-9-   Approving and accepting the final draft Act 537 plan for the Borough of
2002- 2002   Dillsburg.
6
R-    3-11-
2003- 2003   Adopting and amending the borough’s Emergency Operations Plan.
1
R-    9-14-  Adopting the Northern York County Region Comprehensive Plan, dated September
2004- 2004   2004.
7
            
 
 
APPENDIX F: PUBLIC PROPERTY
[Reserved for future enactments.]
APPENDIX G: SEWERS
[Reserved for future enactments.]
APPENDIX H: STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
This appendix contains an alphabetical listing of streets; and, under each
street, a listing of all ordained activities.
Name Activity Location Ord./Res. Date
Name                 Activity  Location                   Ord./Res. Date
Alley                Renaming  Joins Impala Drive to      2001-9    8-14-2001
                               Bomar Alley
                               Travels from Harrisburg
Alley                Renaming  Pike to a dead-end just    2001-9    8-14-2001
                               south of Greenbriar Lane
Alley                Renaming  Joins Third Street with    2001-9    8-14-2001
                               Bailey Alley
Alley                Renaming  Joins W. Harrisburg Street 2001-9    8-14-2001
                               with W. York Street
Alley                Renaming  Joins E. Church Street     2001-9    8-14-2001
                               with E. Welty Avenue
Alley                Renaming  Joins Harrisburg Pike with 2001-9    8-14-2001
                               N. Second Street
Alley                Renaming  Joins Dill Alley with E.   2001-9    8-14-2001
                               York Street
Alley                Renaming  Joins Franklin Street with 2001-9    8-14-2001
                               E. Church Street
Alley                Renaming  Joins Second Street to     2001-9    8-14-2001
                               Dill Alley
                               Joins Second Street to S.
Alley                Renaming  Baltimore Street           2001-9    8-14-2001
                               (previously named Maple)
                               Joins Second Street to
Alley                Renaming  private property,          2001-9    8-14-2001
                               currently know as Digital
                               Ink
Autumn Woods Court   Accepting Contained within the       2007-9    12-11- 2007
                               Autumn Woods Development
                               Former alley which joins
Bailey Alley         Renaming  W. Harrisburg Street with  2001-9    8-14-2001
                               W. York Street
Beaver Street        Accepting Gettysburg Street to W.    144       3-1-1979
                               York Street
                               From Gettysburg Street to
Beaver Street        Adopting  a point Northwest of West  1984-2    10-16-1984
                               York Street
Belair Drive         Accepting Impala Drive to Corvair    144       3-1-1979
                               Drive
Bomar Alley          Retaining Retaining name             2001-9    8-14-2001
Briar Court          Accepting As shown on a plan of      1995-3    12-19-1995
                               Greenbriar Glen - Phase 2
Chalet Avenue        Accepting Gettysburg Street to west  144       3-1-1979
                               to borough line
Chestnut Street      Accepting Harrisburg Pike to         144       3-1-1979
                               southeast to borough line
                               Phase 1, Segments 1 and 2,
Chestnut Hollow Lane Accepting contained in Phase 1,      2017-4    9-12- 2017
                               Chestnut Hollow
                               Development
                               Former alley which joins
Clark Alley          Renaming  E. Church Street with E.   2001-9    8-14-2001
                               Welty Avenue
                               As described on a final
Clemens Drive        Accepting plan of subdivision for    1992-3    3-17-1992
                               Greenbriar Glen, Phase I
                               Recorded in the office of
Clemens Drive        Accepting the Recorder of Deeds in   1999-11   11-9-1999
                               and for York County in
                               Record Book 88V, Page 024
Clemens Drive        Accepting Contained within the       2007-9    12-11- 2007
                               Autumn Woods Development
Corvair Drive        Accepting Impala Drive to boundary   144       3-1-1979
                               line of Chevy Terrace
                               Former alley which joins
Daisy Alley          Renaming  Impala Drive to Bomar      2001-9    8-14-2001
                               Alley
                               Former alley which joins
Dill Alley           Renaming  Franklin Street with E.    2001-9    8-14-2001
                               Church Street
E. Welty Avenue      Accepting N. Baltimore Street to E.  144       3-1-1979
                               of Harrisburg Pike
E. Church Street     Accepting N. Baltimore Street to     144       3-1-1979
                               Harrisburg Pike
E. York Street       Accepting S. Baltimore Street to     144       3-1-1979
                               Chestnut Street
E. Harrisburg Street Accepting Baltimore Street to        144       3-1-1979
                               Chestnut Street
E. Hanover Street    Accepting S. Baltimore Street to     144       3-1-1979
                               Alley
                               Former alley which joins
Farmer Alley         Renaming  Second Street to S.        2001-9    8-14-2001
                               Baltimore Street
                               (previously named Maple)
Farmer Alley         Renaming  Formerly Maple Alley       2001-9    8-14-2001
Gettysburg Street    Accepting Intersection with S.       1996-1    5-21-1996
                               Second Street
Gettysburg Street    Accepting S. Second Street to        144       3-1-1979
                               southwest to borough line
                               Former alley which joins
Gherkin Alley        Renaming  Dill Alley with E. York    2001-9    8-14-2001
                               Street
                               As described on a final
Greenbriar Lane      Accepting plan of subdivision for    1992-3    3-17-1992
                               Greenbriar Glen, Phase I
Greenbriar Lane      Accepting N. Baltimore Street to     144       3-1-1979
                               Harrisburg Pike
Harrisburg Pike      Accepting E. Harrisburg Street to    144       3-1-1979
                               north to borough line
                               Phase 1, contained in
Hollow Lane          Accepting Phase 1 Chestnut Hollow    2017-4    9-12- 2017
                               Development
Impala Drive         Accepting Welty Avenue to Boundary   144       3-1-1979
                               line of Chevy Terrace
                               Former alley which joins
Keystone Alley       Renaming  Second Street to private   2001-9    8-14-2001
                               property, currently known
                               as Digital Ink
Locust Alley         Retaining Retaining name             2001-9    8-14-2001
Maple Street         Accepting As shown on a plan of      1995-3    12-19-1995
                               Greenbriar Glen - Phase 2
Maple Alley          Renaming  To Farmer Alley            2001-9    8-14-2001
Mumper Lane          Accepting Harrisburg Pike to east to 144       3-1-1979
                               borough line
N. Baltimore Street  Accepting Harrisburg Street to       144       3-1-1979
                               borough line at Rte. 15
N. Second Street     Accepting W. Harrisburg Street to    144       3-1-1979
                               U.S. Rte. 15
N. Third Street      Accepting W. Harrisburg Street to W. 144       3-1-1979
                               Church Street
Orchard Drive        Accepting Harrisburg Pike to former  144       3-1-1979
                               Rearick boundary line
Park Drive           Accepting As shown on a plan of      1995-3    12-19-1995
                               Greenbriar Glen - Phase 2
Park Drive           Accepting As shown on a plan of      1991-1    9-14-1999
                               Greenbriar Glen - Phase 3
Park Drive           Accepting As shown on a plan of      1997-7    1-5-1998
                               Greenbriar Glen - Phase 3
                               Pheasant Ride Subdivision
Pheasant Ridge Road  Accepting as shown on plan dated 8-  2004-9    12-14-20 04
                               17-1995
                               Former alley which joins
Quay Alley           Renaming  Harrisburg Pike with N.    2001-9    8-14-2001
                               Second Street
Ridgeview Drive      Accepting As shown on a plan of      1995-3    12-19-1995
                               Greenbriar Glen - Phase 2
Ridgeview Drive      Accepting As shown on a plan of      1997-7    1-5-1998
                               Greenbriar Glen- Phase 3
Ridgeview Drive      Accepting As shown on a plan of      1999-1    9-14-1999
                               Greenbriar Glen - Phase 3
                               Former alley which travels
Rose Alley           Renaming  from Harrisburg Pike to a  2001-9    8-14-2001
                               dead-end just South of
                               Greenbriar Lane
S. Third Street      Accepting W. Harrisburg Street to    144       3-1-1979
                               southerly
S. Baltimore Street  Accepting Harrisburg Street to south 144       3-1-1979
                               borough line
S. Second Street     Accepting Franklin Street to W.      144       3-1-1979
                               Harrisburg Street
                               Former alley which joins
Sidle Alley          Renaming  Third Street with Bailey   2001-9    8-14-2001
                               Alley
Sunset Drive         Accepting Orchard Drive to           144       3-1-1979
                               Harrisburg Pike
                               Former alley which joins
Tractor Alley        Renaming  Second Street to Dill      2001-9    8-14-2001
                               Alley
W. Butler Street     Accepting S. Baltimore Street to     144       3-1-1979
                               Alley
W. Hanover Street    Accepting S. Baltimore Street to     144       3-1-1979
                               south of S. Second Street
W. Church Street     Accepting N. Baltimore Street to     144       3-1-1979
                               North Third Street
W. Welty Avenue      Accepting N. Baltimore Street to     144       3-1-1979
                               west to Alley
W. York Street       Accepting S. Baltimore Street to     144       3-1-1979
                               Beaver Street
W. Harrisburg Street Accepting Baltimore Street to west   144       3-1-1979
                               to borough line
W. Franklin Street   Accepting S. Baltimore Street to S.  144       3-1-1979
                               Second Street
                               As described on a final
Wayside Court        Accepting plan of subdivision for    1992-3    3-17-1992
                               Greenbriar Glen, Phase I
Welty Avenue         Accepting The section between Bomar  2001-10   10-9-2001
                               Alley and N. Second Street
 
APPENDIX I: WATER
   [Reserved for future enactments.]
APPENDIX J: ZONING; PRIOR ORDINANCES
   [Reserved for future enactments.]
FEE SCHEDULE
Zoning/use permits                                                            $25
Change of use permits includes two walk-through inspections                   $125
   Additional fees may apply                                                
Building code permits and related fees
Purpose: permit and related fees are collected to cover the costs of permit
applications, plan reviews, issuance of permits, required on site              
inspections, certificate of occupancy, and codes inspection and enforcement
activities
Permit fee                                                                    
                       Residential                                           $7/$1,000 value of const.
                       Commercial                                            $7/$1,000 value of const.
                       Minimum fees:                                          
                          New home construction                           $675
                          Decks                                           $125
                          Mobile homes                                    $125
                          Pole garages (non-agriculture)                  $125
                          Renovations/additions                           $125
Grading plan review by Engineer                                               $125
Plan review                                                                   $85
Estimated value of construction. ESTIMATED VALUE means the reasonable cost,
as determined by the Building Code Official, of all services, labor,
materials and use of equipment entering into and necessary to the prosecution
and completion of the work. The following average square foot construction     
costs shall be used to compute the “estimated value” of construction by
multiplying per square foot construction cost by the total square footage of
area for the proposed use
Estimate sq. ft.        Description                                           $/sq. ft.
construction costs
                       Single-family                                         $70
                       Multi-family                                          $70
                       Garages:
                          Attached                                        $24
                          Detached                                        $30
                       Accessory structures/building                         $20
                       Carports                                              $15
                       Basements:
                          Finished                                        $30
                          Unfinished                                      $20
                       Additions                                             $55
                       Remodeling                                            Per contract
Swimming pools                                                                
                       Residential                                           $65
                       Commercial                                            $250
Reinspection fees                                                            $55
Building Code Board of  Hearing for appeals of the Building Code Official’s
Appeals Hearing Board   determination on aspects of the borough’s Building  $550
                        Code
Plumbing permit fees                                                          
                       Bathroom group, water closet, lavatory, tub/shower,   $10 per item
                        kitchen sink, laundry, whirlpool/spa
   For additions and                                                       
renovations
Electrical inspection   Service hook-up                                       $55
Electrical permit fees  Wiring (rough/final)                                  $55
   For additions and Commercial                                            $7/$1,000
renovations
Fire insurance                                                               $150
inspection
                       Certificate issuance                                  $25
                       Bill issuance                                         $5
                       Bank fee                                              At cost
Surcharge for
Department of Community
and Economic                                                                 $2
Development (collected
on every building
permit)
Plumbing license                                                              
                       A.   Master                                        $25 per year
                       B.   Journeyman                                    $15 per year
Demolition                                                                   $25
                       Commercial demolition                                 $75
Burning (application information required at least 24 hours prior to event)   No cost
Sign                                                                         $25
Street-cut                                                                    
   A.   Application fee                                                 $20
   B.   Underground facilities (e.g., pipelines, buried cable with pedestals,
conduit, manholes, headwall, inlet and grate); this fee is calculated on the   
total linear feet of the facility or facilities being permitted within the
right-of-way
      (1)   Underground facilities (first 50 feet or fraction thereof$45each
section
      (2)   Additional underground facilities (each 100 feet or fract$10
thereof)
   C.   Surface openings (e.g., service connections performed independen$45
of underground facility installation, pipeline repairs), each opening
   D.   Aboveground facilities (e.g., poles, guys and/or anchors if inst led
independently of poles).
      (1)   Up to 10 physically connected aboveground facilities, eac$20
continuous group
      (2)   Additional aboveground physically connected facilities, e$2h pole
with appurtenances
   E.   Bonding                                                         See fee schedule
Professional/technical/administrative                                          
                       A.   Internal staff                                $45 per hour
                       B.   Outside consultants                           Current fees plus 10%
                       C.   Administrative                                10% of costs
   Zoning hearing                                                          
                       A.   Non-refundable fee                            $300
                       B.   Special services (transcript)                 Current rate
   Curative amendment                                                      
                       A.   Non-refundable fee                            $600
                       B.   Special services                              Current rate
   Zoning map                                                             $3
Copies                                                                        
                       Per page                                              $0.25
                       Certification of copy                                 $0.50
Return check fee                                                              $25
Pet permit                                                                    $50
Tax Collector fees                                                             
                       Tax certification                                     $10
                       Faxing                                                $10
                       Copies of tax bills                                   $2
Zoning ordinance book dated March, 1997                                       $25
Subdivision and land development ordinance book dated March, 1997             $25
Codified ordinance book                                                       $85
Subdivision and land development plans                                         
   Preliminary plan                                                        
                       A.   Non-refundable fee                            $500
                       B.   Escrow
                          1.   Land development                        $3,000
                          2.   Sub-div (5 lots or less)                $2,000
                          3.   Sub-div (6 lots to 20 lots)             $3,000
                          4.   Sub-div (more than 20 lots)             $6,000
Sketch plan or minor preliminary/final plan                                    
                       A.   Non-refundable fee                            $300
                       B.   Escrow                                        $750
   Final plan                                                              
                       A.   Non-refundable fee                            $300
   The escrow deposit shall be submitted with the preliminary plan. Any
balance remaining after review of the preliminary plan shall either be
refunded at the request of the applicant or applied to fees due for
submission of a final plan. Whenever the escrow amount falls below $500, the
applicant, at the request of the borough, shall submit an amount equal to      
one- half the amount originally submitted to replenish the escrow. When an
application is rejected, or when a project is completed and there are not
likely to be further costs to the borough, any balance remaining in the
escrow shall be refunded to the applicant.
   The applicant is responsible for all county review fees and postage/     
delivery charges.
   Recreational fees                                                        
                       A.                                                    $1,500 per dwelling/building unit/or
                       B.                                                    $1,500 per lot
                       C.                                                    $2,500 for each acre of single-lot parcels
Stormwater management fees                                                     
   1.   The fee for copies of the stormwater management ordinance shall  
$10 per copy
   2.   The filing fee for consideration of a stormwater management plan
shall be broken into categories based upon the type of development proposed.   
In all instances, the monies shall either be deposited with the borough or an
escrow account established prior to the borough’s consideration of the plan
Category I residential development:                                            
Number of lots or       General fee                                           Deposit for consultants’** and legal review
dwelling units                                                                fees
1                       $75                                                   $200
2—5                   $75                                                   $400
6-+                     $75                                                   $700
Category II nonresidential development:                                        
Number of lots          General fee                                           Deposit for consultants’** and legal review
                                                                              fees
1                       $75                                                   $500
2—5                   $75                                                   $700
6-+                     $75                                                   $1,000
*   Any unused portions of the deposit for consultant’s review fees shall be returned to the applicant following approval
or disapproval of the stormwater management plan. In the event that the actual amount for engineering and legal review fees
exceeds the amount of the deposit, the applicant shall reimburse the borough an amount equal to the increased fee.
**   In instances, where determined by the borough that the project is of a nature that additional monies will be required,
the borough reserves the right to require such additional fees in an amount determined by the borough following review with
the Borough Engineer and/or Solicitor.
Miscellaneous fees                                                             
                       Storage buildings                                     $10
                       Porch for mobile home                                 $10
                       Patio                                                 $10
                       Sidewalk                                              $15
                       Window replacement                                    $10
                       Door replacement                                      $10
                       Fence installation                                    $10
                       Deck/porch less 30” high                            $15
                       Porch replacement w/concrete                          $10
                       Roof repair                                           $10
                       Siding repair                                         $10
                       Commercial fenced storage                             $25
                       Driveway permit                                       $15
 
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Pennsylvania Statutes
References to Pennsylvania Code
References to Pennsylvania Consolidated Statutes
References to Pennsylvania Consolidated Statutes Annotated
Key to the Disposition of All Resolutions
Key to the Disposition of All Ordinances
REFERENCES TO PENNSYLVANIA STATUTES
P.S. Section Code Section
P.S. Section                          Code Section
3 P.S. § 851(c)                      26-201
10 P.S. §§ 162.1 et seq.            13-101
16 P.S. § 11011-6                    24-312
                                      26-104;
32 P.S. §§ 680.1 et seq.            26-201;
                                      26-305
32 P.S. §§ 693.1 et seq.            8-202
                                      8-212;
35 P.S. §§ 679.101 et seq.          8-405;
                                      8-501
35 P.S. §§ 691.1 et seq.            8-202;
                                      26-301
35 P.S. §§ 750 et seq.              Appendix E
35 P.S. §§ 750.1 et seq.            8-202
35 P.S. §§ 7210.101 through 7210.1105-702
35 P.S. §§ 10231 et seq.            27-202
                                      24-304;
53 P.S. §§ 6924.101 et seq.         24-402;
                                      24-502
53 P.S. §§ 6924.501 et seq.         24-102
53 P.S. §§ 7101 et seq.             24-315
                                      22-100;
53 P.S. § 10101, ff.                 22-202;
                                      27-202
                                      1-402;
                                      22-406;
                                      22-502;
                                      22-702;
                                      22-703;
                                      26-104;
                                      26-201;
53 P.S. §§ 10101 et seq.            26-403;
                                      26-406;
                                      26-503;
                                      27-104;
                                      27-601;
                                      26-901;
                                      27-704;
                                      27-706
                                      1-601;
65 P.S. §§ 67.101 et seq.           1-603;
                                      1-607
72 P.S. §§ 1 et seq.                24-110;
                                      24-506
                                      24-103;
72 P.S. §§ 7101 et seq.             24-105;
                                      24-107
72 P.S. §§ 8101-D et seq.           24-302
72 P.S. §§ 8107-C et seq.           24-317
75 P.S. §§ 7301 et seq.             15-809
                                      
 
 
REFERENCES TO PENNSYLVANIA CODE
Pa. Code Code Section
Pa. Code                             Code Section
25 Pa. Code                          26-201;
                                     26-301
25 Pa. Code Chapter 92a              26-306
25 Pa. Code 92                       26-201;
                                     26-306
25 Pa. Code 93                       26-103
25 Pa. Code 102                      26-201;
                                     26-306
25 Pa. Code Chapter 102              26-305
25 Pa. Code § 102.4(b)              26-306
34 Pa. Code Chapters 401 through 405 5-701;
                                     8-406
61 Pa. Code Pt. I Subpt. B Art. V    24-404
                                     
 
 
REFERENCES TO PENNSYLVANIA CONSOLIDATED STATUTES
 
Pa.C.S. Code                       Code Section
2 Pa.C.S. Chapter 5                24-512
2 Pa.C.S. Chapter 7                24-512
8 Pa.C.S. §§ 101 et seq.         26-104
42 Pa.C.S.                         24-514
53 Pa.C.S. Chapter 85 Subchapter F 24-406
 
REFERENCES TO PENNSYLVANIA CONSOLIDATED STATUTES ANNOTATED
Pa.C.S.A. Code Section
Pa.C.S.A.                             Code Section
1 Pa.C.S.A. § 1937                   24-102
53 Pa.C.S.A. Chapter 84, Subchapter C 24-108
53 Pa.C.S.A. §§ 1202 et seq.        21-302
53 Pa.C.S.A. § 8430                  24-502
75 Pa.C.S.A. §§ 101 et seq.         15-101
75 Pa.C.S.A. §§ 3323(b)             15-212
75 Pa.C.S.A. §§ 3323(c)             15-212;
                                      15-214
75 Pa.C.S.A. § 3368                  15-109
75 Pa.C.S.A. § 4902(a)               15-301;
                                      15-302
75 Pa.C.S.A. § 4902(b)               15-303
                                      15-301;
75 Pa.C.S.A. § 4902(g)(1)            15-302;
                                      15-303
75 Pa.C.S.A. §§ 6101 et seq.        15-109
75 Pa.C.S.A. § 6109(a)(22)           15-801
75 Pa C.S.A. §§ 7301 et seq.        15-810
75 Pa.C.S.A. § 7311                  15-810
75 Pa.C.S.A. § 7721                  15-218
75 Pa.C.S.A. § 7723                  15-218
75 Pa.C.S.A. § 7752(a)               15-218
                                      
 
 
KEY TO THE DISPOSITION OF ALL RESOLUTIONS
 
Res. No. Date Passed Code Section Subject
Res. No. Date Passed Code Section       Subject
2000-1   1-3-2000    Appendix D         Governmental and Intergovernmental
                                        Affairs
2000-2   1-11-2000   Appendix D         Governmental and Intergovernmental
                                        Affairs
2000-3   1-11-2000   Appendix D         Governmental and Intergovernmental
                                        Affairs
2000-4   1-11-2000   Appendix D         Governmental and Intergovernmental
                                        Affairs
2000-5   1-11-2000   Appendix D         Governmental and Intergovernmental
                                        Affairs
2000-6   2-8-2000    Appendix B         Bond Issues and Loans
2000-7   2-8-2000    Appendix D         Governmental and Intergovernmental
                                        Affairs
2000-8   - -         Superseded by AFR   
2000-9   3-14-2000   Appendix D         Governmental and Intergovernmental
                                        Affairs
2000-10  - -         Superseded by AFR   
2000-11  4-11-2000   Appendix D         Governmental and Intergovernmental
                                        Affairs
2000-12  7-11-2000   Appendix E         Plan Approval
2000-13  8-8-2000    Appendix C         Franchises and Services
2000-14  10-10-2000  Appendix D         Governmental and Intergovernmental
                                        Affairs
2000-15  - -         Superseded by A.O. Code Enforcement
2000-16  10-10-2000  Appendix D         Governmental and Intergovernmental
                                        Affairs
2000-17  10-10-2000  Appendix D         Governmental and Intergovernmental
                                        Affairs
2000-18  10-10-2000  Appendix D         Governmental and Intergovernmental
                                        Affairs
2000-19  11-14-2000  Appendix D         Governmental and Intergovernmental
                                        Affairs
2000-20  11-14-2000  Appendix D         Governmental and Intergovernmental
                                        Affairs
2000-21  11-14-2000  Appendix D         Governmental and Intergovernmental
                                        Affairs
2000-22  - -         Appendix D         Governmental and Intergovernmental
                                        Affairs
2000-23  - -         Superseded by AFR   
2000-24  12-12-2000  Appendix D         Governmental and Intergovernmental
                                        Affairs
2000-25  12-12-2000  Appendix D         Governmental and Intergovernmental
                                        Affairs
2000-26  - -2000     Appendix D         Governmental and Intergovernmental
                                        Affairs
2001-1   - -2000     Appendix D         Governmental and Intergovernmental
                                        Affairs
2001-2   9- -2001    Appendix D         Governmental and Intergovernmental
                                        Affairs
2001-3   10-9-2001   Appendix D         Governmental and Intergovernmental
                                        Affairs
2001-4   - -2001     Appendix B         Bond Issues and Loans
2001-5   - -2001     Appendix D         Governmental and Intergovernmental
                                        Affairs
2001-6              Appendix D         Governmental and Intergovernmental
                                        Affairs
2001-7   12-11-2001  Appendix D         Governmental and Intergovernmental
                                        Affairs
2001-8   12-11-2001  Appendix D         Governmental and Intergovernmental
                                        Affairs
2001-9   12-11-2001  Appendix D         Governmental and Intergovernmental
                                        Affairs
2001-10  12-11-2001  Appendix D         Governmental and Intergovernmental
                                        Affairs
2001-11  12-11-2001  Appendix D         Governmental and Intergovernmental
                                        Affairs
2001-12  12-11-2001  Appendix D         Governmental and Intergovernmental
                                        Affairs
2002-1   - -         Superseded by AFR   
2002-2   3-12-2002   Appendix D         Governmental and Intergovernmental
                                        Affairs
2002-3   - -2002     Appendix D         Governmental and Intergovernmental
                                        Affairs
2002-4   - -         Missing             
2002-5   - -         Superseded by AFR   
2002-6   7-9-2002    Appendix E         Plan Approval
2002-7   5-14-2002   Appendix D         Governmental and Intergovernmental
                                        Affairs
2002-8   10-8-2002   Appendix D         Governmental and Intergovernmental
                                        Affairs
2002-9   - -2002     Appendix D         Governmental and Intergovernmental
                                        Affairs
2002-10  12-10-2002  Appendix D         Governmental and Intergovernmental
                                        Affairs
2002-11  12-10-2002  Appendix D         Governmental and Intergovernmental
                                        Affairs
2002-12  12-10-2002  Appendix D         Governmental and Intergovernmental
                                        Affairs
2002-13  12-10-2002  Appendix D         Governmental and Intergovernmental
                                        Affairs
2002-14             Appendix D         Governmental and Intergovernmental
                                        Affairs
2002-15  1-14-2003   Appendix C         Franchises and Services
2003-1   3-11-2003   Appendix E         Plan Approval
2003-2   3-11-2003   Appendix D         Governmental and Intergovernmental
                                        Affairs
2003-3   4-8-2003    Appendix D         Governmental and Intergovernmental
                                        Affairs
2003-4   7-8-2003    Appendix D         Governmental and Intergovernmental
                                        Affairs
2003-5   10-8-2003   Appendix D         Governmental and Intergovernmental
                                        Affairs
2003-6   11-11-2003  Appendix D         Governmental and Intergovernmental
                                        Affairs
2003-7   11-11-2003  Appendix D         Governmental and Intergovernmental
                                        Affairs
2003-8   12-9-2003   Appendix D         Governmental and Intergovernmental
                                        Affairs
2003-9   - -         Superseded by AFR   
2003-10  12-9-2003   Appendix D         Governmental and Intergovernmental
                                        Affairs
2003-11  12-9-2003   Appendix D         Governmental and Intergovernmental
                                        Affairs
2003-12  12-9-2003   Appendix D         Governmental and Intergovernmental
                                        Affairs
2003-13  12-9-2003   Appendix D         Governmental and Intergovernmental
                                        Affairs
2004-1   1-13-2004   Appendix D         Governmental and Intergovernmental
                                        Affairs
2004-2   3-9-2004    Appendix C         Franchises and Services
2004-3   4-13-2004   Appendix D         Governmental and Intergovernmental
                                        Affairs
2004-4   - -2004     Appendix D         Governmental and Intergovernmental
                                        Affairs
2004-5   - -2004     Appendix D         Governmental and Intergovernmental
                                        Affairs
2004-6   9-14-2004   Appendix D         Governmental and Intergovernmental
                                        Affairs
2004-7   9-14-2004   Appendix E         Plan Approval
2004-8   - -         Superseded by AFR   
2004-9   9-20-2004   Appendix D         Governmental and Intergovernmental
                                        Affairs
2004-10  10-12-2004  Appendix D         Governmental and Intergovernmental
                                        Affairs
2004-11  - -2004     Appendix D         Governmental and Intergovernmental
                                        Affairs
2004-12  11-9-2004   Appendix C         Franchises and Services
2004-13  12-14-2004  Appendix C         Franchises and Services
2004-14  12-14-2004  Appendix D         Governmental and Intergovernmental
                                        Affairs
2004-15  12-14-2004  Appendix D         Governmental and Intergovernmental
                                        Affairs
2004-16  12-14-2004  Appendix D         Governmental and Intergovernmental
                                        Affairs
2004-17  12-14-2004  Appendix D         Governmental and Intergovernmental
                                        Affairs
2005-1   3-8-2005    Appendix D         Governmental and Intergovernmental
                                        Affairs
2005-2   2-8-2005    Appendix D         Governmental and Intergovernmental
                                        Affairs
2005-3   2-8-2005    Appendix D         Governmental and Intergovernmental
                                        Affairs
2005-4   2-8-2005    Appendix D         Governmental and Intergovernmental
                                        Affairs
2005-5   2-8-2005    Appendix D         Governmental and Intergovernmental
                                        Affairs
2005-6   2-8-2005    Appendix D         Governmental and Intergovernmental
                                        Affairs
2005-7   3-8-2005    Appendix D         Governmental and Intergovernmental
                                        Affairs
2005-8   3-8-2005    Appendix D         Governmental and Intergovernmental
                                        Affairs
2005-9   4-12-2005   Fee Schedule        
2005-10  5-10-2005   Appendix D         Governmental and Intergovernmental
                                        Affairs
2005-11  5-10-2005   Appendix D         Governmental and Intergovernmental
                                        Affairs
2005-12  6-14-2005   Appendix D         Governmental and Intergovernmental
                                        Affairs
2005-13  7-12-2005   Appendix D         Governmental and Intergovernmental
                                        Affairs
2005-14  8-9-2005    Appendix D         Governmental and Intergovernmental
                                        Affairs
2005-15  8-9-2005    Appendix D         Governmental and Intergovernmental
                                        Affairs
2005-16             Voided              
2005-17  9-13-2005   Appendix C         Franchises and Services
2005-18  9-13-2005   Appendix D         Governmental and Intergovernmental
                                        Affairs
2005-19  10-11-2005  Appendix D         Governmental and Intergovernmental
                                        Affairs
2005-20  11-9-2005   Appendix D         Governmental and Intergovernmental
                                        Affairs
2005-21  11-9-2005   Appendix D         Governmental and Intergovernmental
                                        Affairs
2005-22  11-9-2005   Appendix D         Governmental and Intergovernmental
                                        Affairs
2005-23  11-9-2005   Appendix D         Governmental and Intergovernmental
                                        Affairs
2005-24  11-9-2005   Appendix D         Governmental and Intergovernmental
                                        Affairs
2005-25  12-13-2005  Appendix D         Governmental and Intergovernmental
                                        Affairs
2005-26  12-13-2005  Appendix D         Governmental and Intergovernmental
                                        Affairs
2005-27  12-13-2005  Appendix C         Governmental and Intergovernmental
                                        Affairs
2005-28  12-13-2005  Appendix D         Governmental and Intergovernmental
                                        Affairs
2005-29  12-13-2005  Appendix C         Franchises and Services
2005-30  12-13-2005  Appendix D         Governmental and Intergovernmental
                                        Affairs
2005-31  12-13-2005  Appendix D         Governmental and Intergovernmental
                                        Affairs
                                      
 
 
KEY TO THE DISPOSITION OF ALL ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section Subject
Ord. No.                  Date Passed   Code Section       Subject
171                       1-18-1972                       Zoning
Art. I, §§ 101—106                  27-101—          Zoning
                                        27-105
Art. II, §§ 201, 202                 27-201;            Zoning
                                        27-202
Art. III, §§ 301—305               27-301—          Zoning
                                        27-305
Art. IV, §§ 401—403                27-401;            Zoning
                                        27-402
Art. IV, §§ 411—413                27-411—          Zoning
                                        27-413
Art. IV, §§ 421—423                27-421—          Zoning
                                        27-423
Art. IV, §§ 431—433                27-431—          Zoning
                                        27-433
Art. IV, §§ 441—443                27-441—          Zoning
                                        27-443
Art. IV, §§ 451—453                27-451—          Zoning
                                        27-453
Art. IV, §§ 461—464                27-461—          Zoning
                                        27-464
                                      27-471—          Zoning
                                        27-474
Art. V, §§ 501—507                 27-501—          Zoning
                                        27-507
Art. V, §§ 509, 510                  27-509;            Zoning
                                        27-510
Art. V, §§ 512—518                 27-512—          Zoning
                                        27-518
                                      27-601—          Zoning
                                        27-604
                                      27-701—          Zoning
                                        27-708
                                      27-801—          Zoning
                                        27-804
Art. V, § 511                         27-901             Zoning
                                        Ch. 27, Diagrams;
                                      Ch. 27, Table;     Zoning
                                        Ch. 27, Chart A; 
                                        Ch. 27, Chart B
178                       7-15-1974     22-100—          Subdivision and
                                        22-103             Land Development
Art. I, §§ 100—103                 22-200;            Subdivision and
                                        22-201             Land Development
Art. II, §§ 200—202                22-300             Subdivision and
                                                           Land Development
Art. III, § 300                       22-400—          Subdivision and
                                        22-412             Land Development
Art. IV, §§ 400—412                22-413             Subdivision and
                                                           Land Development
Art. V, §§ 500—506                 22-500—          Subdivision and
                                        22-506             Land Development
Art. VI, § 600                        22-600             Subdivision and
                                                           Land Development
Art. VII, §§ 700—708               22-700—          Subdivision and
                                        22-708             Land Development
                                                           Governmental and
188                       6-3-1975      Appendix D         Intergovernmental
                                                           Affairs
                                        27-402;
                                        27-413;
                                        27-423;
190                       9-16-1975     27-433;            Zoning
                                        27-442;
                                        27-443;
                                        27-453
                                                           Governmental and
192                       11-18-1975    Appendix D         Intergovernmental
                                                           Affairs
                                                           Licenses, Permits
197                       11-16-1976    13-301             and General
                                                           Business
                                                           Regulations
212                       2-20-1979     27-302             Zoning
131                       - -           Repealed by 1993-4  
1-142                     - -           Repealed by 144     
144                       3-1-1979                         
Art I, §§ 100—120-4                Superseded by A.O.  
Art. II                                Superseded by A.O. Taxation
Art. III, §§ 300-1, 300-             Repealed by 2000-4 Administration
                                                           and Government
Art. III, §§ 301—305-3             Superseded by      Administration
                                        2000-4             and Government
Art. III, § 310                       Superseded by A.O. Social Security
                                                           Continuation
Art. III, § 315                       Repealed by 1993-4 Administration
                                                           and Government
                                                           Governmental and
Art. IV, § 400                        Appendix D         Intergovernmental
                                                           Affairs
Art. V                                 Repealed by 1981-4  
Art. VI                                26-101—          Water
                                        26-110
                                      Appendix C         Franchises and
                                                           Services
                                        Superseded by 2006 Fire Prevention
Art. VII, §§ 800, 801                A.O.               and Fire
                                                           Protection
                                      Appendix H         Streets and
                                                           Sidewalks
Art. XX                                Superseded by A.O. Motor Vehicles
                                                           and Traffic
Art. XXX §§ 3050                     3-101, superseded  Bicycles
                                        by 197
3100 Art. XL                           Repealed by 178    Subdivision and
                                                           Land Development
Art. XLV                               Repealed by 178    Trailer
                                                           Regulations
Art. L                                 Superseded by      Building
                                        1989-3             Regulations
Art. LX § 6000—6010                 6-101 4-101,       Conduct,
                                        superseded by A.O. Buildings
Art. LX, § 6000                       4-101              Buildings
Art. LX, § 6010                       6-101              Conduct
Art. LX, §§ 6021—6025              10-101—          Health and Safety
                                        10-105
Art. LX, § 6030                       2-101              Animals
                                      2-102              Animals
Art. LX, § 6040                       2-103              Animals
Art. LX, § 6050                       10-201             Health and Safety
Art. LXII, § 6200                     Superseded by       
                                        1994-4
Art. LXXX,                             Superseded by       
§§ 8001—8020                        1988-4
146                       - -           Repealed by 178     
156                       - -           Superseded by A.O.  
171                       1-18-1972                        
Art. I, §§ 101—106                 27-101—          Zoning
                                        27-105
Art. II, §§ 201, 202                 27-201;            Zoning
                                        27-202
Art. III, §§ 301—305               27-301—          Zoning
                                        27-305
Art. IV, §§ 401—403                27-401;            Zoning
                                        27-402
Art. IV, §§ 411—413                27-411—          Zoning
                                        27-413
Art. IV, §§ 421—423                27-421—          Zoning
                                        27-423
Art. IV, §§ 431—433                27-431—          Zoning
                                        27-433
Art. IV, §§ 441—443                27-441—          Zoning
                                        27-443
Art. IV, §§ 451—453                27-451—          Zoning
                                        27-453
Art. IV, §§ 461—464                27-461—          Zoning
                                        27-464
                                      27-471—          Zoning
                                        27-474
Art. V, §§ 501—507                 27-501—          Zoning
                                        27-507
Art. V, §§ 509, 510                  27-509;            Zoning
                                        27-510
Art. V, §§ 512—518                 27-512—          Zoning
                                        27-518
                                      27-601—          Zoning
                                        27-604
                                      27-701—          Zoning
                                        27-708
                                      27-801—          Zoning
                                        27-804
Art. V, § 511                         27-901             Zoning
178                       7-15-1974                        
Art. I, §§ 100—103                 22-100—          Subdivision and
                                        22-103             Land Development
Art. II, §§ 200—202                22-200;            Subdivision and
                                        22-201             Land Development
Art. III, § 300                       22-300             Subdivision and
                                                           Land Development
Art. IV, § 400—412                  22-400—          Subdivision and
                                        22-412             Land Development
Art. IV                                22-413             Subdivision and
                                                           Land Development
Art. V, §§ 500—506                 22-500—          Subdivision and
                                        22-506             Land Development
Art. VI, § 600                        22-600             Subdivision and
                                                           Land Development
Art. VII, §§ 700—708               22-700—          Subdivision and
                                        22-708             Land Development
                                        27-402;
                                        27-413;
                                        27-423;
190                       9-16-1975     27-433;            Zoning
                                        27-442;
                                        27-443;
                                        27-453
                                                           Governmental and
192                       11-18-1975    Appendix D         Intergovernmental
                                                           Affairs
193                       Missing                          
                                                           Licenses, Permits
197                       11-16-1976    13-301             and General
                                                           Business
                                                           Regulations
212                       2-20-1979     27-302             Zoning
                                                           27-202;
213                       3-29-1979                       27-411—
                                                           27-413; 27-
                                                           507Zoning
214                       - -           Superseded by A.O. Taxation; Special
1980                      - -           Tax rate 1980      Taxation; Special
1980-1                    - -           Repealed by 2005-4 Taxation; Special
1980-2                    - -           Repealed by 1985-5 Administration
                                                           and Government
1980-3                    8-19-1990     Appendix C         Franchises and
                                                           Services
1980-4                    - -           Repealed by A.O.   Health and Safety
1980-5                    - -           Occupation tax      
                                        1981
1981                      - -           Tax rate 1981      Taxation; Special
                                        27-421;
                                        27-423;
                                        27-901;
1981-1                    2-17-1981     Ch. 27, Diagrams;  Zoning
                                        Ch. 27, Table;
                                        Ch. 27, Chart A; 
                                        Ch. 27, Chart B
                                                           Governmental and
1981-2                    3-17-1981     Appendix D         Intergovernmental
                                                           Affairs
                                                           Governmental and
1981-3                    4-21-1981     Appendix D         Intergovernmental
                                                           Affairs
1981-4                    - -           Repealed           Sewers and Sewage
                                                           Disposal
                                                           Licenses, Permits
1981-5                    9-22-1981     13-201—          and General
                                        13-210             Business
                                                           Regulations
1982-1                    3-16-1982     27-302             Zoning
1982-2                    - -           Repealed by 1989-3  
1982-3                    - -           Occupation tax      
                                        1983
1983                      - -           Tax rate 1983       
                                                           Licenses, Permits
1983-1                    - -           Superseded by A.O. and General
                                                           Business
                                                           Regulations
1983-2                    - -           Repealed by Ord.    
                                        1989-3
                                                           Licenses, Permits
1983-3                    - -           Superseded by A.O. and General
                                                           Business
                                                           Regulations
                                                           Governmental and
1984-1                    5-15-1984     Appendix D         Intergovernmental
                                                           Affairs
1984-2                    10-16-1984    Appendix H         Streets and
                                                           Sidewalks
1985                      - -           Tax rate 1985       
1985-1                    - -           Repealed by 1993-4 Administration
                                                           and Government
1985-2                    - -           Repealed by 2011-2 Water
1985-3                    11-19-1985    Appendix B         Bond Issues and
                                                           Loans
1985-4                                 Repealed by 2000-   
                                        04
1985-5                    12-17-1985    1-401—           Administration
§§ 1—3                              1-404              and Government
1986                      - -           Tax rate 1986       
1986-1                    8-12-1986     27-461—          Zoning
                                        27-464; 27-516
1986-2                    - -           Occupation tax      
                                        1986
1987                      - -           Tax rate 1987       
                                        Ch. 27, Diagrams;
1987-1                    4-21-1987     Ch. 27, Table;     Zoning
                                        Ch. 27, Chart A; 
                                        Ch. 27, Chart B
1987-2                    10-20-1987    27-202             Zoning
1988                      - -           Tax rate 1988       
1988-1                    - -           Superseded by       
                                        1988-2
1988-2                    - -           Superseded by      Solid Waste
                                        2009-3
1988-3                    5-17-1988     2-102; 2-103       Animals
1988-3A                                Superseded by A.O.  
1988-4                    11-15-1988                       
§§ 8001—8005                       1-201—           Administration
                                        1-205              and Government
§§ 8009—8011                       1-206—           Administration
                                        1-208              and Government
1984-3                    2-21-1989     8-101;             Floodplains
Art. I, §§ 1.00, 1.01                 8-102
1989                      - -           Tax rate 1989       
1989-1                    - -           Repealed by 2011-2 Water
                                                           Governmental and
1989-2                    2-21-1989     Appendix D         Intergovernmental
                                                           Affairs
1989-3                    2-21-1989                        
Art. I, §§ 1.02—1.04               8-103—           Floodplains
                                        8-105
Art. II, §§ 2.00—2.10              8-201—           Floodplains
                                        8-212
Art. III, §§ 3.00—3.03             8-301—           Floodplains
                                        8-304
Art. IV, §§ 4.00—4.05              8-401—           Floodplains
                                        8-406
Art. V, §§ 5.00—5.03               8-501—           Floodplains
                                        8-504
Art. VI, §§ 6.00, 6.01               8-601;             Floodplains
                                        8-602
Art. VII, §§ 7.00, 7.01              8-701;             Floodplains
                                        8-702
Art. VIII, §§ 8.00, 8.01             8-801;             Floodplains
                                        8-802
1989-4                    - -           Repealed            
1989-5                    - -           Repealed by 2011-2 Water
1990                      - -           Tax rate 1990       
1990-2                    11-20-1990    27-516             Zoning
1990-3                    8-19-1990     Appendix C         Franchises and
                                                           Services
1991                      - -           Tax rate 1991       
1991-1                    - -           Occupation tax     Taxation; Special
                                        1991
1991-2                    - -           Repealed by 2004-7  
                                                           Licenses, Permits
1991-3                    - -           Superseded by A.O. and General
                                                           Business
                                                           Regulations
1992                      - -           Tax rate 1992       
                                                           Governmental and
1992-1                    2-11-1992     Appendix D         Intergovernmental
                                                           Affairs
1992-3                    3-17-1992     Appendix H         Streets and
                                                           Sidewalks
                                        Superseded by      Fire Prevention
1992-4                    - -           2001-3             and Fire
                                                           Protection
1993                      - -           Tax rate 1993       
                                        22-103;
                                        22-201;
1993-1                                  22-300;            Subdivision and
§ 1                      2-16-1993     22-403—          Land Development
                                        22-413;
                                        22-700—
                                        22-708
                                      22-503             Subdivision and
                                                           Land Development
                                        27-202;
                                        27-402;
                                        27-403;
                                        27-412;
                                        27-506;
1993-2                    2-16-1993     27-513;            Zoning
                                        27-601—
                                        27-604;
                                        27-701—
                                        27-708;
                                        27-801—
                                        27-804
1993-3                    - -           Superseded by A.O. Water
1993-4                    - -           Repealer           Administration
                                                           and Government
                                        20-202;
1993-5                    9-21-1993     20-204—          Solid Waste
§ 2                                    20-208;
                                        22-505
1993-6                    10-19-1993    22-505             Subdivision and
                                                           Land Development
1994                      - -           Tax rate 1994       
1994-1                    - -           Superseded by A.O. Motor Vehicles
                                                           and Traffic
1994-2                    - -           Superseded by A.O. Water
1994-3                    - -           Superseded by A.O. Motor Vehicles
                                                           and Traffic
1994-4                    - -           Repealed by 2008-6 Conduct
1995                      - -           Tax rate 1995       
1995-1                    Missing                          
1995-02                   - -           Superseded by A.O. Motor Vehicles
                                                           and Traffic
1995-3                    12-19-1995    Appendix H         Streets and
                                                           Sidewalks
1996                      - -           Tax rate 1996       
1996-1                    5-21-1996     Appendix H         Streets and
                                                           Sidewalks
1996-2                    9-17-1996     10-301—          Health and Safety
§§ 1—3                              10-303
1996-3                    - -           Superseded by A.O. Motor Vehicles
                                                           and Traffic
1997                      - -           Tax rate 1997       
1997-1                    - -           Superseded by A.O. Motor Vehicles
                                                           and Traffic
1997-2                    - -1997       24-601;            Taxation; Special
                                        24-602
                                        22-100—
                                        22-103;
                                        22-200—
                                        22-202;
                                        22-300;
1997-03                   3-18-1997     22-400—          Subdivision and
                                        22-413;            Land Development
                                        22-500—
                                        22-506;
                                        22-600;
                                        22-700—
                                        22-707
                                        27-101—
                                        27-106;
                                        27-201;
                                        27-202;
                                        27-301—
                                        27-305;
                                        27-401—
                                        27-403;
                                        27-411—
                                        27-413;
                                        27-421—
                                        27-423;
                                        27-431—
                                        27-433;
                                        27-441—
                                        27-443;
                                        27-451—
1997-04                   3-18-1997     27-453;            Zoning
                                        27-461—
                                        27-464;
                                        27-501—
                                        27-510;
                                        27-512—
                                        27-518;
                                        27-601—
                                        27-604;
                                        27-701—
                                        27-708;
                                        27-801—
                                        27-803;
                                        27-901;
                                        Ch. 27, Diagrams;
                                        Ch. 27, Table;
                                        Ch. 27, Chart A;
                                        Ch. 27, Chart B
1997-5                    - -           Superseded by A.O. Motor Vehicles
                                                           and Traffic
1997-6                    - -           Superseded by A.O. Motor Vehicles
                                                           and Traffic
1997-7                    1-5-1998      Appendix H         Streets and
                                                           Sidewalks
1997-8                    - -           Repealed by 2000-   
                                        04
1998                      - -           Tax rate 1988       
1998-01                   - -           Superseded by A.O. Motor Vehicles
                                                           and Traffic
1998-2                    6-16-1998     Appendix B         Bond Issues and
                                                           Loans
1998-03                   - -           Superseded by A.O. Motor Vehicles
                                                           and Traffic
                                                           Licenses, Permits
1998-04                   - -           Superseded by A.O. and General
                                                           Business
                                                           Regulations
                                                           Licenses, Permits
1998-05                   - -           Superseded by A.O. and General
                                                           Business
                                                           Regulations
                                                           Fire Prevention
1998-06                   - -           Superseded by A.O. and Fire
                                                           Protection
                                                           Fire Prevention
1998-07                   - -           Superseded by A.O. and Fire
                                                           Protection
1998-08                   - -           Superseded by A.O. Motor Vehicles
                                                           and Traffic
1988-04                   2-13-1999     20-208             Solid Waste
1999                      - -           Tax rate 1999       
1999-01                   9-14-1999     Appendix H         Streets and
                                                           Sidewalks
1999-02                   - -           Superseded by A.O. Taxation; Special
1999-03                   - -           Repealed by 2009-3 Solid Waste
1999-04                   - -           Superseded 2007-2  Solid Waste
1999-05                   6-8-1999                         
§ 1                                   8-210              Floodplains
§ 3                                   8-602              Floodplains
1991-1                    9-14-1999     Appendix H         Streets and
                                                           Sidewalks
                                                           Governmental and
1999-06                   11-9-1999     Appendix D         Intergovernmental
                                                           Affairs
1999-07                   9-14-1999     1-501—           Administration
§§ 1—5                              1-505              and Government
1999-08                   12-11-1998    27-509             Zoning
1999-09                   12-14-1999    27-901             Zoning
                                                           Governmental and
1999-10                   11-9-1999     Appendix D         Intergovernmental
                                                           Affairs
1999-11                   11-9-1999     Appendix H         Streets and
                                                           Sidewalks
2000                      - -           Tax rate 2000       
2000-1                    5-9-2000                         
§ 2                                   27-202             Zoning
§ 3                                   27-471—          Zoning
                                        27-473
                                      27-474             Zoning
§§ 4, 5                              27-901             Zoning
2000-2                    5-9-2000      22-502;            Subdivision and
§§ 2—4                              22-506             Land Development
2000-3                    - -           Superseded by      Solid Waste
                                        2010-1
2000-4                    8-8-2000      1-101;             Administration
§§ 1, 2                               1-102              and Government
                                                           Governmental and
2000-5                    10-10-2000    Appendix D         Intergovernmental
                                                           Affairs
2000-6                    - -           Repealed by 2011-2 Water
2000-7                    10-10-2000    9-101—           Grading and
§§ 1—15                             9-115              Excavating
                                                           Governmental and
2000-8                    11-14-2000    Appendix D         Intergovernmental
                                                           Affairs
2000-09                                Tax rate 2001       
2000-10                   1-9-2001      24-601             Taxation; Special
2001-1                    2-13-2002     5-401—           Code Enforcement
                                        5-404
2001-2                                 Superseded         Code Enforcement
2001-3                                  7-101—           Fire Prevention
§§ 1—9                2-13-2001     7-109              and Fire
                                                           Protection
2001-4                    2-13-2001     5-601—           Code Enforcement
§§ 1—5                              5-605
2001-5                    2-13-2001     5-101—           Code Enforcement
§§ 1—4                              5-104
                                        5-201—
2001-6                    2-13-2001     5-204;             Code Enforcement
§§ 1—4                              5-301—
                                        5-304
2001-7                    2-13-2001                        
                                                           Licenses, Permits
§§ 1—3                             13-401—          and General
                                        13-403             Business
                                                           Regulations
                                                           Licenses, Permits
§§ 5, 6                              13-404;            and General
                                        13-405             Business
                                                           Regulations
2001-8                                 Superseded by A.O. Motor Vehicles
                                                           and Traffic
2001-8                    11-9-2004     21-203             Streets and
                                                           Sidewalks
2001-9                    8-14-2001     Appendix H         Streets and
                                                           Sidewalks
2001-10                   10-9-2001     Appendix H         Streets and
                                                           Sidewalks
2001-11                   2-12-2001     27-509             Zoning
2001-12                   - -           Tax rate 2002       
2002-1                                  5-301;
§§ 1—4                2-12-2002     5-401—           Code Enforcement
                                        5-404
2002-2                    - -           Superseded by A.O. Taxation; Special
2002-3                    6-11-2002, §�5-501—           Code Enforcement
                          1—4         5-504
2002-4                    - -           Superseded          
                                                           Governmental and
2002-5                    3-11-2003     Appendix D         Intergovernmental
                                                           Affairs
2002-07                                Tax rate 2003       
2003-1                    4-8-2003      24-601; 24-602     Taxation; Special
2003-2                    10-8-2003     1-201—           Administration
                                        1-208              and Government
                                                           Governmental and
2003-3                    5-13-2003     Appendix D         Intergovernmental
                                                           Affairs
                                                           Governmental and
2003-3A                   5-13-2003     Appendix D         Intergovernmental
                                                           Affairs
2003-4                    - -           Repealed           Administration
                                                           and Government
2003-5                    - -           Superseded by A.O. Motor Vehicles
                                                           and Traffic
2003-6                    - -           Tax rate 2004       
2004-1                    4-13-2004     5-701—           Code Enforcement
§§ 1—4                              5-704
2004-2                    11-9-2004     Appendix C         Franchises and
                                                           Services
2004-3                    - -           Superseded by A.O. Motor Vehicles
                                                           and Traffic
2004-5                    - -           Repealed by 2011-2 Water
2004-6                    6-8-2004      Appendix B         Bond Issues and
                                                           Loans
2004-7                    - -           Superseded by A.O. Motor Vehicles
                                                           and Traffic
2004-8                    11-9-2004     21-202             Streets and
                                                           Sidewalks
2004-9                    12-14-2004    Appendix H         Streets and
                                                           Sidewalks
2004-10                   - -           Tax rate 2005       
2005-1                    2-8-2005      1-201—           Administration
                                        1-208              and Government
2005-2                    6-14-2005     27-901             Zoning
2005-3                    8-9-2005      27-901             Zoning
2005-4                    - -           Repealed by 2007-8 Taxation; Special
2005-5                    - -           Tax rate 2006       
2006-1                    - -           Superseded         Zoning
2006-4                    4-11-2006     Repealer            
2006-6                    6-13-2006     11-201—          Housing
                                        11-210
2007-1                    1-9-2007      1-101;             Administration
                                        1-102              and Government
2007-2                    2-15-2007     20-201—          Solid Waste
                                        20-204
2007-3                    4-10-2007     27-901             Zoning
2007-4                    4-10-2007     15-405;            Motor Vehicles
                                        15-411             and Traffic
                                        11-202;
2007-5                    4-10-2007     11-205;            Housing
                                        11-207
2007-6                    8-14-2007     Voided              
2007-7                    8-14-2007     24-510             Taxation; Special
2007-8                    - -2007       24-401—          Taxation; Special
                                        24-418
2007-9                    12-11-2007    Appendix H         Streets and
                                                           Sidewalks
                                        11-202;
2007-10                   12-11-2007    11-203;            Housing
                                        11-205;
                                        11-210
                                        7-101;             Fire Prevention
2007-11                   12-11-2007    7-102;             and Fire
                                        7-105;             Protection
                                        7-106
2007-12                   12-11-2007    Tax rate 2008       
2008-1                    3-11-2008     21-301             Streets and
                                                           Sidewalks
2008-2                    3-11-2008     15-402             Motor Vehicles
                                                           and Traffic
2008-3                    4-9-2008      22-500             Subdivision and
                                                           Land Development
2008-4                    4-9-2008      15-404             Motor Vehicles
                                                           and Traffic
                                        13-101;
                                        13-102;            Licenses, Permits
2008-5                    6-9-2008      13-104;            and General
                                        13-105;            Business
                                        13-107;            Regulations
                                        13-108
2008-6                    6-9-2008      6-201—           Conduct
                                        6-204
                                                           Governmental and
2008-7                    6-9-2008      Appendix D         Intergovernmental
                                                           Affairs
2008-8                    11-3-2008     Appendix C         Franchises and
                                                           Services
2008-9                    12-9-2008     Tax rate 2009       
                                                           Governmental and
2009-1                    1-13-2009     Appendix D         Intergovernmental
                                                           Affairs
                                                           Governmental and
2009-2                    1-13-2009     Appendix D         Intergovernmental
                                                           Affairs
2009-3                    3-10-2009     20-101—          Solid Waste
                                        20-107
2009-4                    7-14-2009     15-402;            Motor Vehicles
                                        15-405             and Traffic
                                        8-301;
2009-5                    8-11-2009     8-403;             Floodplains
                                        8-406;
                                        8-802
2009-6                    12-8-2009     Tax rate 2010       
2010-1                    2-9-2010      20-103;            Solid Waste
                                        20-108
2010-2                    7-13-2010     10-102—          Health and Safety
                                        10-105
2010-3                    10-12-2010    Appendix C         Franchises and
                                                           Services
2010-4                    12-14-2010    15-402             Motor Vehicles
                                                           and Traffic
2010-5                    12-14-2010    Tax rate 2011       
2010-6                    12-14-2010    27-901             Zoning
2011-1                    4-12-2011     20-107             Solid Waste
                                        26-101—
                                        26-110;
                                        26-201;
                                        26-301—
                                        26-306;
                                        26-401—
                                        26-407;
                                        26-501—
2011-2                    10-11-2011    26-503;            Water
                                        26-601;
                                        26-701—
                                        26-703;
                                        26-801—
                                        26-806;
                                        26-901;
                                        26-1001;
                                        Ch. 26, App. A
                                                           Governmental and
2011-3                    11-7-2011     Appendix D         Intergovernmental
                                                           Affairs
2011-4                    11-7-2011     24-101—          Taxation; Special
                                        24-114
                                                           Governmental and
2011-5                    11-7-2011     Appendix D         Intergovernmental
                                                           Affairs
2011-6                    11-7-2011     Tax rate 2012       
2011-7                    12-13-2011    Repealer Chapter   Administration
                                        1, Part 3          and Government
2012-1                    6-12-2012     2-201—           Animals
                                        2-203
2012-2                    3-13-2012     Appendix B         Bond Issues and
                                                           Loans
2012-3                    12-11-2012    Tax rate 2013       
2013-1                    11-12-2013    4-201—           Buildings
                                        4-205
2013-2                    12-10-2013    Tax rate 2014       
2014-1                    9-9-2014      15-901;            Motor Vehicles
                                        15-902             and Traffic
                                        21-101;            Streets and
2014-2                    9-9-2014      21-102;            Sidewalks
                                        21-104
                                                           Governmental and
2014-3                    9-9-2014      Appendix D         Intergovernmental
                                                           Affairs
2014-4                    10-14-2014    15-405             Motor Vehicles
                                                           and Traffic
                                                           Governmental and
2014-5                    12-9-2014     Appendix D         Intergovernmental
                                                           Affairs
2014-6                    12-9-2014     Tax rate 2015       
2015-1                    1-13-2015     27-901             Zoning
                                                           Governmental and
2015-2                    2-10-2015     Appendix D         Intergovernmental
                                                           Affairs
2015-3                    10-13-2015    2-104—           Animals
                                        2-107
2015-4                    10-13-2015    15-402             Motor Vehicles
                                                           and Traffic
                                        8-203;
                                        8-211;
                                        8-301—
2015-5                    12-8-2015     8-303;             Floodplains
                                        8-401;
                                        8-402A;
                                        8-404
2015-6                    12-8-2015     Tax rate 2016       
2016-1                    12-13-2016    Tax rate 2017       
                                                           Governmental and
2017-1                    4-11-2017     Appendix D         Intergovernmental
                                                           Affairs
2017-2                    5-9-2017      16-101—          Parks and
                                        16-104             Recreation
                                                           Governmental and
2017-3                    9-12-2017     Appendix D         Intergovernmental
                                                           Affairs
2017-4                    9-12-2017     Appendix H         Streets and
                                                           Sidewalks
2017-5                    12-12-2017    Tax rate 2018       
2018-1                    12-11-2018    Tax rate 2019       
2019-1                    9-10-2019     15-301—          Motor Vehicles
                                        15-304             and Traffic
2019-2                    12-10-2019    Tax rate 2020       
2020-1                    2-11-2020     15-301—          Motor Vehicles
                                        15-304             and Traffic
2020-2                    12-8-2020     Tax rate 2021       
2021-1                    5-19-2021     Appendix B         Bond Issues and
                                                           Loans
2021-3                    12-14-2021    Tax rate 2022       
                                        27-202;
2022-1                    12-13-2022    27-442;            Zoning
                                        27-511
2022-2                    12-13-2022    Tax rate 2023       
                                                           Non-uniformed
2023-1                    9-12-2023     Appendix D         employee pension
                                                           plan
                                        27-202;
2025-1                    9-9-2025      27-432;            Zoning
                                        27-442
                          
 
 
