BOROUGH OF EVERETT, PENNSYLVANIA
CODE OF ORDINANCES
Code current through
Ord. 2025-05-13 published 5-12-2025
 
Published by:
AMERICAN LEGAL PUBLISHING
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
(800) 445-5588 www.amlegal.com
OFFICIALS OF THE BOROUGH OF EVERETT
BEDFORD COUNTY
PENNSYLVANIA
Elected Officials
Mayor           Harry F. Leonard, Jr.
2025 Council
President       Charles T. Stone
Vice President  Barry Husick
Council Members Jarred Bulger
               Jaimie Bulger
               Garrison Leonard
               Renee Nicholson
               Karen Sciranko
Tax Collector   Karen Foor
Appointed Officials
Secretary       Ruth Bowman
Treasurer       Harry F. Leonard, Jr.
Police Chief    Thaddeus Yothers
Engineer        P. Joseph Lehman, Inc.
Solicitor       Bradley D. Allison
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
10.01   Approval, adoption, and title of code
   
10.02   Rules of interpretation and definitions
   
10.03   Effect of code on previous provisions
   
10.04   Sections and ordinances repealed
   
10.05   Exemptions from repeal
   
10.06   Application to future ordinances
   
10.07   Changes and revisions in previously adopted ordinances
   
10.08   Interpretation of provisions
   
10.09   Headings, editor’s notes, statutory references
   
10.10   Filing copies of code
   
10.11   Amendments to the code; code books to be kept up-to-date
   
10.12   Severability
   
10.13   Reference to other sections
   
10.14   Errors and omissions
   
10.15   Sections histories; statutory references
   
10.16   Altering or tampering with the code; penalties for violation
 
   
10.99   General penalty
§ 10.01 APPROVAL, ADOPTION, AND TITLE OF CODE.
   (A)   Pursuant to 8 Pa.C.S. § 3301.5, the codification of all ordinances of
a permanent and general nature for the Borough of Everett, Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, as revised, codified, rearranged, renumbered, and consolidated
into component codes, titles, chapters, and sections, are approved, adopted,
ordained, and enacted as a single ordinance of the Borough of Everett and shall
be known and designated as the Borough of Everett Code, for which designation
“code of ordinances,” “codified ordinances,” or “code” may be substituted.
   (B)   Code title, chapter, and section headings do not constitute any part
of the law as contained in the code.
§ 10.02 RULES OF INTERPRETATION AND DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   Rules of interpretation.
      (1)   Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain, ordinary, and
usual sense. Technical words and phrases having a peculiar and appropriate
meaning in law shall be understood according to their technical import.
      (2)   Words imputing joint authority to three or more persons shall be
construed as imputing authority to a majority of the persons unless otherwise
declared in the section giving the authority.
      (3)   Where a section requires an act to be done which, by law, an agent
or deputy may perform in addition to the principal, the performance of the act
by an authorized deputy or agent is valid.
      (4)   Words denoting the masculine gender shall be deemed to include the
feminine and neuter genders; words in the singular shall include the plural and
words in the plural shall include the singular; the use of a verb in the
present tense shall include the future, if applicable
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this code, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICE. All departments and the personnel thereof
established by the Borough Code or ordinance.
      ADOPTING ORDINANCE. The ordinance of the Borough of Everett adopting the
Codified Ordinances of Everett Borough, Pennsylvania, in accordance with the
Borough Code of Pennsylvania.
      AND. May be read OR, and OR may be read AND, if the sense requires it.
      AUTHORITY. Whenever in this code, authority is given to an officer or an
act is required to be performed, the authority may be exercised and the act may
be performed, at the instance of the officer, by a deputy or subordinate,
unless contrary to law or to the clear intent of any particular provision.
      BOROUGH and MUNICIPALITY. The Borough of Everett, Pennsylvania.
      BOROUGH CODE. P.L. 432, of 2014, No. 37, effective June 17, 2014, being 8
Pa.C.S. §§ 101 et seq., as amended.
      BUDGET. The annual budget of the borough.
      CALENDAR/COMPUTATION OF TIME. The terms MONTH and YEAR mean the CALENDAR
MONTH or YEAR. The time expressed in days within which an act is to be done or
a period is to expire shall be computed by excluding the first and including
the last day, unless the last day is a Sunday, in which case it shall be
excluded. If time is expressed in hours, the whole of Sunday shall be excluded.
      CONTRACT ADMINISTRATION. The management of the execution of contracts
between the borough and any individual, partnership, association, corporation,
or governmental body.
      COUNCIL. The Council of the Borough of Everett, Pennsylvania.
      COUNTY. The County of Bedford, Pennsylvania.
      ENGINEER. The Engineer of the borough.
      KEEPER and PROPRIETOR. Persons, firms, associations, corporations, clubs,
and copartnerships, whether acting by themselves or as a servant, agent, or
employee.
      LAND/REAL ESTATE. Includes rights and easements of an incorporeal nature.
      LAW. All applicable laws and ordinances of the United States of America,
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and the County of Bedford.
      MANAGER and BOROUGH MANAGER. The chief administrative officer as
appointed by the Borough Council.
      OATH. Includes AFFIRMATION. When an oath is required or authorized by
law, an affirmation in lieu thereof may be taken by a person having
conscientious scruples about taking an OATH. An AFFIRMATION shall have the same
effect as an OATH.
      ORDINANCE. Any ordinance of the Borough of Everett, including this code.
      OWNER. When applied to property, includes a part owner, joint owner, or
tenant in common of the whole or any part of the property.
      PERSON. An individual, association, club, corporation, firm, partnership,
body politic, or any other legal entity.
      PREMISES. When used as applicable to property, extends to and includes
land and buildings.
      PROPERTY. Includes real and personal property and any mixed and lesser
estates or interests therein. PERSONAL PROPERTY includes every kind of property
except REAL PROPERTY. REAL PROPERTY includes lands, tenements, and
hereditaments.
      REASONABLE TIME. In all cases where provision is made for and act to be
done or notice to be given within a REASONABLE TIME, it shall be deemed to mean
the time only as may be necessary for the prompt performance of the act or the
giving of the notice.
      SECRETARY and BOROUGH SECRETARY. An appointed position charged with the
responsibility for taking meeting minutes; recording and certifying ordinances;
attesting to the execution of documents; and is the custodian of borough
records and the borough seal. The BOROUGH SECRETARY shall not be a member of
the Borough Council and serves an indefinite term at the pleasure of the
Borough Council.
      SIDEWALK. Any portion of a street between the curb line and the adjacent
property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding parkways.
      SOLICITOR. The Solicitor of the borough.
      STATE and COMMONWEALTH. The Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
      STREET. Alleys, avenues, boulevards, lanes, roads, streets, state
highways, and other public ways in the borough.
      TENANT and OCCUPANT. As applied to buildings or land, shall extend and be
applied to any person holding a written or oral lease of, or who occupies the
whole or any part of, a building or land, alone or with others.
      TIME. Whenever any time established in the codified ordinances for the
taking of any action expires on a Sunday or legal holiday, the time shall not
expire on the day but shall expire on the next week day.
§ 10.03 EFFECT OF CODE ON PREVIOUS PROVISIONS.
   (A)   The provisions of this code, insofar as they are substantially the
same as those of ordinances and resolutions in force immediately prior to the
enactment of this code, are intended as a continuation of the ordinances and
resolutions, and not as new enactments, and the effectiveness of the provisions
shall date from the date of adoption of the prior ordinance or resolution.
   (B)   All the provisions are hereby continued in full force and effect and
are hereby reaffirmed as to their adoption by the Borough Council, and it is
the intention of the Borough Council that each provision contained within the
code is hereby reenacted and reaffirmed as it appears in the code.
§ 10.04 SECTIONS AND ORDINANCES REPEALED.
   All ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict with the provisions of
this code are hereby repealed.
§ 10.05 EXEMPTIONS FROM REPEAL.
   The repeal provided for in §
10.04 shall not affect the following ordinances, resolutions, rights, and
obligations which are hereby expressly saved from repeal; provided, however,
that the repeal of ordinances or parts thereof in §
10.04, or the saving from repeal of ordinances or parts thereof pursuant to
this section, shall not be construed so as to revive an ordinance or part
thereof previously repealed, superseded, or no longer of any effect:
   (A)   Any offense or act committed or done, or any penalty or forfeiture
incurred, or any contract or right established or accruing, before the adoption
of these codified ordinances;
   (B)   Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of
money by or to the borough, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the
borough, or any evidence of the borough’s indebtedness, or any contract or
obligation assumed by the borough;
   (C)   Any ordinance or resolution of Council not in conflict or inconsistent
with the provisions of these codified ordinances;
   (D)   Any right, license, or franchise conferred by any ordinance or
resolution of Council or any other person or corporation;
   (E)   Any ordinance establishing, naming, relocating, or vacating any street
or other public way;
   (F)   Any ordinance or part thereof providing for the establishment of
positions, for salaries or compensation;
   (G)   Any prosecution, suit, or other proceeding pending, or any judgment
rendered, on or prior to the adoption of these codified ordinances;
   (H)   Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes or assessments;
   (I)   Any ordinance establishing or changing the boundaries of the borough;
or
   (J)   Any ordinance or resolution adopted by Council after the adoption of
the codified ordinances.
§ 10.06 APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.
   All provisions of Title I, compatible with future legislation, shall apply
to ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code unless
otherwise specifically provided.
§ 10.07 CHANGES AND REVISIONS IN PREVIOUSLY ADOPTED ORDINANCES.
   (A)   Nonsubstantive grammatical changes. In compiling and preparing the
ordinances and resolutions of the borough for adoption and revision as part of
the code, certain nonsubstantive grammatical and style changes were made in one
or more of the ordinances. It is the intention of the Borough Council that all
the changes be adopted as part of the code as if the ordinances and resolutions
so changed had been previously formally amended to read as such.
   (B)   Substantive changes and revisions. In addition to the changes and
revisions in division (A) above, changes and revisions of a substantive nature
are hereby made to various ordinances and resolutions included in the code.
These changes are enacted to bring provisions into conformity with the desired
policies of the Borough Council, and it is the intent of the Borough Council
that all the changes be adopted as part of the code as if the ordinances and
resolutions so changed have been previously formally amended to read as such.
All changes and revisions shall be deemed to be in effect as of the effective
date of this code.
§ 10.08 INTERPRETATION OF PROVISIONS.
   In interpreting and applying the provision of the code, they shall be held
to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety,
comfort, convenience, and general welfare. Where the provisions of the code
impose greater restrictions or requirements than those of any state statute,
other ordinance, resolution, or regulation, the provisions of the code shall
control. Where the provisions of any statute, other ordinance, resolution, or
regulation impose greater restrictions or requirements, the provisions of the
statute, other ordinance, resolution, or regulation shall control.
§ 10.09 HEADINGS, EDITOR’S NOTES, STATUTORY REFERENCES.
   (A)   Headings of titles, chapters, sections, and divisions in the code, or
in supplements to the code, are inserted into the code, and may be inserted
into the supplements to the code, for the convenience of persons using the code
and are not part of the legislation.
   (B)   Editors’s notes and/or statutory references indicating sources of
sections, giving other information, or referring the statutes or to other parts
of the code are inserted in the code, and may be inserted in supplements to the
code, for the convenience of persons using the code and are not part of the
legislation.
§ 10.10 FILING COPIES OF CODE.
   Three copies of the code in a bound volume shall be filed with the ordinance
books in the office of the Borough Manager and shall remain there for use and
examination by the public. Upon adoption, the copies shall be certified to by
the Borough Manager, as provided by law, and the certified copies shall remain
on file in the office of the Borough Manager, available to persons desiring to
examine the same during all times while the code is in effect.
§ 10.11 AMENDMENTS TO THE CODE; CODE BOOKS TO BE KEPT UP-TO-DATE.
   (A)   Any and all additions, deletions, amendments, or supplements to the
code, when passed and adopted so as to indicate the intention of Borough
Council to be a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated into the code
so that the references in the code shall be understood and intended to include
the changes. When any and all additions, deletions, amendments, or supplements
to the code shall be adopted, they shall be printed and inserted in the bound
code book as amendments and supplements to it.
   (B)   (1)   The Borough Manager or someone authorized or directed by him or
her shall keep the certified copies of the code book, which are required to be
kept in the Borough Manager’s office for public use, up-to-date.
      (2)   All changes in the code, and all ordinances and resolutions adopted
subsequent to the effective date of this code, which the Borough Council
specifically adopts as part of the code, shall be included in the code book by
reference until the changes or new ordinances or resolutions are printed as
supplements to the code book and inserted into the code book.
§ 10.12 SEVERABILITY.
   (A)   If any title, chapter, section, division, or part thereof of this code
now enacted or subsequently amended or its application to any person or
circumstances is held to be illegal, invalid, or unconstitutional by a court of
competent jurisdiction, that determination shall not affect, impair, or
invalidate the remainder thereof, but is confined in its operation and
application to the title, chapter, section, division, or part thereof
determined illegal, invalid, or unconstitutional.
   (B)   It is the intent of the Borough Council to declare that this code
would have been adopted if the illegal, invalid, or unconstitutional title,
chapter, section, division, or part thereof would not have been included.
§ 10.13 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
   Whenever in one section, reference is made to another section hereof, the
reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified, or renumbered unless the subject matter is
changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
§ 10.14 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   (A)   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of
any words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention
of the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning can
be attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was
clearly intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be corrected and the
word or words supplied, omitted, or substituted as will conform with the
manifest intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though the
correct words were contained in the text as originally published.
   (B)   No alteration shall be made or permitted if any question exists
regarding the nature or extent of the error.
§ 10.15 SECTIONS HISTORIES; STATUTORY REFERENCES.
   (A)   (1)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and
passage date of the original ordinance, and amending ordinances, if any, are
listed following the text of the code section.
      (2)   Example: (Ord. 10, passed 5-13-1960; Ord. 15, passed 1-1-1970; Ord.
20, passed 1-1-1980; Ord. 25, passed 1-1-1985)
   (B)   (1)   If a statutory cite is included in the history, this indicates
that the text of the section reads substantially the same as the statute.
Example: (65 P.S. § 67.101) (Ord. 10, passed 1-17-1980; Ord. 20, passed 1-1-
1985)
      (2)   If a statutory cite is set forth as a “statutory reference”
following the text of the section, this indicates that the reader should refer
to that statute for further information. Example:
§ 39.01 PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.
   This code book consists of all ordinances and resolutions of the borough and
shall be known as the codified ordinances of the borough.
      Statutory reference:
   Authority to codify ordinances, see 65 P.S. §§ 67.101 et seq.
   (C)   If a section of this code is derived from the previous code of
ordinances of the borough published in a previous year and subsequently
amended, the previous code section number shall be indicated in the history by
“(Prior Code, §      )”.
§ 10.16 ALTERING OR TAMPERING WITH THE CODE; PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION.
   It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, or to alter or tamper with the code or any part or portion
thereof, in any manner which will cause the law of the borough to be
misrepresented thereby. Anybody violating this section shall, upon conviction,
be punished by a fine not to exceed $600, plus costs of prosecution or
imprisonment not to exceed 90 days, or both.
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   (A)   Whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of
these codified ordinances, including a provision of any technical or other code
adopted in these codified ordinances by reference, and including a rule or
regulation promulgated pursuant to any provision of these codified ordinances
or of any technical or other code adopted in these codified ordinances by
reference, and including any order made under authority, express or implied, of
any provision of these codified ordinances or of any technical or other code
adopted in these codified ordinances by reference, having to do with building,
housing, property maintenance, health, fire, or public safety codes or
ordinances, or with water, air, or noise pollution violations, for which no
penalty is otherwise provided, shall be fined not more than $1,000 or
imprisoned for not more than 90 days, or both for each offense. Unless
otherwise stated, a separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during
or on which a violation or noncompliance occurs or continues.
   (B)   Whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of
these codified ordinances, including a provision of any technical or other code
adopted in these codified ordinances by reference, and including a rule or
regulation promulgated pursuant to any provision of these codified ordinances
or of any technical or other code adopted in these codified ordinances by
reference, and including any order made under authority, express or implied, of
any provision of these codified ordinances or of any technical or other code
adopted in these codified ordinances by reference, for which no penalty is
otherwise provided, shall be fined not more than $600 or imprisoned not more
than 90 days, or both, for each offense. Unless otherwise stated, a separate
offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation
occurs or continues.
   (C)   The penalty provided for herein shall be in addition to any fee,
deposit, charge, surcharge, interest, insurance, or bond requirement or
equitable remedy provided in these codified ordinances, or in any standard,
technical or other code adopted by reference in these codified ordinances, or
in any rule or regulation promulgated under authority of the standard,
technical, or other code adopted by reference in these codified ordinance, or
under authority of any other provision of these codified ordinances, or under
authority of state law.
Statutory reference:
   Collection of penalties, amounts, prosecution of violators, disposition of
fines, see 8 Pa.C.S. §§ 3321 to 3324
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   GOVERNING AUTHORITY
      
31.   BOROUGH EMPLOYEES AND ORGANIZATIONS
      
32.   FINANCE AND TAXATION
CHAPTER 30: GOVERNING AUTHORITY
Section
Borough Area Municipal Authority
   
30.01   Intention to organize an authority
   
30.02   Articles of Incorporation of Area Municipal Authority
   
30.03   Authorization to cause notice
   
30.04   Authorization of filing
BOROUGH AREA MUNICIPAL AUTHORITY
§ 30.01 INTENTION TO ORGANIZE AN AUTHORITY.
   The Council of the borough signifies its intention and desire to organize an
authority under provisions of the Municipal Authorities Act, being 53 Pa.C.S.
§§ 5601 et seq., as amended and supplemented.
(Prior Code § 1, 501) (Ord. passed 8-17-1981)
§ 30.02 ARTICLES OF INCORPORATION OF AREA MUNICIPAL AUTHORITY.
   The Mayor, the President of the Council, and the Secretary of the borough
are authorized and directed to execute, in behalf of this borough, Articles of
Incorporation for such authority in substantially the following form:
 
   Articles of Incorporation
TO THE SECRETARY OF THE COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA:
   In compliance with requirements of the Act of Assembly approved May 2, 1945, P.L.
382, as amended and supplemented, known as the “Municipality Authorities Act of
1945,” and pursuant to an ordinance duly enacted by the municipal authorities of the
Borough of Everett, Bedford County, Pennsylvania, expressing the intention and desire
of the municipal authorities of said municipality to organize an authority under
provisions of said Act, said municipality certifies:
   1.   The name of the Authority is “The Borough of Everett Area Municipal
Authority.”
   2.   The Authority is formed under provisions of the Act of Assembly approved May
2, 1945, P.L. 382, as amended and supplemented, known as the “Municipalities
Authorities Act of 1945.”
   3.   No other authority has been organized under provisions of the Municipal
Authorities Act, being 53 Pa.C.S. §§ 5601 et seq., as amended and supplemented, or
under provisions of the Act of Assembly approved June 28, 1935, P.L. 463, as amended
and supplemented, and is in existence in or for the incorporating municipality except
the Everett Municipal Authority organized by the Borough of Everett, Bedford County,
Pennsylvania, on July 11, 1949.
   4.   The name of said incorporating municipality is: Borough of Everett, Bedford
County, Pennsylvania.
 
(Prior Code, § 1, 502) (Ord. passed 8-17-1981)
§ 30.03 AUTHORIZATION TO CAUSE NOTICE.
   The President of the Council and the Secretary of this borough are
authorized and directed to cause notice of the substance of this subchapter,
including the substance of the foregoing Articles of Incorporation, and of the
proposed filing of such Articles of Incorporation, to be published as required
by the Municipal Authorities Act, being 53 Pa.C.S. §§ 5601 et seq.
(Prior Code, § 1, 503) (Ord. passed 8-17-1981)
§ 30.04 AUTHORIZATION OF FILING.
   The President of the Council and the Secretary of this borough are
authorized and directed to file such Articles of Incorporation and the
necessary proofs of publication with the Secretary of the commonwealth and to
do all other things necessary to effect the incorporation of such authority,
including payment of required filing fees.
(Prior Code, § 1, 504) (Ord. passed 8-17-1981)
CHAPTER 31: BOROUGH EMPLOYEES AND ORGANIZATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
31.01   Consolidation of Secretary/Treasurer
Police Department
   
31.15   Police Department established; membership thereof
   
31.16   Appointment of special police by Mayor
   
31.17   Drug task force
   
31.18   Police pension plan
Fire Department
   
31.30   Composition of Fire Department; Fire Chief
   
31.31   Authorized activities of members of Fire Department
   
31.32   Firefighters’ Relief Association
Planning Commission
   
31.45   Organization
   
31.46   Membership
   
31.47   Powers and duties
   
31.48   Funding and agreements
County Association of Municipalities
   
31.60   Authority
   
31.61   Purposes, objectives, and scope of authority
   
31.62   Term of agreement and renewal
   
31.63   Funding
   
31.64   Administration
   
31.65   Representation
   
31.66   Acquisition of property
   
31.67   Authority to execute agreement
   
31.68   Group insurance and employee benefits
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 31.01 CONSOLIDATION OF SECRETARY/TREASURER.
   (A)   Title. This section shall be known and may be cited as the “Secretary/
Treasurer Consolidation Ordinance.”
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      BOROUGH. The Borough of Everett, Pennsylvania.
      COUNCIL. The duly elected Borough Council of Everett Borough,
Pennsylvania.
   (C)   Purpose and findings. The Council recognizes the importance and
significance of employing qualified personnel to serve in the offices of the
Secretary and Treasurer and that one person may serve as the Borough Secretary
and Treasurer.
   (D)   Authorization to appoint one person to serve as Secretary/Treasurer.
      (1)   The Council is hereby authorized to appoint one person to the
position of Secretary and Treasurer of the borough, under the authority of
Article XI, § 1104 of the Borough Code, being 8 Pa.C.S. §§ 101 et seq., as
amended.
      (2)   Nothing in this section shall prohibit the Council from repealing
this section and appointing a separate Secretary and Treasurer.
(Ord. 2007-01-1, passed 1-8-2007)
POLICE DEPARTMENT
§ 31.15 POLICE DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED; MEMBERSHIP THEREOF.
   (A)   A Police Department is hereby established in and for the borough, to
be composed of one Chief of Police and one or more patrol officer, the precise
number thereof, as well as the compensation of each, to be determined by the
Borough Council from time to time.
   (B)   The Chief of Police, under the direction of the Mayor, shall be in
charge of the Police Department.
(Prior Code, § 1, 201) (Ord. 215, passed 4-7-1969)
§ 31.16 APPOINTMENT OF SPECIAL POLICE BY MAYOR.
   Nothing in this subchapter shall affect the authority of the Mayor to
appoint special police during emergencies.
(Prior Code, § 1, 202) (Ord. 215, passed 4-7-1969)
§ 31.17 DRUG TASK FORCE.
   (A)   (1)   The Borough Council recognizes that the use and trafficking of
narcotics and illegal drugs is an increasing problem throughout the county.
      (2)   The use and trafficking of narcotics and illegal drugs have tended
to extend beyond and across municipal boundaries.
      (3)   The Attorney General of the commonwealth has officially requested
that the District Attorney of the county create a District Attorney-controlled
county drug task force to be known as the “Bedford County Drug Task Force.”
      (4)   The Attorney General of the commonwealth has agreed to hold
harmless and indemnify municipalities which allow their officers to perform
task force activities with regard to issues which arise as a result of the
officer’s performance of task force activities in accordance with the Municipal
Police Jurisdiction Act, 42 Pa.C.S.A. §§ 8951 et seq.
      (5)   The borough intends to participate in the County Drug Task Force in
conjunction with the County District Attorney’s office.
      (6)   The borough, acting pursuant to the Intergovernmental Cooperation
Law, being 53 Pa.C.S. §§ 2301 et seq., hereby enacts this section adopting a
Municipal Police Cooperative Agreement (hereinafter referred to as “agreement”)
with the County District Attorney’s office to enforce narcotics and illegal
drug laws and thereby to preserve the safety and welfare of the community.
   (B)   The borough has evidenced its intent to participate in the County Drug
Task Force activities in cooperation with the County District Attorney’s office
designed to interdict the illegal use and trafficking of narcotics and other
illegal drugs within its municipal boundaries as well as within the boundaries
of nearby communities.
   (C)   The agreement may include intergovernmental cooperative activities
with adjacent and nearby municipal governments as part of a regional effort to
interdict illegal drug activities.
   (D)   The borough shall utilize the services of its police force, both full-
time as well as part-time, under the conditions set forth in the agreement and
in compliance with the Municipal Police Jurisdiction Act, 42 Pa.C.S.A. § 8953.
   (E)   The borough shall establish, pursuant to the terms of the agreement
which is incorporated as part of this ordinance, appropriate procedures to
comply with all relevant provisions of the agreement and relevant regulations,
direction, and guidance from the County District Attorney’s office.
   (F)   The term of the agreement shall commence on May 11, 2004, and may be
terminated at any time upon 30 days’ written notice.
   (G)   The purpose and objectives of the agreement include region-wide
coordination of municipal police activities in an effort to combat illegal
narcotics and drug trafficking.
   (H)   The agreement shall be financed with the assistance of funds supplies
by the office of the Attorney General of the commonwealth and the County
District Attorney’s office.
   (I)   The organizational structure necessary to implement the terms of the
agreement shall be covered by directives, procedures, and guidance from the
Country District Attorney’s office.
   (J)   All property, real or personal, acquired, managed, or disposed of
pursuant to the agreement shall be in accordance with both the terms of the
agreement as well as the directives, procedures, and guidance of the County
District Attorney’s office.
   (K)   The borough shall retain responsibility for the management, control,
and direction of its employees with assistance, financial or otherwise, from
the County District Attorney’s office.
(Prior Code, § 1, 203) (Ord. 2004-05-01, passed 5-10-2004)
§ 31.18 POLICE PENSION PLAN.
   (A)   The borough, having established a police pension plan administered by
the Commonwealth Municipal Retirement System (the system), hereby elects to
amend its Police Pension Plan administered by the system in accordance with
Article IV of the Commonwealth Municipal Retirement Law, 53 P.S. §§ 881.101 et
seq. (Retirement Law), and does hereby agree to be bound by all the
requirements and provisions of the Retirement Law and the Municipal Pension
Plan Funding Standard and Recovery Act, 53 P.S. §§ 895.101 et seq., and to
assume all obligations, financial and otherwise, placed upon member
municipalities.
   (B)   As part of this section, the borough agrees that the system shall
administer and provide the benefits set forth in the amended Police Pension
Plan document entered into between the Commonwealth Municipal Retirement Board
and the borough effective as of the date specified in the adoption agreement
(the contract).
   (C)   The borough acknowledges that by passage and adoption of this section,
the borough officially accepts the contract and the financial obligations
resulting from the administration of the contract.
   (D)   Payment for any obligation established by the adoption of this section
and the contract shall be made by the borough in accordance with the Retirement
Law and the Municipal Pension Plan Funding Standard and Recovery Act. The
borough hereby assumes all liability for any unfundedness created due to the
benefit structure set forth in the contract.
   (E)   The borough intends this section to be the complete authorization of
the contract, as amended, and it shall become effective as of the date
specified in the adoption agreement, which is the effective date of the
contract, as amended.
   (F)   A duly certified copy of this section and an executed contract shall
be filed with the system.
(Ord. 2024-1-02, passed 1-2-2024)
FIRE DEPARTMENT
§ 31.30 COMPOSITION OF FIRE DEPARTMENT; FIRE CHIEF.
   The Fire Department of the borough shall be composed of the Borough
Volunteer Fire Company No. 1, which shall be in charge of the Fire Chief, who
shall be elected annually by the qualified members thereof, but whose election
shall be subject to the approval of the Borough Council.
(Prior Code, § 1, 301) (Ord. 223, passed 4-7-1969)
§ 31.31 AUTHORIZED ACTIVITIES OF MEMBERS OF FIRE DEPARTMENT.
   In addition to fighting fires and traveling to or returning from fires, the
members of the Fire Department are authorized to do the following things:
   (A)   Answer any type of fire alarm or call, whether general alarm, private
call, or investigation of fire report, or emergency call of any type,
including, but not limited to, flood need, within or without the limits of the
borough; and
   (B)   Engage in any type of drill, training, ceremonial, practice, test,
parade, or other duty when duly called or authorized by the Fire Chief, or in
his or her absence, by his or her duly appointed assistant.
(Prior Code, § 1, 302) (Ord. 223, passed 4-7-1969)
§ 31.32 FIREFIGHTERS’ RELIEF ASSOCIATION.
   (A)   Recognition.
      (1)   The following association is hereby recognized as actively engaged
in providing fire protection and/or emergency services in the borough: Borough
Volunteer Firefighters’ Relief Association. The above-named association has
been formed for the benefit of its members and their families in case of death,
sickness, temporary or permanent disability, or accident suffered in the line
of duty.
      (2)   The association named in division (A)(1) above is designated the
proper association to receive such funds as are due and payable to the Borough
Treasurer by the Treasurer of the commonwealth from the tax on premiums from
foreign fire insurance companies.
(Prior Code, § 1, 101)
   (B)   Certification to Auditor General. The Borough Council shall annually
certify to the Auditor General of the commonwealth, the name(s) of the active
associations and the percentage of service they contribute to the protection of
the borough. Such certification shall be on forms prescribed by the Auditor
General.
(Prior Code, § 1, 102)
   (C)   Annual appropriation.
      (1)   There is annually appropriated from the Borough Treasury all such
sums of money that may hereafter be paid into the Borough Treasury by the
Treasurer of the state on account of taxes paid on premiums of foreign fire
insurance companies in pursuance of the Act of December 18, 1984, No. 205, §§
701 et seq., being 53 P.S. §§ 895.701 et seq., as hereafter amended,
supplemented, modified, or reenacted by the General Assembly of the
commonwealth.
      (2)   Such monies received by the Borough Treasurer from the State
Treasurer shall be distributed to the duly recognized association(s) within 60
days of receipt. The funds shall be distributed on the basis of the percentage
of service established in the certification to the Auditor General and with
other provisions of the Act.
(Prior Code, § 1, 103)
(Ord. passed 2-2-1931; Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992)
PLANNING COMMISSION
§ 31.45 ORGANIZATION.
   The Council of the borough hereby signifies its intention and desire to
organize a Planning Commission under the provisions of the State Municipalities
Planning Code (MPC), Act 247 of July 31, 1968, reenacted and amended by Act 170
of December 21, 1988, P.L. 1329, being 53 P.S. §§ 10101 et seq.
(Ord. 98-06-01, passed 6-8-1998)
§ 31.46 MEMBERSHIP.
   (A)   The Planning Commission shall consist of nine members, all of whom
shall be citizens of the borough.
   (B)   The term of office of the members shall be four years and shall expire
on December 31, or until a successor is appointed, except that the terms of the
members first appointed shall be so fixed that no more than three shall be so
reappointed or replaced. In the event of vacancies, the governing body shall
appoint a member to fill the unexpired term.
(Ord. 98-06-01, passed 6-8-1998)
§ 31.47 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   The Planning Commission shall, at the request of the governing body,
have the power and shall be required to:
      (1)   Prepare the comprehensive plan for the development of the
municipality as set forth in the MPC, and present it for the consideration of
the governing body; and
      (2)   Maintain and keep on file records of its actions. All records and
files of the Planning Commission shall be in the possession of the governing
body.
   (B)   The Planning Commission, at the request of the governing body, may:
      (1)   Make recommendations to the governing body concerning the adoption
or amendment of an official map;
      (2)   Prepare and present to the governing body of the municipality a
zoning ordinance, and make recommendations to the governing body on proposed
amendments to it;
      (3)   Prepare, recommend, and administer subdivision and land development
and planned residential development regulations;
      (4)   Prepare and present to the governing body of the municipality a
building code and a housing code and make recommendations concerning proposed
amendments thereto;
      (5)   Do such other acts or make studies as may be necessary to fulfill
the duties and obligations imposed by the MPC;
      (6)   Prepare and present to the governing body of the municipality an
environmental study;
      (7)   Submit to the governing body of the municipality a recommended
capital improvements program;
      (8)   Prepare and present to the governing body of the municipality a
water survey, which shall be consistent with the State Water Plan, being 17
Pa.C.S. §§ 3111 et seq., and any applicable water resources plan adopted by a
River Basin Commission. The water survey shall be conducted in consultation
with any public water supplier in the area to be surveyed;
      (9)   Promote public interest in, and understanding of, the comprehensive
plan and planning;
      (10)   Make recommendations to governmental, civic, and private agencies
and individuals as to the effectiveness of the proposals of such agencies and
individuals;
      (11)   Hold public hearings and meetings;
      (12)   Present testimony before any board;
      (13)   Require from other departments and agencies of the municipality
such available information as relates to the work of the planning agency;
      (14)   In the performance of its functions, enter upon any land to make
examinations and land surveys with the consent of the owner;
      (15)   Prepare and present to the governing body a study regarding the
feasibility and practicability of using renewable energy sources in specific
areas within the municipality; and
      (16)   Review the zoning ordinance, subdivision and land development
ordinance, official map, provisions for planned residential development, and
such other ordinances and regulations governing the development of land no less
frequently than it reviews the comprehensive plan.
(Ord. 98-06-01, passed 6-8-1998)
§ 31.48 FUNDING AND AGREEMENTS.
   The Planning Commission may, with the consent of the governing body, accept
and utilize any funds, personnel, or other assistance made available by the
county, the commonwealth, or the federal government, or any of their agencies,
or from private sources. The governing body may enter into agreements or
contracts regarding the acceptance or utilization of the funds or assistance in
accordance with the governmental procedures of the municipality.
(Ord. 98-06-01, passed 6-8-1998)
COUNTY ASSOCIATION OF MUNICIPALITIES
§ 31.60 AUTHORITY.
   Pursuant to the provision of the Intergovernmental Cooperation Act, Act of
December 19, 1996, P.L. 1158 No. 177 (53 Pa.C.S.A. §§ 2301 et seq.), local
governments may enter into intergovernmental cooperation agreements for the
purpose of cooperatively performing intergovernmental powers and duties. The
Borough Council hereby authorizes the borough to enter into an
intergovernmental cooperation agreement (agreement) with townships and other
boroughs in the county for the purpose of establishing the “Bedford County
Association of Municipalities” (hereinafter referred to as “BCAM”).
(Prior Code, § 1, 601)
§ 31.61 PURPOSES, OBJECTIVES, AND SCOPE OF AUTHORITY.
   The purpose and objectives of the agreement as well as the scope of
authority being authorized hereby, are as follows:
   (A)   Enforcement of the Uniform Construction Code, being 35 P.S. §§
7210.301 et seq., and/or any similar construction code adopted by the
commonwealth, including rules and regulations enacted thereunder, and
contracting with such entity(ies) as is necessary to facilitate and administer
the enforcement thereof;
   (B)   Consolidation for the purpose of purchasing materials, supplies,
equipment, and services;
   (C)   Consolidation for the purpose of entering into contracts to offer
participation by member municipalities in policies for group insurance and
employee benefits for the employees of the participating municipalities,
including the borough, and those of the BCAM; and
   (D)   Establishment of a process or system for review of building permit
applications; issuance and administration of building permits; performance of
inspections of buildings as required by law; and appeal of decisions with
respect thereto as more particularly set forth in the agreement authorized by
this subchapter, made a part hereof, and incorporated herein by reference as if
set forth at length, as well as the development by the BCAM Program Board
(Program Board) of bylaws, rules, and regulations, if necessary, with respect
thereto.
(Prior Code, § 1, 602)
§ 31.62 TERM OF AGREEMENT AND RENEWAL.
   The agreement shall continue for five years commencing with the date of
execution hereof. The agreement shall be automatically renewed for an
additional term of one year at the conclusion of the initial term and each
renewal term thereafter unless, at least 90 days prior to the beginning of the
fiscal year, the borough gives written notice of such refusal to BCAM in
writing.
(Prior Code, § 1, 603)
§ 31.63 FUNDING.
   (A)   The agreement shall be financed by equal contributions by the
participating municipalities of $500 each to fund start-up costs with respect
thereto and thereafter be pro rata or proportionate contributions by
municipalities in relation to their share of materials, supplies, equipment,
and services purchased, and acceptance of gifts, grants, or similar subsidies.
   (B)   In the event that additional administrative costs require yearly
contributions by the participating municipalities, those participating herein
shall be responsible, if necessary, for up to $500 in contribution fees per
year.
(Prior Code, § 1, 604)
§ 31.64 ADMINISTRATION.
   The agreement shall be administered by the Program Board composed of one
person appointed by each municipal member of the group as set forth in the
agreement, which municipal member shall be entitled to one vote. The Board
shall elect a Chairperson, Secretary, and Treasurer by a majority vote of the
Program Board.
(Prior Code, § 1, 605)
§ 31.65 REPRESENTATION.
   In accordance with the provisions of the agreement, the Borough Council
will, from time to time, designate one person to be a representative for the
Program Board, who shall be a member of the Borough Council.
(Prior Code, § 1, 606)
§ 31.66 ACQUISITION OF PROPERTY.
   The property, whether real or personal, necessary for the proper functioning
of the provisions of the agreement shall be acquired and is hereby authorized
to be acquired in accordance with the provisions of the Intergovernmental
Cooperation Act, 53 Pa.C.S.A. §§ 2301 et seq. and applicable law and shall be
licensed, managed, and/or disposed of by BCAM in accordance with applicable law
and as is necessary for the proper functioning of BCAM and pursuing and
facilitating the purposes and objectives herein set forth.
(Prior Code, § 1, 607)
§ 31.67 AUTHORITY TO EXECUTE AGREEMENT.
   The President of the Borough Council is hereby authorized to execute the
agreement as described in this subchapter on behalf of the borough.
(Prior Code, § 1, 608)
§ 31.68 GROUP INSURANCE AND EMPLOYEE BENEFITS.
   BCAM shall be empowered to enter into contracts to offer participation by
member municipalities in policies for group insurance and employee benefits for
the employees of the participating municipalities, including the borough and
those of BCAM.
(Prior Code, § 1, 609) (Ord. 2003-11-01, passed 11-10-2003)
CHAPTER 32: FINANCE AND TAXATION
Section
Earned Income Tax
   
32.001   Definitions
   
32.002   Imposition of tax
   
32.003   Exemptions
   
32.004   Individual tax returns and payments
   
32.005   Employer withholding, remittance, and tax returns
   
32.006   Tax Collector
   
32.007   Interest, penalties, costs, and fines
   
32.008   Purpose; amendment and restatement; repeal
Realty Transfer Tax
   
32.020   Short title
   
32.021   Authority
   
32.022   Definitions
   
32.023   Imposition of tax; interest
   
32.024   Exempt parties
   
32.025   Excluded transactions
   
32.026   Documents relating to associations or corporations and members,
partners, stockholders, or shareholders thereof
   
32.027   Acquired company
   
32.028   Credits against tax
   
32.029   Extension of lease
   
32.030   Proceeds of judicial sale
   
32.031   Duties of Recorder of Deeds
   
32.032   Statement of value
   
32.033   Civil penalties
   
32.034   Lien
   
32.035   Enforcement
   
32.036   Regulations
   
32.037   Effective date
Amusement Devices Tax
   
32.050   Definitions
   
32.051   Authority of the Local Tax Enabling Act
   
32.052   Payment of tax
   
32.053   Expense of collection
   
32.054   Tax not paid when due
   
32.055   Prohibition of disclosure
   
32.056   Taxes imposed are by law recoverable
   
32.057   Usage for general revenue
   
32.058   Expenses incurred
   
32.059   Exemptions
   
32.060   Imposition
   
32.061   Effective date
Local Economic Revitalization Tax Assistance Act (LERTA)
   
32.075   Stipulations
   
32.076   Declaration of deteriorated status
   
32.077   Tax exemption
   
32.078   Procedure for obtaining exemption
   
32.079   Provisions of Act 76
   
32.080   Effective date
Emergency and Municipal Services Tax
   
32.095   Authority
   
32.096   Definitions
   
32.097   Imposition of tax
   
32.098   Collection through employers
   
32.099   Direct payment by taxpayers
   
32.100   Nonresident taxpayers
   
32.101   Administration and enforcement
   
32.102   Collection
   
32.103   Effective date
 
   
32.999   Penalty
EARNED INCOME TAX
§ 32.001 DEFINITIONS.
   All terms used herein which are defined in the Local Tax Enabling Act, being
53 P.S. §§ 6924.101 et seq., shall have the meanings set forth herein. For the
purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COLLECTOR. The person or entity appointed as tax officer pursuant to the
Local Tax Enabling Act to collect the tax.
   EFFECTIVE DATE. January 1, 2012.
   EMPLOYER. A person, partnership, association, corporation, institution,
governmental body or unit or agency, or any other entity employing one or more
persons for a salary, wage, commission, or other compensation.
   ENACTMENT. This subchapter.
   GOVERNING BODY. The Borough of Everett.
   LOCAL TAX ENABLING ACT. The Local Tax Enabling Act, as set forth in 53 P.S.
§§ 6901 et seq., while such numbering and provisions remain in effect under Act
32 of 2008, and as set forth in 53 P.S. §§ 6924.101 et seq., when such
numbering and provisions become effective under Act 32, and as amended in the
future.
   PERSON or INDIVIDUAL. A natural person.
   TAX. The tax imposed by this enactment.
   TAXING AUTHORITY. Everett Borough.
   TAX RETURN. A form prescribed by the Collector for reporting the amount of
tax or other amount owed or required to be withheld, remitted, or reported
under this enactment or the Local Tax Enabling Act.
   TAX YEAR. The period from January 1 to December 31.
   TCC. The Tax Collection Committee established to govern and oversee the
collection of earned income tax within the TCD under the Local Tax Enabling
Act.
   TCD. Any tax collection district to which the Taxing Authority or any part
of the Taxing Authority is assigned under the Local Tax Enabling Act.
(Ord. 2011-11-01, passed 11-28-2011)
§ 32.002 IMPOSITION OF TAX.
   (A)   General purposes taxes.
      (1)   General purpose resident tax. The Taxing Authority hereby imposes a
tax for general revenue purposes at the rate of 1% on earned income and net
profits of individual residents of the Taxing Authority.
      (2)   General purpose municipal nonresident tax. The Taxing Authority
also imposes tax for general revenue purposes at the rate of 1% on earned
income and net profits derived by an individual who is not a resident of the
Taxing Authority from any work, business, profession, or activity of any kind
engaged in within the boundaries of the Tax Authority.
   (B)   Ongoing tax. The tax shall continue at the rates in division (A) above
during the current tax year and each tax year thereafter, without annual
reenactment, until this enactment is repealed or the rate is changed.
   (C)   Combined tax rate applicable to residents. Currently, the total rate
applicable to residents of the Taxing Authority, including the tax imposed by
the school district and municipality in which the individual resides, is 1.6%.
   (D)   Municipal tax rate applicable to nonresidents. Currently, the total
rate applicable to nonresidents working within the Taxing Authority based on
the municipal nonresident tax rate is 1%.
   (E)   Local Tax Enabling Act applicable. The tax is imposed under authority
of the Local Tax Enabling Act, and all provisions thereof that relate to a tax
on earned income or net profits are incorporated into this enactment. Any
future amendments to the Local Tax Enabling Act that are required to be applied
to a tax on earned income or net profits will automatically become part of this
enactment upon the effective date of such amendment, without the need for
formal amendment of this enactment, to the maximum extent allowed by 1
Pa.C.S.A. § 1937.
   (F)   Applicable laws, regulations, policies, and procedures. The tax shall
be collected and administered in accordance with:
      (1)   All applicable laws and regulations; and
      (2)   Regulations, policies, and procedures adopted by the TCC or by the
Collector. This includes any regulations, policies, and procedures adopted in
the future to the maximum extent allowed by 1 Pa.C.S.A. § 1937.
(Ord. 2011-11-01, passed 11-28-2011)
§ 32.003 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   Individuals under age 16.
      (1)   This governing body finds that:
         (a)   Minors of various age groups have traditionally, and with
judicial sanction, been considered as comprising separate classes for many
legislative purposes; and
         (b)   Minors under the age of 16 are generally unemancipated and
subject to compulsory school attendance and child labor laws, and therefore
have limited earned income and net profits and control of money such that
enforcement of reporting and collection of tax hereunder against them would
yield inconsequential amounts and be unduly difficult, expensive, and not in
the public interest.
      (2)   For these reasons, individuals under the age of 16 years are exempt
from liability for the tax.
   (B)   Residents of other states if similarly exempted in other state.
      (1)   Individuals who are residents of a state other than Pennsylvania
are exempt from liability for the tax, but only if all local governments of the
locality where the individual resides either:
         (a)   Impose no tax on the income of a state resident derived from
activities within the locality; or
         (2)   Exempt that income from tax.
      (2)   In addition to this exemption from municipal nonresident tax,
certain credits and deductions against tax are permitted under certain
circumstances as provided in applicable law and regulations.
   (C)   No exemption from tax. Although credits and deductions against tax are
permitted under certain circumstances as provided in applicable law and
regulations, no individuals are exempted from tax based on age, income, or
other factors.
(Ord. 2011-11-01, passed 11-28-2011)
§ 32.004 INDIVIDUAL TAX RETURNS AND PAYMENTS.
   Every individual receiving earned income or earning net profits in any tax
year shall file tax returns and pay tax in accordance with the Local Tax
Enabling Act.
(Ord. 2011-11-01, passed 11-28-2011) Penalty, see §
32.999
§ 32.005 EMPLOYER WITHHOLDING, REMITTANCE, AND TAX RETURNS.
   Every employer shall register, withhold, and remit tax, and file tax returns
in accordance with the Local Tax Enabling Act, being 53 P.S. §§ 6924.101 et
seq.
(Ord. 2011-11-01, passed 11-28-2011) Penalty, see §
32.999
§ 32.006 TAX COLLECTOR.
   The tax will be collected from individuals and employers by the Collector,
which shall be Keystone Collections Group or such other successor person or
entity as determined by this municipality.
(Ord. 2011-11-01, passed 11-28-2011)
§ 32.007 INTEREST, PENALTIES, COSTS, AND FINES.
   Individuals and employers are subject to interest, penalties, costs, and
fines in accordance with the Local Tax Enabling Act, including costs imposed by
the Collector in accordance with the Local Tax Enabling Act, being 53 P.S. §§
6924.101 et seq.
(Ord. 2011-11-01, passed 11-28-2011)
§ 32.008 PURPOSE; AMENDMENT AND RESTATEMENT; REPEAL.
   The primary purpose of this enactment is to conform the earned income and
net profits tax currently imposed to the Local Tax Act, being 53 P.S. §§
6924.101 et seq., as amended and restated by Act 32 of 2008, and to do so
within the time frame required by Act 32. Any prior enactment imposing a tax on
earned income or net profits of individuals is amended and restated in its
entirety to read as stated in this enactment. Any other prior enactment or part
of any prior enactment conflicting with the provisions of this enactment is
rescinded insofar as the conflict exists. To the extent the same as any
enactment in force immediately prior to adoption of this enactment, the
provisions of this enactment are intended as a continuation of such prior
enactment and not as a new enactment. If this enactment is declared invalid,
any prior enactment levying a similar tax shall remain in full force and effect
and shall not be affected by adoption of this Enactment. If any part of this
enactment is declared invalid, the similar part of any prior enactment levying
a similar tax shall remain in effect and shall not be affected by adoption of
this enactment. The provisions of this enactment shall not affect any act done
or liability incurred, nor shall such provisions affect any suit or prosecution
pending or to be initiated to enforce any right or penalty or to punish offense
under the authority of any enactment in force prior to adoption of this
enactment. Subject to the foregoing provisions of this section, this enactment
shall amend and restate on the effective date any enactment levying a tax on
earned income or net profits in force immediately prior to the effective date.
(Ord. 2011-11-01, passed 11-28-2011)
REALTY TRANSFER TAX
§ 32.020 SHORT TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known as the “Realty Transfer Tax Ordinance of the
Borough of Everett.”
(Prior Code, § 24, 201) (Res. passed 5-1-1967; Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992)
§ 32.021 AUTHORITY.
   A realty transfer tax for general revenue purposes is hereby imposed upon
the transfer of real estate or interest in real estate situated within the
borough, regardless of where the documents making the transfer are made,
executed, or delivered, or where the actual settlements on such transfer took
place, as authorized by Article XI-D, “Local Real Estate Transfer Tax,” 72 P.S.
§§ 8101 et seq.
(Prior Code, § 24, 202) (Res. passed 5-1-1967; Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992)
§ 32.022 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ASSOCIATION. A partnership, limited partnership, or any other form of
unincorporated enterprise owned or conducted by two or more persons other than
a private trust or decedent’s estate.
   CORPORATION. A corporation, joint stock association, business trust, or
banking institution which is organized under the laws of this commonwealth, the
United States, or any other state, territory, foreign country, or dependency.
   DOCUMENT. Any deed, instrument, or writing which conveys, transfers,
demises, vests, confirms, or evidences any transfer or demise of title of real
estate, but does not include wills, mortgages, deeds of trust, or other
instruments of like character given as security for a debt and deeds of release
thereof to the debtor, land contracts whereby the legal title does not pass to
the grantee until the total consideration specified in the contract has been
paid or any cancellation thereof unless the consideration is payable over a
period of time exceeding 30 years, or instruments which solely grant, vest, or
confirm a public utility easement. DOCUMENT shall also include a declaration of
acquisition required to be presented for recording under §
32.021.
   FAMILY FARM CORPORATION. A corporation of which at least 75% of its assets
are devoted to the business of agriculture and at least 75% of each class of
stock of the corporation is continuously owned by members of the same family.
The business of AGRICULTURE shall not be deemed to include:
      (1)   Recreational activities such as, but not limited to, hunting,
fishing, camping, skiing, show competition, or racing;
      (2)   The raising, breeding, or training of game animals or game birds,
fish, cats, dogs, or pets or animals intended for use in sporting or
recreational activities;
      (3)   Fur farming;
      (4)   Stockyard and slaughterhouse operations; or
      (5)   Manufacturing or processing operations of any kind.
   MEMBERS OF THE SAME FAMILY. Any individual, such individual’s brothers and
sisters, the brothers and sisters of such individual’s parents and
grandparents, the ancestors and lineal descendants of any of the foregoing, a
spouse of any of the foregoing, and the estate of any of the foregoing.
Individuals related by the half-blood or legal adoption shall be treated as if
they were related by the whole-blood.
   MUNICIPALITY. The Borough of Everett.
   PERSON. Every natural person, association, or corporation. Whenever used in
any clause prescribing and imposing a fine or imprisonment, or both. The term
PERSON, as applied to associations, shall include the responsible members or
general partners thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers thereof.
   REAL ESTATE.
      (1)   All lands, tenements, or hereditaments within this borough,
including, without limitation, buildings, structures, fixtures, mines,
minerals, oil, gas, quarries, spaces with or without upper or lower boundaries,
trees and other improvements, immovables, or interests which by custom, usage,
or law pass with a conveyance of land, but excluding permanently attached
machinery and equipment in an industrial plant.
      (2)   A condominium unit.
      (3)   A tenant-stockholder’s interest in a cooperative housing
corporation, trust, or association under a proprietary lease or occupancy
agreement.
   REAL ESTATE COMPANY. A corporation or association which is primarily engaged
in the business of holding, selling, or leasing real estate, 90% or more of the
ownership interest in which is held by 35 or fewer persons and which:
      (1)   Derives 60% or more of its annual gross receipts from the ownership
or disposition of real estate; or
      (2)   Holds real estate, the value of which comprises 90% or more of the
value of its entire tangible asset holdings exclusive of tangible assets which
are freely transferable and actively traded on an established market.
   TITLE TO REAL ESTATE.
      (1)   Any interest in real estate which endures for a period of time, the
termination of which is not fixed or ascertained by a specific number of years,
including, without limitation, an estate in fee simple, life estate, or
perpetual leasehold; or
      (2)   Any interest in real estate enduring for a fixed period of years
but which, either by reason of the length of the term or the grant of a right
to extend the term by renewal or otherwise, consist of a group of rights
approximating those of an estate in fee simple, life estate, or perpetual
leasehold, including, without limitation, a leasehold interest or possessory
interest under a lease or occupancy agreement for a term of 30 years or more or
a leasehold interest or possessory interest in real estate in which the lessee
has equity.
   TRANSACTION. The making, executing, delivering, accepting, or presenting for
recording of a document.
   VALUE.
      (1)   In the case of any bona fide sale of real estate at arm’s length
for actual monetary worth, the amount of the actual consideration therefor,
paid or to be paid, including liens or other encumbrances thereon existing
before the transfer and not removed thereby, whether or not the underlying
indebtedness is assumed, and ground rents, or a commensurate part thereof where
such liens or other encumbrances and ground rents also encumber or are charged
against real estate; provided, that where such documents shall set forth a
nominal consideration, the VALUE thereof shall be determined from the price set
forth in or actual consideration for the contract of sale.
      (2)   In the case of a gift, sale by execution upon a judgment, or upon
the foreclosure of a mortgage by a judicial officer, transactions without
consideration or for consideration less than the actual monetary worth of the
real estate, a taxable lease, an occupancy agreement, a leasehold or possessory
interest, any exchange of properties, or the real estate of an acquired
company, the actual monetary worth of the real estate determined by adjusting
the assessed value of the real estate for local real estate tax purposes for
the common level ratio factor developed by the State Department of Revenue for
state realty transfer tax base calculations.
      (3)   In the case of an easement or other interest in real estate, the
value of which is not determinable under divisions (1) or (2) of this
definition, the actual monetary worth of such interest.
      (4)   The actual consideration for or actual monetary worth of any
executory agreement for the construction of buildings, structures, or other
permanent improvements to real estate between the grantor and other persons
existing before the transfer and not removed thereby or between the grantor,
the agent, or principal of the grantor of a related corporation, association,
or partnership and the grantee existing before or effective with the transfer.
(Prior Code, § 24, 203) (Res. passed 5-1-1967; Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992)
§ 32.023 IMPOSITION OF TAX; INTEREST.
   (A)   Every person who makes, executes, delivers, accepts, or presents for
recording any document or in whose behalf any document is made, executed,
delivered, accepted, or presented for recording, shall be subject to pay for
and in respect to the transaction or any part thereof, a tax at the rate of 1%
of the value of the real estate represented by such document, which tax shall
be payable at the earlier of the time the document is presented for recording
or within 30 days of acceptance of such document or within 30 days of becoming
an acquired company.
   (B)   The payment of the tax imposed herein shall be evidenced by the
affixing of an official stamp or writing by the Recorder of Deeds whereon the
date of the payment of the tax, amount of the tax, and the signature of the
collecting agent shall be set forth.
   (C)   It is the intent of this subchapter that the entire burden of the tax
imposed herein on a person or transfer shall not exceed the limitations
prescribed in the Local Tax Enabling Act, Act of December 31, 1965, P.L. 1257,
53 P.S. §§ 6924.101 et seq., so that if any other political subdivision shall
impose or hereafter shall impose such tax on the same person or transfer then
the tax levied by the governing body under the authority of that Act shall,
during the time such duplication of the tax exists, except as hereinafter
otherwise provided, be one-half of the rate and such one-half shall become
effective without any action on the part of the governing body, provided,
however, that the borough and any other political subdivision which impose such
tax on the same person or transfer may agree that, instead of limiting their
respective rates to one-half of the rate herein provided, they will impose
respectively different rates, the total of which shall not exceed the maximum
rate permitted under the Local Tax Enabling Act.
   (D)   If for any other reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the
rate in effect at the time the tax is due, shall be added and collected.
(Prior Code, § 24, 204) (Res. passed 5-1-1967; Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992)
§ 32.024 EXEMPT PARTIES.
   The United States, the commonwealth, or any of their instrumentalities,
agencies, or political subdivisions shall be exempt from payment of the tax
imposed by this subchapter. The exemption of such governmental bodies shall
not, however, relieve any other party to a transaction from liability for the
tax.
(Prior Code, § 24, 205) (Res. passed 5-1-1967; Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992)
§ 32.025 EXCLUDED TRANSACTIONS.
   (A)   The tax imposed by §
32.024 shall not be imposed upon:
      (1)   A transfer to the commonwealth, or to any of its instrumentalities,
agencies, or political subdivisions, by gift, dedication, or deed in lieu of
condemnation or deed or confirmation in connection with condemnation
proceedings, or a reconveyance by the condemning body of the property condemned
to the owner of record at the time of condemnation which reconveyance may
include property line adjustments, provided said conveyance is made within one
year from the date of condemnation;
      (2)   A document which the borough is prohibited from taxing under the
Constitution or statutes of the United States;
      (3)   A conveyance to a municipality, township, school district, or
county pursuant to acquisition by the municipality, township, school district,
or county of a tax delinquent property at sheriff sale or Tax Claim Bureau
sale;
      (4)   A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration which corrects or
confirms a transfer previously recorded, but which does not extend or limit
existing record legal title or interest;
      (5)   A transfer or division in kind for no or nominal actual
consideration of property passed by testate or intestate succession and held by
cotenants; however, if any of the parties take shares greater in value than
their undivided interest, tax is due on the excess;
      (6)   A transfer between husband and wife, between persons who were
previously husband and wife who have since been divorced, provided the property
or interest therein subject to such transfer was acquired by the husband and
wife or husband or wife prior to the granting of the final decree in divorce,
between parent and child or the spouse of such child, between brother or sister
or spouse of a brother or sister, and between a grandparent and grandchild or
the spouse of such grandchild, except that a subsequent transfer by the grantee
within one year shall be subject to tax as if the grantor were making such
transfer;
      (7)   A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration of property
passing by testate or intestate succession from a personal representative of a
decedent to the decedent’s devisee or heir;
      (8)   A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration to a trustee of
an ordinary trust where the transfer of the same property would be exempt if
the transfer was made directly from the grantor to all of the possible
beneficiaries, whether or not such beneficiaries are contingent or specifically
named. No such exemption shall be granted unless the Recorder of Deeds is
presented with a copy of the trust instrument that clearly identifies the
grantor and all possible beneficiaries;
      (9)   A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from a trustee to
a beneficiary of an ordinary trust;
      (10)   A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from trustee to
successor trustee;
      (11)   (a)   A transfer:
            1.   For no or nominal actual consideration between principal and
agent or straw property; or
            2.   From or to an agent or straw party where, if the agent or
straw party were his or her principal, no tax shall be imposed under this
subchapter.
         (b)   Where the document by which title is acquired by a grantee or
statement of value fails to set forth that the property was acquired by the
grantee from, or for the benefit of, his or her principal, there is a rebuttal
presumption that the property is the property of the grantee in his or her
individual capacity if the grantee claims an exemption from taxation under this
division (K);
      (12)   A transfer made pursuant to the statutory merger or consolidation
of a corporation or statutory division of a nonprofit corporation, except where
the department reasonably determines that the primary intent for such merger,
consolidation, or division is avoidance of the tax imposed by this subchapter;
      (13)   A transfer from a corporation or association of real estate held
of record in the name of the corporation or association where the grantee owns
stock of the corporation or an interest in the same proportion as his or her
interest in or ownership of the real estate being conveyed and where the stock
of the corporation or the interest in the association has been held by the
grantee for more than two years;
      (14)   A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or
authority to a grantee of property conveyed by the grantee to that agency or
authority as security for a debt of the grantee or a transfer to a nonprofit
industrial development agency or authority;
      (15)   A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or
authority to a grantee purchasing directly from it, but only if:
         (a)   The grantee shall directly use such real estate for the primary
purpose of manufacturing, fabricating, compounding, processing, publishing,
research and development, transportation, energy conversion, energy production,
pollution control, warehousing, or agriculture; and
         (b)   The agency or authority has the full ownership interest in the
real estate transferred.
      (16)   A transfer by a mortgagor to the holder of a bona fide mortgage in
default of a foreclosure or a transfer pursuant to a judicial sale in which the
successful bidder is the bona fide holder of a mortgage, unless the holder
assigns the bid to another person;
      (17)   Any transfer between religious organizations or other bodies or
persons holding title for a religious organization if such real estate is not
being or has not been used by such transferor for commercial purposes;
      (18)   A transfer to a conservancy which possesses a tax exempt status
pursuant to I.R.C. § 501(c)(3) (68A Stat. 3, 26 U.S.C. § 501(c)(3)) and which
has as its primary purpose preservation of land for historic, recreational,
scenic, agricultural, or open space opportunities;
      (19)   A transfer of real estate devoted to the business of agriculture
to a family farm corporation by a member of the same family which directly owns
at least 75% of each class of the stock thereof;
      (20)   A transfer between members of the same family of an ownership
interest in a real estate company or family farm corporation;
      (21)   A transaction wherein the tax is $1 or less; or
      (22)   Leases for the production or extraction of coal, oil, natural gas,
or minerals and assignments thereof.
   (B)   In order to exercise any exclusion provided in this section, the true,
full, and complete value of the transfer shall be shown on the statement of
value. A copy of the State Realty Transfer Tax Statement of Value may be
submitted for this purpose. For leases of coal, oil, natural gas, or minerals,
the Statement of Value may be limited to an explanation of the reason such
document is not subject to tax under this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 24, 206) (Res. passed 5-1-1967; Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992)
§ 32.026 DOCUMENTS RELATING TO ASSOCIATIONS OR CORPORATIONS AND MEMBERS,
PARTNERS, STOCKHOLDERS, OR SHAREHOLDERS THEREOF.
   Except as otherwise provided in §
32.025, documents which make, confirm, or evidence any transfer or demise of
title to real estate between associations or corporations and the members,
partners, shareholders, or stockholders thereof are fully taxable. For the
purposes of this section, corporations and associations are entities separate
from their members, partners, stockholders, and shareholders.
(Prior Code, § 24, 207) (Res. passed 5-1-1967; Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992)
§ 32.027 ACQUIRED COMPANY.
   (A)   A real estate company is an ACQUIRED COMPANY upon a change in the
ownership interest in the company, however effected, if the change does not
affect the continuity of the company; and of itself or together with prior
changes, has the effect of transferring, directly or indirectly, 90% or more of
the total ownership interest in the company within a period of three years.
   (B)   With respect to real estate acquired after February 16, 1986, a family
farm corporation is an ACQUIRED COMPANY when, because of voluntary or
involuntary dissolution, it ceases to be a family farm corporation or when,
because of issuance or transfer of stock or because of acquisition or transfer
of assets that are devoted to the business of agriculture, it fails to meet the
minimum requirements of a family farm corporation under this subchapter.
   (C)   Within 30 days after becoming an acquired company, the company shall
present a declaration of acquisition with the Recorder of each county in which
it holds real estate for the affixation of documentary stamps and recordings.
Such declaration shall set forth the value of real estate holdings of the
acquired company in such county. A copy of the State Realty Transfer Tax
Declaration of Acquisition may be submitted for this purpose.
(Prior Code, § 24, 208) (Res. passed 5-1-1967; Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992)
Penalty, see §
32.999
§ 32.028 CREDITS AGAINST TAX.
   (A)   Where there is a transfer of a residential property by a licensed real
estate broker which property was transferred to him or her within the preceding
year as consideration for the purchase of other residential property, a credit
for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the transfer to him or her shall
be given to him or her toward the amount of the tax due upon the transfer.
   (B)   Where there is a transfer by a builder of residential property which
was transferred to the builder within the preceding year as a consideration for
the purchase of new, previously unoccupied residential property, a credit for
the amount of the tax paid at the time of the transfer to the builder shall be
given to the builder toward the amount of the tax due upon the transfer.
   (C)   Where there is a transfer of real estate which is leased by the
grantor, a credit for the amount of tax paid at the time of the lease shall be
given the grantor toward the tax due upon the transfer.
   (D)   Where there is a conveyance by deed of real estate which was
previously sold under a land contract by the grantor, a credit for the amount
of the tax paid at the time of the sale shall be given the grantor toward the
tax due upon the deed.
   (E)   If the tax due upon the transfer is greater than the credit given
under this section, the difference shall be paid. If the credit allowed is
greater than the amount of tax due, no refund or carryover credit shall be
allowed.
(Prior Code, § 24, 209) (Res. passed 5-1-1967; Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992)
§ 32.029 EXTENSION OF LEASE.
   In determining the term of a lease, it shall be presumed that a right or
option to renew or extend a lease will be exercised if the rental charge to the
lessee is fixed or if a method for calculating the rental charge is
established.
(Prior Code, § 24, 210) (Res. passed 5-1-1967; Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992)
§ 32.030 PROCEEDS OF JUDICIAL SALE.
   (A)   The tax herein imposed shall be fully paid, and have priority out of
the proceeds of any judicial sale of real estate before any other obligation,
claim, lien, judgment, estate, or costs of the sale and of the writ upon which
the sale is made except the state realty transfer tax, and the sheriff, or
other officer, conducting said sale, shall pay the tax herein imposed out of
the first monies paid to him or her in connection therewith.
   (B)   If the proceeds of the sale are insufficient to pay the entire tax
herein imposed, the purchaser shall be liable for the remaining tax.
(Prior Code, § 24, 211) (Res. passed 5-1-1967; Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992)
§ 32.031 DUTIES OF RECORDER OF DEEDS.
   (A)   As provided in 16 P.S. § 11011-6, as amended by Act of July 7, 1983
(P.L. 40, No. 20), the Recorder of Deeds shall be the collection agent for the
local realty transfer tax, including any amount payable to the borough based on
a redetermination of the amount of tax due by the commonwealth of the
commonwealth realty transfer tax, without compensation from the borough.
   (B)   In order to ascertain the amount of taxes due when the property is
located in more than one political subdivision, the Recorder shall not accept
for recording such a deed unless it is accompanies by a statement of value
showing what taxes are due each municipality.
   (C)   On or before the tenth of each month, the Recorder shall pay over to
the borough all local realty transfer taxes collected, less 2% for use of the
county, together with a report containing the information as is required by the
commonwealth in reporting collections of the state realty transfer tax. The 2%
commission shall be paid to the county.
   (D)   Upon a redetermination of the amount of realty transfer tax due by the
commonwealth, the Recorder shall rerecord the deed or record the additional
realty transfer tax form only when both the state and local amounts and a
rerecording or recording fee has been tendered.
(Prior Code, § 24, 212) (Res. passed 5-1-1967; Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992)
§ 32.032 STATEMENT OF VALUE.
   Every document lodged with or presented to the Recorder of Deeds for
recording shall set forth therein and as a part of such document the true,
full, and complete value thereof, or shall be accompanied by a statement of
value executed by a responsible person connected with the transaction showing
such connection and setting forth the true, full and complete value thereof or
the reason, if any, why such document is not subject to tax under this
subchapter. A copy of the State Realty Transfer Tax Statement of Value may be
submitted for this purpose. The provisions of this section shall not apply to
any excludable real estate transfers which are exempt from taxation based on
family relationship. Other documents presented for the affixation of stamps
shall be accompanied by a certified copy of the document and statement of value
executed by a responsible person connected with the transaction showing such
connection and setting forth the true, full, and complete value thereof or the
reason, if any, why such document is not subject to tax under this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 24, 213) (Res. passed 5-1-1967; Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992)
§ 32.033 CIVIL PENALTIES.
   (A)   If any part of any underpayment of taxes imposed by this subchapter is
due to fraud, there shall be added to the tax an amount equal to 50% of the
underpayment.
   (B)   In the case of failure to record a declaration required under this
subchapter on the date prescribed therefor, unless it is shown that such
failure is due to reasonable cause, there shall be added to the tax 5% of the
amount of such tax if the failure is for not more than one month, with an
additional 5% for each additional month or fraction thereof during which such
failure continues, not exceeding 50% in the aggregate.
(Prior Code, § 24, 214) (Res. passed 5-1-1967; Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992)
§ 32.034 LIEN.
   The tax imposed by this subchapter shall become a lien upon the lands,
tenements, or hereditaments, or any interest therein, lying, being situated,
wholly or in part within the boundaries of the borough, which lands, tenements,
hereditaments, or interests therein, are described in or conveyed by or
transferred by the deed which is the subject of the tax imposed, assessed, and
levied by this subchapter, said lien to begin at the time when the tax under
this subchapter is due and payable, and continue until discharged by payment,
or in accordance with the law, and the Solicitor is authorized to file a
municipal or tax claim in the Court of Common Pleas of the county, in
accordance with the provisions of the Municipal Claims and Liens Act of 1923,
53 P.S. §§ 7101 et seq., its supplements and amendments.
(Prior Code, § 24, 215) (Res. passed 5-1-1967; Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992)
§ 32.035 ENFORCEMENT.
   All taxes imposed by this subchapter, together with interest and penalties
prescribed herein, shall be recoverable as other debts of like character are
recovered.
(Prior Code, § 24, 216) (Res. passed 5-1-1967; Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992)
§ 32.036 REGULATIONS.
   The Recorder of Deeds of the county is charged with enforcement and
collection of tax and is empowered to promulgate and enforce reasonable
regulations for enforcement and collection of the tax. The regulations which
have been promulgated by the State Department of Revenue under 72 P.S. §§ 8101-
C et seq. are incorporated into and made a part of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 24, 217) (Res. passed 5-1-1967; Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992)
§ 32.037 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This subchapter shall become effective on enactment and shall continue in
effect on a calendar year basis without annual reenactment.
(Prior Code, § 24, 218) (Res. passed 5-1-1967; Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992)
AMUSEMENT DEVICES TAX
§ 32.050 DEFINITIONS.
   In this subchapter, the singular shall include the plural and the masculine
shall include the feminine and neuter. For the purpose of this subchapter, the
following definitions apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
   COLLECTOR. A duly appointed agent of the borough in charge of levy and
collection of taxes on devices under this subchapter.
   DEVICE. Any juke box or mechanical amusement device for the use of which for
profit a tax is levied under this subchapter.
   GAME OF SKILL. Any device other than a juke box, which upon the insertion of
a single coin, slug, token, plate, or disc, per each play or player, may be
operated for use as a game, entertainment, or amusement, in which the score is
determined by the manual dexterity of the player or players whether or not
registering a score and whether or not a prize is offered. Provided, such term
shall not include any gambling device or any mechanism that has been judicially
determined to be a gambling device.
   JUKEBOX. Any music vending machine, contrivance, or device which, upon the
insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate, disc, or key into any slot, crevice,
or other opening, operates or may be operated for the emission of song, music,
or similar amusement.
   MECHANICAL AMUSEMENT DEVICE. Any device other than a juke box which, upon
the insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate, or disc, may be operated for use
as a game, entertainment, or amusement, whether or not registering a score and
whether or not a prize is offered. Provided, such term shall not include any
gambling device or any mechanism that has been judicially determined to be a
gambling device.
   PERSON. Any natural person, association, copartnership, firm, or
corporation.
(Prior Code, § 24, 301) (Ord. passed 9-1-1973)
§ 32.051 AUTHORITY OF THE LOCAL TAX ENABLING ACT.
   There is hereby imposed a tax, for general borough purposes, under the
authority of the Local Tax Enabling Act approved December 31, 1965 (P.L. 511),
being 53 P.S, §§ 6924.101 et seq., upon the privilege of using for profit,
within the borough, any juke box or mechanical amusement device, and machines
of games of skill, as herein defined. Such tax shall be payable by the person
owning and/or operating the establishment in which such device is installed for
use. On each device or juke box shall be at the rate of $5 per month for the
first five machines, and an additional $2.50 per month for the next five
machines thereafter.
(Prior Code, § 24, 302) (Ord. passed 9-1-1973)
§ 32.052 PAYMENT OF TAX.
   The tax imposed under this subchapter shall be payable to the Borough
Treasurer or before September 15, 1973, for the year 1973 and on January 15
each year commencing with the year 1974, On any device installed after
September 1, 1973, the tax shall be paid immediately after installation. No
deduction or refund of any tax payable under this subchapter shall be granted
in the case of any tax payable for less than a full calendar year, or in case
of any device destroyed, stolen, sold, or otherwise disposed of or transferred
after the payment of such tax. Provided, however, in the case of the
substitution of any device by another device in the same class, the use of
which is taxable under this subchapter, no additional tax shall be paid,
provided that the total number of devices of the same class in use upon the
premises remains no greater than that upon which such tax was paid.
(Prior Code, § 24, 303) (Ord. passed 9-1-1973)
§ 32.053 EXPENSE OF COLLECTION.
   (A)   The Collector shall procure, at the expense of the borough, a
sufficient number of certificates, upon each of which the following information
shall be printed or inserted by typewriter:
      (1)   The name of the borough;
      (2)   The number of the certificate;
      (3)   The name and address of the person paying the tax;
      (4)   The year for which the tax shall have been paid;
      (5)   The date on which such tax shall have been paid;
      (6)   The type of device for which the tax shall have been paid; and
      (7)   The amount of tax paid.
   (B)   (1)   Whenever any tax shall have been paid under this subchapter, the
Collector shall prepare in duplicate a certificate, as herein prescribed. The
original of such certificate, to which the Borough Seal shall be affixed, shall
be given to the person paying such tax, and the duplicate shall be kept on file
by the Collector.
      (2)   The Collector shall also procure and give to each person paying
such tax a seal to be affixed to each device for the use of which such tax
shall have been paid. Such seal shall indicate the year for which such tax
shall have been paid, the type of device and the certificate number.
   (C)   In the case of the loss, defacement, or destruction of any original
certificate or seal, the person to whom such certificate or seal was issued
shall apply to the collector who may issue a new certificate or seal in
replacement thereof, upon payment of a fee of $5 and who shall amend the
duplicate of the certificate first issued in case that a new certificate has
been issued.
   (D)   In case of the removal of any establishment in which any device for
the use of which a tax shall have been paid under this subchapter, to another
location in the borough, or in case of a change in the identity of the person
operating or owning any such establishment, the person operating such
establishment shall report such fact within five days of such change in
location or personnel, and the Collector shall immediately amend the
certificate and duplicate certificate.
   (E)   (1)   Before the removal of any device from any establishment, the
person operating such establishment shall remove the seal issued under this
subchapter from such device.
      (2)   Such seal shall be affixed to any other device of the same class
used in such establishment during the current year.
(Prior Code, § 24, 304) (Ord. passed 9-1-1973)
§ 32.054 TAX NOT PAID WHEN DUE.
   If any tax levied in pursuance of this subchapter shall not be paid when
due, a penalty of 10% of the amount of tax due and unpaid shall be added
thereto.
(Prior Code, § 24, 305) (Ord. passed 9-1-1973)
§ 32.055 PROHIBITION OF DISCLOSURE.
   (A)   Any information gained by the Collector or any other official or agent
of the borough as a result of any returns, investigations, or verifications
required or authorized by this subchapter shall be confidential, except for
official purposes, and except in accordance with proper judicial order, or as
otherwise provided by law.
   (B)   Any disclosure of any information, contrary to the provisions of this
section, shall constitute a violation of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 24, 306) (Ord. passed 9-1-1973) Penalty, see §
32.999
§ 32.056 TAXES IMPOSED ARE BY LAW RECOVERABLE.
   All taxes imposed by this subchapter, together with all penalties, interest,
and costs, shall be recoverable by the Borough Solicitor as debts of like
amount are by law recoverable.
(Prior Code, § 24, 307) (Ord. passed 9-1-1973)
§ 32.057 USAGE FOR GENERAL REVENUE.
   All taxes, interest, and penalties collected or recovered by the Collector
or any other borough officer or person for or in behalf of the borough, shall
be paid into the Borough Treasury as general revenue to be used for general
revenue purposes.
(Prior Code, § 24, 308) (Ord. passed 9-1-1973)
§ 32.058 EXPENSES INCURRED.
   All expenses incurred in the administration of this subchapter shall be paid
by the borough.
(Prior Code, § 24, 309) (Ord. passed 9-1-1973)
§ 32.059 EXEMPTIONS.
   This subchapter shall not apply to any person or property as to whom or
which it is beyond the legal power of the Borough Council to impose the tax or
duties herein provided for.
(Prior Code, § 24, 310) (Ord. passed 9-1-1973)
§ 32.060 IMPOSITION.
   The tax hereby imposed shall continue in force on a calendar year basis
without annual reenactment, pursuant to the provisions of the Local Tax
Enabling Act, being 53 P.S, §§ 6924.101 et seq., as amended.
(Prior Code, § 24, 312) (Ord. passed 9-1-1973)
§ 32.061 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This subchapter shall go into effect September 1, 1973, pursuant to the
authority of the Local Tax Enabling Act, approved December 31, 1965 (P.L. 511),
being 53 P.S, §§ 6924.101 et seq., as amended.
(Prior Code, § 24, 313) (Ord. passed 9-1-1973)
LOCAL ECONOMIC REVITALIZATION TAX ASSISTANCE ACT (LERTA)
§ 32.075 STIPULATIONS.
   (A)   The borough recognizes the need to encourage the rehabilitation of
industrial, commercial, and other business property owned by individuals,
associations, or corporations, and located within the geographic and political
boundaries of the borough.
   (B)   The Local Economic Revitalization Tax Assistance Act, Act 76 of
December 1, 1977 (72 P.S. §§ 4722 et seq.), hereinafter referred to as the
“Act,” authorized local taxing authorities to exempt improvements to certain
deteriorated industrial, commercial, and other business property.
   (C)   Enactment of such exemption will result in improving the conditions
and size of the labor force in the borough by stimulating existing business’
employment conditions as well as creating new work positions.
   (D)   It is expected that increased employment opportunities in the form of
new or expanded full-time positions will result due to the improvement of
deteriorated property within the five years of exemption as hereinafter
provided.
   (E)   It is hereby ordained and enacted by the borough as follows in this
subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 24, 401) (Ord. 273, passed 2-8-1993)
§ 32.076 DECLARATION OF DETERIORATED STATUS.
   It is hereby determined and declared that the entire corporate limits of the
borough is a deteriorated area as defined in Act 76, and for the purposes
thereof, there is hereby exempt from real property taxation the assessed value
of improvements to deteriorated properties in the amounts and in accordance
with the provisions and limitations hereinafter set forth within the boundaries
of the borough in accordance with the Act.
(Prior Code, § 24, 402) (Ord. 273, passed 2-8-1993)
§ 32.077 TAX EXEMPTION.
   The exemption from taxes created hereunder shall be limited to the
additional assessment value attributable to 100% of the actual costs of
improvements to the deteriorated property for the first two years; 75% of the
actual costs of improvements to the deteriorated property for the third year;
50% of the actual costs of improvements of the deteriorated property for the
fourth year; and 25% of the actual costs of improvements of the deteriorated
property for the fifth year.
(Prior Code, § 24, 403) (Ord. 273, passed 2-8-1993)
§ 32.078 PROCEDURE FOR OBTAINING EXEMPTION.
   (A)   The procedure for obtaining exemption under this subchapter shall be
in accordance with the provisions of the Act.
   (B)   In addition, any person, association or corporation applying for tax
exemption pursuant to this subchapter shall supply the County Assessment Office
with a statement projecting the number of new jobs created or existing jobs
retained as a result of the repair, construction, or reconstruction of a
deteriorated property.
(Prior Code, § 24, 404) (Ord. 273, passed 2-8-1993)
§ 32.079 PROVISIONS OF ACT 76.
   The provisions of Act 76 of the General Assembly of the commonwealth, not
herein enumerated, shall, nevertheless, be incorporated as part of this
subchapter by reference.
(Prior Code, § 24, 405) (Ord. 273, passed 2-8-1993)
§ 32.080 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This subchapter shall become effective, within the boundaries of the
borough, immediately upon adoption by the borough, the county, and the Everett
Area School District in accordance with the provisions of the Act and shall
automatically expire and terminate five years following the effective date
hereof; provided, however, that any person, association, or corporation who has
applied for the exemption prior to said expiration date shall be entitled to a
full five-year exemption if the application otherwise qualifies.
(Prior Code, § 24, 406) (Ord. 273, passed 2-8-1993)
EMERGENCY AND MUNICIPAL SERVICES TAX
§ 32.095 AUTHORITY.
   This subchapter is enacted under authority of the Local Tax Act, 53 P.S. §§
6924.101 et seq., hereinafter as amended. All prior ordinances involving the
imposition of tax on the privilege of engaging in an occupation within the
borough and particular Ordinance 2004-08-01 are hereby amended, repealed, and/
or revised to the extent inconsistent hereby.
(Prior Code, § 24, 501)
§ 32.096 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COMPENSATION. Salaries, wages, commission, tips, bonuses, fees, gross
receipts, or any other earned income.
   EMPLOYER. Any person, partnership, limited partnership, unincorporated
association, institution, trust, corporation, governmental agency, or any other
body engaged in business or situated in the borough, employing one or more
employees engaged in any occupation.
   OCCUPATION. Any livelihood, job, trade, profession, business, or enterprise
of any kind, including services, domestic or other, for which monetary
compensation is received or charged.
   TAX COLLECTOR. Tax Collector of the borough elected or designated by the
borough to collect or receive the taxes imposed by this subchapter.
   TAXPAYER. Any natural person liable for the tax levied by this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 24, 502)
§ 32.097 IMPOSITION OF TAX.
   (A)   (1)   A tax for emergency and/or municipal services to be used for
police, fire, and/or emergency services; road construction and/or maintenance
within the borough; and reduction of property taxes, in the amount of $52 is
hereby imposed upon the privilege of engaging in an occupation within the
borough, in the year 2006, and in each following calendar year.
      (2)   Each natural person who exercises such privilege for any length of
time in any calendar year, beginning with the year 2006, shall pay the tax in
accordance with the provisions hereof.
   (B)   Ten dollars of such tax collected in any year in which the Everett
Area School District also adopts or has in effect an occupational privilege
tax, and the Local Tax Enabling Act, being 53 P.S, §§ 6924.101 et seq., limits
the total tax to $10, shall go to the Everett Area School District; otherwise,
any amount above the sum of $10 shall be collected by and become part of the
revenue of the borough; provided, however, that there is hereby exempted from
the borough’s portion of this tax any person whose total compensation from all
sources is less than $10,000 per annum.
(Prior Code, § 24, 503)
§ 32.098 COLLECTION THROUGH EMPLOYERS.
   (A)   Each employer shall register with the Tax Collector the employer’s
name, address, and other information the Tax Collector may require within 15
days after the effective date of this subchapter or within 15 days after first
becoming an employer.
   (B)   For each taxpayer employed for any length of time on or after January
1, 2006, each employer shall deduct the tax from compensation payable to the
taxpayer, file a return on a form prescribed by the Tax Collector, and pay to
said Tax Collector the full amount of taxes deducted on or before April 30 of
the current tax year. For each taxpayer for whom no prior deduction has been
made, who is employed after the effective date of this subchapter and in any of
the three-month periods ending June 30, September 30, and December 31, of the
tax year, each employer shall deduct the tax from compensation payable to the
taxpayer, file a return on a form prescribed by the Tax Collector, and pay said
Collector the full amount of all taxes deducted, on or before July 31 or
October 31 of the current tax year, or January 31 of the following year,
respectively.
   (C)   Any employer who discontinues business or ceases operation before
December 31 of any year during which this tax is in effect shall file the
return hereinabove required and pay the tax to the Tax Collector within 15 days
after discontinuing business or ceasing operations.
   (D)   The failure of any employer to deduct the tax shall not relieve the
employee from the duty to file a return and pay the tax. Any employer who fails
to deduct the tax as required by this section, or who fails to pay such tax to
the Collector, shall be liable for such tax in full, as though the tax had
originally been levied against such employer.
   (E)   As to employees who present official receipts evidencing prior payment
of the tax imposed hereby either directly or by collection through employers,
the employer shall not deduct the tax but shall maintain adequate records
concerning such employees.
(Prior Code, § 24, 504) Penalty, see §
32.999
§ 32.099 DIRECT PAYMENT BY TAXPAYERS.
   Every taxpayer who is self-employed or whose tax for any other reason is not
collected under §
32.098 shall file a return on a form prescribed by the Tax Collector and shall
pay the tax directly to said Collector. Each such taxpayer who first becomes
subject to the tax after the effective date of this subchapter, and on or
before March 31 of the current tax year, shall file the return and pay the tax
on or before April 30 of the current tax year, and each such taxpayer who first
becomes subject to the tax after March 31 of the current tax year, shall file
the return and pay the tax on or before July 31 or October 31 of the current
tax year, or January 31 of the following year, whichever of such payment dates
first occurs at least 30 days after the taxpayer becomes subject to the tax.
(Prior Code, § 24, 505)
§ 32.100 NONRESIDENT TAXPAYERS.
   Both resident and nonresident taxpayers shall, by virtue of engaging in an
occupation within the borough, be subject to the tax and the provisions of this
subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 24, 506)
§ 32.101 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The Tax Collector shall collect and receive the taxes, interests,
fines, and penalties imposed by this subchapter, and shall maintain records
showing the amounts received and the dates such amounts were received. The Tax
Collector shall prescribe and issue all forms necessary for the administration
of the tax and may adopt and enforce regulations relating to any matter
pertaining to the administration of this subchapter.
   (B)   The Tax Collector may examine the records of any employer and/or
supposed employer or of any taxpayer in order to ascertain the tax due or
verify the accuracy of any return. Every employer or supposed employer and
every taxpayer or supposed taxpayer shall give the tax collector all means,
facilities, and opportunity for the examinations hereby authorized.
(Prior Code, § 24, 507)
§ 32.102 COLLECTION.
   (A)   The Tax Collector shall collect by suit or otherwise, all taxes,
interests, costs, fines, and penalties due under this subchapter and unpaid. If
for any reason any tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate of 6% per
year on the amount of unpaid taxes and an additional penalty of 0.5% of the
amount of the unpaid tax, for each month or fraction of month during which the
tax remains unpaid shall be added and collected.
   (B)   Whenever suit is brought for the recovery of unpaid tax, the taxpayer
shall, in addition, be liable for the costs of collection and attorney’s fees
incurred by the borough, as well as for interest and penalties. The Tax
Collector may accept payment under protest of the tax claimed by the borough in
any case where any person disputes the borough’s claim for the tax.
   (C)   If a court of competent jurisdiction thereafter decides that there has
been overpayment to the Tax Collector, the Tax Collector shall refund the
amount of the overpayment to the person who paid under protest. Any action
instituted for such judicial determination shall be instituted within two years
of the last day of the period for which the tax is disputed or claim made. All
refunds shall be made in conformity with the procedure prescribed by the
borough.
(Prior Code, § 24, 508)
§ 32.103 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This amended subchapter shall become effective on January 1, 2006, and shall
continue on a calendar year basis, thereafter, without annual reenactment.
(Prior Code, § 24, 511)
§ 32.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   Any person who fails, neglects, or refuses to make any
declaration or return required by §§
32.001 through
32.008; any employer who fails, neglects, or refuses to register or pay the tax
deducted from his or her employees, or fails, neglects, or refuses to deduct or
withhold the tax from his or her employees; any person who refuses to permit
the officer or any agent designated by him or her to examine his or her books,
records, and papers; and any person who knowingly makes any incomplete, false,
or fraudulent return, or attempts to do anything whatsoever to avoid the full
disclosure of the amount of his or her net profits or earned income in order to
avoid the payment of the whole or any part of the tax imposed by §§
32.001 through
32.008 shall, upon conviction thereof before any Justice of the Peace,
Alderman, or Magistrate, or Court of Common Pleas of the county, be sentenced
to pay a fine of not more than $500 for each offense, and costs, and, in
default of payment of such fine and costs, to be imprisoned for a period not
exceeding 30 days.
      (2)   Each violation or day that a violation is continued to permit shall
constitute a separate offense for which a summary conviction may be sought.
Enforcement and prosecution may be undertaken by the borough’s Solicitor or
Attorney without requiring and securing approval of the District Attorney’s
office in advance. No penalty herein shall prevent the borough from enforcing
§§
32.001 through
32.008 by equitable, injunctive, and other remedies and to collect attorney’s
fees, costs, and expenses incurred by the borough in connection therewith.
   (C)   Any person who shall be convicted for violating or failing to carry
out any of the provisions or requirements of §§
32.050 through
32.061 or of neglecting, failing, or refusing to furnish complete and correct
returns or to pay over any tax levied by §§
32.050 through
32.061 at the time required, or of knowingly making any incomplete, false, or
fraudulent returns; or of doing or attempting to do anything whatsoever to
avoid the payment of the whole or any part of the tax imposed under this
subchapter shall be sentenced to a fine not exceeding $600 and costs for each
and every offense and, in default of payment thereof, to a term of imprisonment
not to exceed 30 days; provided, that such fine or penalty shall be in addition
to any other penalty imposed by any other section of §§
32.050 through
32.061.
(Prior Code, § 24, 311)
   (D)   An employer or taxpayer who makes a false or untrue statement on any
return required by §§
32.095 through
32.103, who refuses inspection of his or her records in his or her custody and
control setting forth his or her employees subject to this tax, who fails or
refuses to file a return required by §§
32.095 through
32.103 shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine not more than
$600 and, in default of payment, to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 30
days.
(Prior Code, § 24, 509)
(Ord. passed 9-1-1973; Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992; Ord. 2011-11-01, passed 11-
28-2011)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
   Chapter
      
50.   WATER
      
51.   SEWERS
      
52.   SOLID WASTE
CHAPTER 50: WATER
Section
General Provisions
   
50.01   Definitions
   
50.02   Use of public water system required
   
50.03   Building mains and connections
   
50.04   Rules and regulations governing building mains and connections to mains
   
50.05   Declaration of purpose
Control of Backflow and Cross-Connections
   
50.20   General policy
   
50.21   Definitions
   
50.22   Water system
   
50.23   Cross-connections prohibited
   
50.24   Surveys and investigations
   
50.25   Where protection is required
   
50.26   Type of protection required
   
50.27   Backflow prevention devices
   
50.28   Installation
   
50.29   Inspection and maintenance
   
50.30   Booster pumps
   
50.31   Enforcement
 
   
50.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 50.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AUTHORITY. The Borough of Everett Area Municipal Authority.
   BOROUGH. The Borough of Everett, Bedford County, Pennsylvania.
   BUILDING MAIN. The extension from the water system of any structure to the
lateral of a main.
   COMMONWEALTH. The Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
   IMPROVED PROPERTY. Any property within the borough upon which there is
erected a structure, intended for continuous or periodic habitation, occupancy,
or use by human beings or animals.
   INDUSTRIAL ESTABLISHMENT. Any improved property located within the borough
and used or intended for use, wholly or in part, for the manufacturing,
processing, cleaning, laundering, or assembling of any product, commodity, or
article.
   LATERAL. The part of the water system extending from a main to the curb line
or, if there shall be no curb line, to the property line or, if no such LATERAL
shall be provided, then LATERAL shall mean that portion of, or place in, a main
which is provided for connection of any building main.
   MAIN. Any pipe or conduit constituting a part of the water system used or
usable for water distribution purposes.
   OWNER. Any person vested with ownership, legal or equitable, sole or
partial, of any improved property.
   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, company, association, society, trust,
corporation, municipality, municipality authority, or other group or entity.
   WATER SYSTEM. All facilities, as of any particular time, for production,
transmission, storage, and distribution of water in, to, and for the borough
and owned by the authority.
(Prior Code, § 26, 101) (Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992)
§ 50.02 USE OF PUBLIC WATER SYSTEM REQUIRED.
   (A)   The owner of any improved property within the borough abutting upon
any street, alley, or right-of-way in which a water main has been provided by
the Authority, and where any part of the structure on said improved property is
within 150 feet of said water main, shall connect with said main, in such
manner as the borough may require within 60 days after notice to such owner
from the borough to make such connection. However, any improved property that
shall constitute an industrial establishment or a farm that has its own supply
of water for use other than human consumption shall not be required under this
section to connect to said water main.
   (B)   The notice by the borough to make a connection to a main, referred to
in division (A) above shall consist of a copy of this subchapter, including any
amendments and/or supplements at the time in effect, or a summary of each
section thereof, and a written or printed document requiring the connection in
accordance with the provisions of this subchapter and specifying that such
connection shall be made within 90 days after the date such notice is given or
served. Such notice may be given or served at any time after a main is in place
that can deliver water to the particular improved property. Such notice shall
be given or served upon the owner by personal service or by registered or
certified mail to his or her last known address.
(Prior Code, § 26, 102) (Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.03 BUILDING MAINS AND CONNECTIONS.
   (A)   No person shall uncover, shall connect with, make any opening into, or
use, alter, or disturb, in any manner, any main or any part of the water system
without first obtaining a permit, in writing, from the borough.
   (B)   Application for a permit required under division (A) above shall be
made by the owner of the improved property served or to be served or by the
duly authorized agent of such owner.
   (C)   No person shall make or shall cause to be made a connection of any
improved property with a main until such person shall have fulfilled each of
the following conditions.
      (1)   Such person shall have notified the Secretary of the borough of the
desire and intention to connect such improved property to a main.
      (2)   Such person shall have applied for and obtained a permit as
required by division (A) above.
      (3)   Such person shall have given the Secretary of the borough at least
24 hours’ notice of the time when such connection will be made so that the
borough may supervise and inspect or may cause to be supervised and inspected
the work of connection and necessary testing.
      (4)   If applicable, such person shall have furnished satisfactory
evidence to the Secretary of the borough that any tapping (or connection) fee
that may be charged and imposed by the Authority against the owner of each
improved property who connects such improved property to a main has been paid.
   (D)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, each improved property
shall be connected separately and independently with a main through a building
main. Grouping of more than one improved property on one building main shall
not be permitted, except under special circumstances and, for good cause shown,
but then only after special permission of the borough, in writing, shall have
been secured and only subject to such rules, regulations, and conditions as may
be prescribed by the borough.
   (E)   All costs and expenses of construction of a building main and all
costs and expenses of connection of a building main to a main shall be borne by
the owner of the improved property to be connected, and such owner shall
indemnify and shall save harmless the borough and the Authority from all loss
or damage that may be occasioned, directly or indirectly, as a result of
construction of a building main or connection of a building main to a main.
   (F)   A building main shall be connected to a main at the place designated
by the borough or by the Authority and where, if applicable, the lateral is
provided. A smooth, neat joint shall be made and the connection of a building
main to the lateral shall be made secure and watertight.
   (G)   If the owner of the improved property located within the borough and
abutting upon the water system, subject, however, to the exception provided for
in §
50.20(A), after 90 days’ notice from the borough, in accordance with §
50.20(A), shall fail to connect such improved property, as required, the
borough may enter upon such improved property and construct such connection and
may collect from such owner the costs and expenses thereof in the manner
permitted by law.
(Prior Code, § 26, 103) (Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.04 RULES AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING BUILDING MAINS AND CONNECTIONS TO
MAINS.
   (A)   No building main shall be covered until it has been inspected and
approved by the borough. If any part of a building main is covered before so
being inspected and approved, it shall be uncovered for inspection at the cost
and expense of the owner of the improved property to be connected to a main.
   (B)   Every building main of any improved property shall be maintained in a
sanitary and safe operating condition by the owner of such improved property.
   (C)   Every excavation for a building main shall be guarded adequately with
barricades and lights to protect all persons from damage and injury. Any
street, sidewalk, or other public property disturbed in the course of
installation of a building main shall be restored, at the cost and expense of
the owner of the improved property being connected, in a manner satisfactory to
the borough.
   (D)   If any person shall fail or shall refuse, upon receipt of a notice of
the borough or the Authority, in writing, to remedy any unsatisfactory
condition with respect to a building main, within 60 days of receipt of such
notice, the borough or the Authority may refuse to permit such person to be
served by the water system until such unsatisfactory condition shall have been
remedied to the satisfaction of the borough and the Authority.
   (E)   The borough reserves the right to adopt, from time to time, additional
rules and regulations, as it shall deem necessary and proper relating to
connection with a main and with the water system, which additional rules and
regulations, to the extent appropriate, shall be and shall be construed as part
of this subchapter.
   (F)   In the event the Authority expands its water system in the borough, as
the result of which any borough road is disturbed, then any restoration of said
road shall be 2 RC stones at the cost and expense of the Authority, to the
extent that any such road of the borough is restored to its original condition
prior to being disturbed by the Authority, excluding only those restoration
improvements which are the responsibility of the owner as provided in division
(C) above.
(Prior Code, § 26, 104) (Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.05 DECLARATION OF PURPOSE.
   It is declared that enactment of this subchapter is necessary for the
protection, benefit, and preservation of the health, safety, and welfare of
inhabitants of the borough.
(Prior Code, § 26, 106) (Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992)
CONTROL OF BACKFLOW AND CROSS-CONNECTION
§ 50.20 GENERAL POLICY.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this subchapter is:
      (1)   To protect the public water supply from contamination or pollution
by isolating, within the consumer’s water system, contaminants or pollutants
which could backflow through the service line and connection into the public
water supply system;
      (2)   To promote the elimination or control of existing cross-
connections, actual or potential, between the public or consumer’s water supply
and non-potable water systems, plumbing fixtures, and sources or systems
containing process fluids; and
      (3)   To provide for the maintenance and continuation of a cross-
connection control program which prevents the contamination or pollution of the
public and consumer’s water supply.
   (B)   Application. The public water supplier and the consumer have the joint
responsibility for protection of the public water supply from contamination or
pollution due to backflow. If the public water supplier requires an approved
backflow prevention device, the supplier shall give notice to the consumer to
install such an approved backflow prevention device at each connection to his
or her premises. The consumer should immediately install such an approved
device or devices at his or her own expense. Failure, refusal, or inability on
the part of the consumer to install such a device shall constitute grounds for
discontinuing water service to the premises until such a device or devices have
been installed.
(Prior Code, § 26, 201) (Ord. 2001-12-01, passed 12-10-2001)
§ 50.21 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AIR GAP SEPARATION. The unobstructed vertical distance through the free
atmosphere between the lowest opening from any pipe or faucet supplying potable
water to a tank, plumbing fixture, or other device, and the flood level rim of
the receptacle. The differential distance shall be at least double the diameter
of the supply pipe measured vertically above the top of the rim of the vessel.
In no case shall the AIR GAP be less than one inch.
   APPROVED. A backflow prevention device or method that has been accepted by
the public water supplier as suitable for the proposed use.
   AUXILIARY WATER SYSTEM. Any water source or system on the premises of, or
available to, the customer except connections to other approved public water
supply systems.
   BACKFLOW. A flow condition, induced by a differential in pressure, that
causes the flow of water or mixtures of water and other substances into the
distribution pipes of a potable water supply system from a source other than
its intended source. BACKFLOW can result from either backsiphonage or
backpressure.
   BACKFLOW PREVENTER. A device or other means which will prevent the backflow
of water or any other substance into the public water supply system.
   BACKPRESSURE. The backflow of water or a mixture of water and other
substances from a plumbing fixture or other customer source, into a public
water supply system due to an increase of pressure in the fixture or customer
source to a value that exceeds the system pressure.
   BACKSIPHONAGE. The backflow of water or a mixture of water and other
substances from a plumbing fixture or other customer source, into a public
water supply system due to a temporary negative or sub-atmospheric pressure
within the public water supply system.
   CONNECTION. The part of the public water system extending from the end of
the service line to the water meter.
   CONSUMER. The owner or person in control of any premises supplied by or in
any manner connected to a public water supply system.
   CONSUMER’S WATER SYSTEM. Any water system, located on the consumer’s
premises supplied by or in any manner connected to a public water supply
system. A household plumbing system is considered to be a CONSUMER’S WATER
SYSTEM.
   CONTAINMENT. Cross-connection control which isolates the customer’s entire
facility from the public water supply system so as to provide the protection
necessary to prevent contamination of the public water supply in the event of
backflow from the customer’s facility. Though CONTAINMENT CONTROL prevents
contamination of the public water supply, it offers no protection to the water
distribution system within the facility. Reduced pressure zone devices are used
for CONTAINMENT CONTROL.
   CONTAMINATION. The degradation of the quality of the drinking water by
wastewaters, processed fluids, or any water of a quality less than accepted
drinking water quality to a degree which would create an actual hazard to the
public health through poisoning or through the spread of disease.
   CROSS-CONNECTION. An arrangement allowing either a direct or indirect
connection through which backflow, including backsiphonage, can occur between
the drinking water in a public water system and a system containing a source or
potential source of contamination, or allowing treated water to be removed from
any public water system, used for any source or routed through any device or
pipes outside the public water system, and returned to the public water system.
The term does not include connections to devices totally within the control of
one or more public water systems and connections between water mains.
   DEGREE OF HAZARD. An evaluation of the potential risk to health and the
adverse effect upon the public water supply system.
   DOUBLE CHECK VALVE ASSEMBLY. An assembly composed of two single,
independently acting, soft-seated, spring-loaded check valves, including
tightly closing shutoff valves located at each end of the ASSEMBLY and suitable
connections for testing the watertightness of each CHECK VALVE.
   HEALTH HAZARD. Any condition, device, or practice in a water system or its
operation that creates, or may create, a danger to the health and wellbeing of
its users. The word SEVERE, as used to qualify HEALTH HAZARD, means a hazard to
the health of the user that could reasonably be expected to result in
significant morbidity or death.
   INTERCHANGEABLE CONNECTION. An arrangement or device that will allow
alternate, but not simultaneous, use of two sources of water.
   NON-HEALTH HAZARD. Any condition, device, or practice in a water system or
its operation that creates, or may create, an impairment of the quality of the
water to a degree which does not create a hazard to the public health, but
which does adversely and unreasonably affect the aesthetic qualities of such
water for domestic use.
   NON-POTABLE WATER. Water not safe for drinking, personal, culinary, or any
other type of domestic use.
   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, association, company, corporation,
municipality, municipal authority, political subdivision, or any agency of
federal or state government. The term includes the officers, employees, and
agents of any partnership, association, company, corporation, municipality,
municipal authority, political subdivision, or any agency of federal or state
government.
   POLLUTION. The presence in water of any foreign substance that tends to
degrade its quality so as to constitute a hazard, or to impair the usefulness
or quality of the water to a degree which does not create an actual hazard to
the public health, but which does adversely and unreasonably affect such waters
for domestic use.
   POTABLE WATER. Water which is satisfactory for drinking, personal, culinary,
and domestic purposes and meets the requirements of DEP.
   PROCESS FLUIDS. Any fluid or solution which may be chemically, biologically,
or otherwise contaminated or polluted in a form or concentration such as would
constitute a health, pollutional, or system hazard if introduced into the
public or a consumer’s water system. This includes, but is not limited to:
      (1)   Polluted or contaminated waters;
      (2)   Process waters;
      (3)   Sanitary quality;
      (4)   Cooling waters;
      (5)   Contaminated natural waters taken from wells, lakes, streams, or
irrigation systems;
      (6)   Chemicals in solution or suspension;
      (7)   Oils, gases, acids, alkalis, and other liquid or gaseous fluids
used in industrial or other processes, or for firefighting purposes; and
      (8)   Heating system waters from boilers or heat pumps.
   PUBLIC WATER SUPPLIER. A system which provides water to the public for human
consumption in the borough. The term includes any collection, treatment,
storage, and distribution facilities under control of the PUBLIC WATER SUPPLIER
and used in connection with the system. The term includes collection or
pretreatment storage facilities not under such control which are used in
connection with the system. The term also includes a system which provides
water for human consumption via bottling, vending machines, retail sale, or
bulk hauling methods.
   REDUCED PRESSURE ZONE DEVICE (RPZD). A device which contains two
independently acting, soft-seated, spring-loaded check valves, together with a
soft-seated, spring-loaded, diaphram- activated, pressure differential relief
valve located between the tow check valves. During normal flow and at the
cessation of normal flow, the pressure between those two checks shall be less
than the supply pressure. In case of leakage of either check valve, the
differential relief valve shall maintain the pressure between the checks at
less than the supply pressure by opening to the atmosphere. The DEVICE must
include tightly closing shutoff valves located at each end, and each DEVICE
shall be fitted with properly located test cocks.
   SERVICE LINE. The part of the public water system including the corporation
stop, saddle, pipe, curb stop, and curb box, extending from the water main to
the property line.
   SYSTEM HAZARD. A condition posing an actual or potential threat of damage to
the physical properties of the public water system or to the consumer’s potable
water system.
(Prior Code, § 26, 202) (Ord. 2001-12-01, passed 12-10-2001)
§ 50.22 WATER SYSTEM.
   (A)   The water system shall be considered as made up of two parts:
      (1)   The public water supply system; and
      (2)   The consumer’s water system.
   (B)   The PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM shall consist of the source facilities
and the distribution system, and shall include all those facilities of the
public water supply system under the control of the public water supplies up to
the point where the consumer’s water system begins.
   (C)   The SOURCE shall include all components of the facilities utilized in
the production, treatment, storage, and delivery of water to the public
distribution system.
   (D)   The PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM shall include the network of conduits
used for delivery of water from the source to the consumer’s water system.
   (E)   The CONSUMER’S WATER SYSTEM shall include the connection and all
facilities beyond the meter which are utilized in conveying water from the
public distribution system to points of use.
(Prior Code, § 26, 203) (Ord. 2001-12-01, passed 12-15-2001)
§ 50.23 CROSS-CONNECTIONS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No water service line and connection shall be installed or maintained
to any premises where actual or potential cross-connections to the public water
supply system or consumer’s water system may exist, unless such cross-
connections are abated or controlled to the satisfaction of the public water
supplier.
   (B)   No connection shall be installed or maintained whereby water from an
auxiliary water supply may enter a public or consumer’s water system unless
such auxiliary water supply, as well as the method of connection and use of
such supply, has been approved by the water supplier.
(Prior Code, § 26, 204) (Ord. 2001-12-01, passed 12-10-2001) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.24 SURVEYS AND INVESTIGATIONS.
   (A)   The consumer’s premises shall be open at all times to the public water
supplier, or its authorized representative, for the purposes of surveying for,
or investigating, actual or potential cross-connections.
   (B)   On request by the public water supplier, the consumer shall furnish
information on water use practices within his or her premises.
   (C)   It shall be the responsibility of the water consumer to conduct
periodic surveys of water use practices on his or her premises to determine
whether there are actual or potential cross-connections to his or her water
system.
(Prior Code, § 26, 205) (Ord. 2001-12-01, passed 12-10-2001) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.25 WHERE PROTECTION IS REQUIRED.
   (A)   An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed prior to the
first branch line leading off each service line to a consumer’s water system
where, in the judgment of the public water supplier, an actual or potential
hazard to the public water supply system exists.
   (B)   An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on each
service line to a consumer’s water system where the following conditions exist:
      (1)   Systems having an auxiliary water supply, unless such auxiliary
supply is accepted as an additional source by the public water supplier and
approved by the State Department of Environmental Protection;
      (2)   Systems where any substance is handled in such a fashion as to
create an actual or potential hazard to the public water supply system. This
shall include systems having sources or auxiliary systems which contain process
fluids or waters originating from the public water supply system, which are no
longer under the sanitary control of the water purveyor;
      (3)   Systems having internal cross-connections that are not correctable,
or intricate plumbing arrangements which make it impractical to determine
whether or not cross-connections exist;
      (4)   Systems where, because of security requirements or restrictions, it
is impossible or impractical to make a complete cross-connection survey;
      (5)   Systems having a repeated history of cross-connections; or
      (6)   Others specified by the public water supplier.
   (C)   An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on each
service line to a consumer’s water system serving, but not necessarily limited
to, the following types of facilities unless the public water supplier
determines that no actual or potential hazards to the public water supply
system exist:
      (1)   Hospitals, mortuaries, clinics, and nursing homes;
      (2)   Laboratories;
      (3)   Sewage treatment plants, sewage pumping station, or stormwater
pumping station;
      (4)   Food or beverage processing plants;
      (5)   Chemical plants;
      (6)   Metal plating industries;
      (7)   Petroleum processing or storage plants;
      (8)   Radioactive material processing plants;
      (9)   Car wash or truck wash; or
      (10)   Others specified by the public water supplier.
(Prior Code, § 26, 206) (Ord. 2001-12-01, passed 12-10-2001) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.26 TYPE OF PROTECTION REQUIRED.
   The type of protection required under §
50.25 of this subchapter shall depend on the degree of hazard which exists as
follows.
   (A)   An approved air gap separation shall be installed where the public
water supply system may be contaminated with substances that are dangerous to
public health and could cause a severe health hazard, and where such a device
would be technically feasible and/or practical.
   (B)   An approved air gap separation or an approved reduced pressure zone
device shall be installed where the public water supply system may be
contaminated with a substance that could cause a system or health hazard.
   (C)   An approved air gap separation, an approved reduced pressure zone
device, or an approved double check valve assembly shall be installed where the
public water supply system may be polluted with substances that would be
objectionable or constitute a non-health hazard.
(Prior Code, § 26, 207) (Ord. 2001-12-01, passed 12-10-2001) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.27 BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICES.
   (A)   Any backflow prevention device required by this subchapter shall be of
a model or construction approved by the public water supplier and shall comply
with the following:
      (1)   Air gap separation to be approved shall be at least twice the
diameter of the supply pipe, measured vertically above the top rim of the
receiving vessel, but in no case less than one inch;
      (2)   (a)   A double check valve assembly or a reduced pressure zone
device shall be approved by the public water supplier and shall mean a device
that has been manufactured in full conformance with standards established by
the American Water Works Association (AWWA) entitled:
            1.   “ANSI/AWWA C510 Standard for Double Check Valve Backflow
Prevention Assembly;” and
            2.   “ANSI/AWWA C511 Standard for Reduced-Pressure Principle
Backflow Prevention Assembly.”
         (b)   Said AWWA standards are herein adopted by the public water
supplier. Final approval, however, of the reduced pressure zone device and the
double check valve assembly shall be evidenced by a certificate of full
approval, issued by an approved testing laboratory, certifying full compliance
with the said AWWA standards.
      (3)   An interchangeable connection to be approved shall be either a
swing type connector or a four-way valve of the lubricated plug type that
operates through a mechanism which unseats the plug, turns it 90 degrees, and
reseats the plug. Four-way valves shall not be used as stop valves but must
have separate stop valves on each pipe connected to the valve. The telltale
port on the four-way valve shall have no piping connected, and the threads or
flange on this port shall be destroyed so that a connection cannot be made.
   (B)   Existing backflow prevention devices approved by the public water
supplier at the time of installation and properly maintained shall, except for
inspection and maintenance requirements, be excluded from the requirement of
division (A) above, provided the public water supplier is assured that they
will satisfactorily protect the public water supply system. Whenever the
existing device is moved from the present location, or requires more than
minimum maintenance, or when the public water supplier finds that the
maintenance of the device constitutes a hazard to health, the device shall be
replaced by a backflow prevention device meeting the requirements of this
subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 26, 208) (Ord. 2001-12-01, passed 12-10-2001) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.28 INSTALLATION.
   (A)   Backflow prevention devices required by this subchapter shall be
installed at a location, and in a manner, approved by the public water
supplier. The device(s) shall be installed by a person approved by the public
water supplier, properly qualified and under the supervision and inspection of
the public water supplier. Installation and inspection of the devices shall be
at the expense of the water consumer.
   (B)   Backflow prevention devices installed on the connection to a
consumer’s water system shall be located on the consumer’s side of the water
meter, as close to the meter as is reasonably practical, and prior to any other
connection.
(Prior Code, § 26, 209) (Ord. 2001-12-01, passed 12-10-2001) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.29 INSPECTION AND MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the consumer at any premises on which backflow
prevention devices are required by this subchapter to have inspections, tests,
and overhaul made in accordance with the following schedule, or more often
where inspections indicate a need.
      (1)   Air separation shall be inspected at the time of installation, and
at least every 12 months thereafter.
      (2)   Double check valve assemblies shall be inspected and tested for
tightness at the time of installation, and at least every 12 months thereafter.
These devices shall be dismantled, inspected internally, cleaned, and repaired
whenever needed, and at least every 30 months.
      (3)   Reduced pressure zone devices shall be inspected and tested for
tightness at the time of installation, and at least every 12 months thereafter.
These devices shall be dismantled, inspected internally, cleaned, and repaired
whenever needed and at least every five years.
      (4)   Interchangeable connections shall be inspected at the time of
installation, and at least every 12 months thereafter.
   (B)   Inspections, tests, and overhaul of backflow prevention devices shall
be made at the expense of the water consumer, and shall be performed by the
public water supplier or a person approved by the public water supplier and
certified to inspect, test, and overhaul backflow prevention devices.
   (C)   Whenever backflow prevention devices required by this subchapter are
found to be defective, they shall be repaired or replaced at the expense of the
consumer without delay.
   (D)   The water consumer must maintain a complete record of each backflow
prevention device from purchase to retirement. This shall include a
comprehensive listing that includes a record of all tests, inspections, and
repairs. Records of inspections, tests, repairs, and overhaul shall be
submitted to the public water supplier upon request.
   (E)   Backflow prevention devices shall not be bypassed, made inoperative,
removed, or otherwise made ineffective without specific authorization by the
public water supplier.
(Prior Code, § 26, 210) (Ord. 2001-12-01, passed 12-10-2001) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.30 BOOSTER PUMPS.
   (A)   Where a booster pump has been installed on the service line or
connection to, or within, any premises, such a pump shall be equipped with a
low pressure cut-off device designed to shutoff the booster pump when the
pressure in the service line on the suction side of the pump drops to ten
pounds per square inch gauge or less for a period of 30 seconds or longer.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of the water consumer to maintain the low
pressure cut-off device in proper working order and to certify to the public
water supplier, at least once a year, that the device is operating properly.
(Prior Code, § 26, 211) (Ord. 2001-12-01, passed 12-10-2001) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.31 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The public water supplier may deny or discontinue, after issuing
reasonable notice, the water service to any premises wherein any backflow
prevention device required by this subchapter is not installed, tested, and
maintained in a manner acceptable to the public water supplier, or if it is
found that the backflow prevention device has been removed or by-passed, or if
an unprotected cross-connection exists on the premises, or if a low pressure
cut-off device required by this subchapter is not installed and maintained in
working order.
   (B)   Water service to such premises shall not be restored until the
consumer has corrected or eliminated such conditions or defects in conformance
with this subchapter and to the satisfaction of the public water supplier.
(Prior Code, § 26, 212) (Ord. 2001-12-01, passed 12-10-2001)
§ 50.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   Any person who shall violate §§
50.01 through
50.05 shall be liable, upon conviction for a first offense and upon conviction
for each subsequent offense, to a fine of not more than $1,000, together with
costs of prosecution in each case. In default of payment of said fine and
costs, said person shall be subject to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30
days. Each day that a violation shall continue shall be deemed and taken to a
separate offense and shall be punishable as such.
      (2)   Fines and costs imposed under provisions of §§
50.01 through
50.05 shall be enforceable and recoverable in the manner at the time provided
by applicable law and shall be paid to the borough.
(Prior Code, § 26, 105)
   (C)   (1)   Any person who shall violate §§
50.20 through
50.31 shall be liable, upon conviction for a first offense, and upon conviction
for each subsequent offense, to a fine of not more than $1,000, together with
costs of prosecution in each case. In default of payment of said fine and
costs, said person shall be subject to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30
days. Each day that a violation shall continue shall be deemed and taken to be
a separate offense and shall be punishable as such.
      (2)   Fines and costs imposed under provisions of §§
50.20 through
50.31 shall be enforceable and recoverable in the manner at the time provided
by applicable law and shall be paid to the borough.
(Prior Code, § 26, 212)
(Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992; Ord. 2001-12-01, passed 12-10-2001)
CHAPTER 51: SEWERS
Section
Connections
   
51.01   Definitions
   
51.02   Use of public sewers required
   
51.03   Building sewers and connections
   
51.04   Rules and regulations governing building sewers and connections to
sewers
   
51.05   Declaration of purpose
Sewer Uses
   
51.20   Downspouts, roof drainage, or surface and areaway drainage not to be
connected to sanitary sewerage system
   
51.21   Removal of prohibited connections following notice
   
51.22   Manner of removal of prohibited connections
Holding Tanks
   
51.35   Purpose
   
51.36   Definitions
   
51.37   Rights and privileges granted
   
51.38   Rules and regulations
   
51.39   Rules and regulations to be in conformity with applicable law
   
51.40   Rates and charges
   
51.41   Holding tank permits
   
51.42   Regulation of public sewage
   
51.43   Exclusiveness of rights and privileges
   
51.44   Duties of improved property owner
   
51.45   Abatement of nuisance
 
   
51.99   Penalty
CONNECTIONS
§ 51.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AUTHORITY. The Borough of Everett Area Municipal Authority, a municipal
authority of the commonwealth.
   BOROUGH. The Borough of Everett, Bedford County, Pennsylvania, a municipal
corporation of the commonwealth, acting by and through its Council or, in
appropriate cases, acting by and through its authorized representatives.
   BUILDING SEWER. The extension from the sewage drainage system of any
structure to the lateral of a sewer.
   COMMONWEALTH. The Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
   IMPROVED PROPERTY. Any property within this borough upon which there is
erected a structure intended for continuous or periodic habitation, occupancy,
or use by human beings or animals and from which structure sanitary sewage and/
or industrial wastes shall be or may be discharged.
   INDUSTRIAL ESTABLISHMENT. Any improved property located in this borough used
or intended for use, wholly or in part, for the manufacturing, processing,
cleaning, laundering, or assembling of any product, commodity, or article, or
any other improved property located in this borough from which wastes, in
addition to or other than sanitary sewage, shall be discharged.
   INDUSTRIAL WASTES. Any and all wastes discharged from an industrial
establishment other than sanitary sewage.
   LATERAL. The part of the sewer system extending from a sewer to the curb
line or, if there shall be no curb line, to the property line or, if no such
lateral shall be provided, then LATERAL shall mean that portion of, or place
in, a sewer that is provided for connection of any building sewer.
   OWNER. Any person vested with ownership, legal or equitable, sole or
partial, of any improved property.
   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, company, association, society, trust,
corporation, municipality, municipality authority, or other group or entity.
   SANITARY SEWAGE. Normal water-carried household and toilet wastes from any
improved property.
   SEWER. Any pipe or conduit constituting a part of the sewer system used or
usable for sewage collection purposes.
   SEWER SYSTEM. All facilities, as of any particular time, for collecting,
transmitting, treating, and disposing of sanitary sewage and/or industrial
wastes situate in or adjacent to this borough and owned by the borough.
   STREET. Any street, road, lane, court, cul-de-sac, alley, public way, or
public square.
(Prior Code, § 18, 101) (Ord. 269, passed 1-9-1989)
§ 51.02 USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED.
   (A)   Exceptions. The owner of any improved property benefitted, improved,
or accommodated by a sewer shall connect such improved property with such
sewer, in such manner as this borough or the Authority may require, within 45
days after notice to such owner from this borough or the Authority to make such
connection, for the purpose of discharge of all sanitary sewage and industrial
wastes from such improved property; subject, however, to such limitations and
restrictions as shall be established herein or otherwise shall be established
by this borough or the Authority, from time to time.
   (B)   Limitations or restrictions. All sanitary sewage and industrial wastes
from any improved property, after connection of such improved property with a
sewer shall be required under division (A) above, shall be conducted into a
sewer; subject, however, to such limitations and restrictions as shall be
established herein or otherwise shall be established by this borough or the
Authority, from time to time.
   (C)   Violations.
      (1)   No person shall place, shall deposit, or shall permit to be placed
or to be deposited upon public or private property within this borough any
sanitary sewage or industrial wastes in violation of division (A) above.
      (2)   No person shall discharge or shall permit to be discharged to any
natural outlet within this borough any sanitary sewage or industrial wastes in
violation of division (A) above, except where suitable treatment has been
provided that is satisfactory to this borough and the Authority.
   (D)   Connections.
      (1)   No privy vault, cesspool, sinkhole, septic tank, or similar
receptacle shall be maintained at any time upon any improved property that has
been connected to a sewer or that shall be required under division (A) above to
be connected to a sewer.
      (2)   Every such privy vault, cesspool, sinkhole, septic tank, or similar
receptacle in existence shall be abandoned and, at the discretion of this
borough and the Authority, shall be cleansed and shall be filled, at the
expense of the owner of such improved property, under the direction and
supervision of this borough or the Authority; and any such privy vault,
cesspool, sinkhole, septic tank, or similar receptacle not so abandoned and, if
required by this borough or the Authority, not cleansed and filled, shall
constitute a nuisance, and such nuisance may be abated, as provided by law, at
the expense of the owner of such improved property.
   (E)   Limitations. No privy vault, cesspool, sinkhole, septic tank, or
similar receptacle at any time shall be connected with a sewer.
   (F)   Notice.
      (1)   The notice by this borough or the Authority to make a connection to
a sewer, referred to in division (A) above, shall consist of a copy of this
subchapter, including any amendments and/or supplements at the time in effect,
or a summary of each section thereof, and a written or printed document
requiring the connection in accordance with the provisions of this subchapter
and specifying that such connection shall be made within 45 days from the date
such notice is given.
      (2)   Such notice may be given at any time after a sewer is in place that
can receive and can convey sanitary sewage and industrial wastes for treatment
and disposal from the particular improved property. Such notice shall be served
upon the owner either by personal service or by registered mail, or by such
other method as, at the time, may be provided by law.
(Prior Code, § 18, 102) (Ord. 269, passed 1-9-1989) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.03 BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS.
   (A)   Restrictions. No person shall uncover, shall connect with, shall make
any opening into or shall use, shall alter, or shall disturb, in any manner,
any sewer or any part of the sewer system without first obtaining a permit, in
writing, from the Authority.
   (B)   Application. Application for a permit required under division (A)
above shall be made by the owner of the improved property served or to be
served or by the duly authorized agent of such owner.
   (C)   Conditions. No person shall make or shall cause to be made a
connection of any improved property with a sewer until such person shall have
fulfilled each of the following conditions.
      (1)   Such person shall have notified the Authority of the desire and
intention to connect such improved property to a sewer.
      (2)   Such person shall have applied for and shall have obtained a permit
as required by division (A) above.
      (3)   Such person shall have given the Authority at least 24 hours’
notice of the time when such connection will be made so that the Authority may
supervise and inspect or may cause to be supervised and inspected the work of
connection and necessary testing.
      (4)   If applicable, such person shall have furnished satisfactory
evidence to the Authority that any tapping (or connection) fee that may be
charged and imposed by the Authority against the owner of each improved
property who connects such improved property to a sewer has been paid.
   (D)   Grouping. Except as otherwise provided in this division (D), each
improved property shall be connected separately and independently with a sewer
through a building sewer. Grouping of more than one improved property on one
building sewer shall not be permitted, except under special circumstances and
for good sanitary reasons or other good cause shown, but then only after
special permission of the Authority in writing, shall have been secured and
only subject to such rules, regulations, and conditions as may be prescribed by
the Authority.
   (E)   Costs and expenses. All costs and expenses of construction of a
building sewer and all costs and expenses of connection of a building sewer to
a sewer shall be borne by the owner of the improved property to be connected,
and such owner shall indemnify and shall save harmless this borough and the
Authority from all loss or damage that may be occasioned, directly or
indirectly, as a result of construction of a building sewer or of connection of
a building sewer to a sewer.
   (F)   Connection. A building sewer shall be connected to a sewer at the
place designated by the Authority and where, if applicable, the lateral is
provided. The invert of a building sewer at the point of connection shall be at
the same or a higher elevation than the invert of the sewer. A smooth, neat
joint shall be made and the connection of a building sewer to the lateral shall
be made secure and watertight.
   (G)   Claim. If the owner of any improved property benefitted, improved, or
accommodated by a sewer, after 45 days’ notice from this borough or the
Authority, in accordance with §
51.02(A), shall fail to connect such improved property, as required, this
borough or the Authority may make such connection and may collect from such
owner the costs and expenses thereof by a municipal claim, an action in
assumpait or such other legal proceeding as may be permitted by law.
(Prior Code, § 18, 103) (Ord. 269, passed 1-9-1989) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.04 RULES AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS TO
SEWERS.
   (A)   Where required. Where an improved property, at the time connection to
a sewer is required, shall be served by its own sewage disposal system or
sewage disposal system or sewage disposal device and attachment shall be made,
with proper fittings, to continue such house sewer line as a building sewer.
   (B)   Covered for inspection.
      (1)   No building sewer shall be covered until it has been inspected and
approved by this borough or the Authority.
      (2)   If any part of a building sewer is covered before so being
inspected and approved, it shall be uncovered for inspection at the cost and
expense of the owner of the improved property to be connected to a sewer.
   (C)   Safe operating conditions. Every building sewer of any improved
property shall be maintained in a sanitary and safe operating condition by the
owner of such improved property.
   (D)   Excavation.
      (1)   Every excavation for a building sewer shall be guarded adequately
with barricades and lights to protect all persons from damage and injury.
      (2)   Any street, sidewalk, and other property disturbed in the course of
installation of a building sewer shall be restored, at the cost and expense of
the owner of the improved property being connected, in a manner satisfactory to
this borough and the Authority.
   (E)   Access.
      (1)   This borough and the Authority shall have the right to gain access
to and upon the improved property, at all reasonable times, after connection of
the building sewer to the sewer for the purposes of inspection, observation,
measurement, sampling, and testing, and the performance of all other functions
relating to sewer service rendered by the Authority.
      (2)   If at any time, said building sewer and the waste being discharged
therein from the improved property does not comply with the rules and
regulations set forth herein or hereinafter adopted, notice of same, in
writing, shall be given to the owner of the improved property to make the
necessary change or repairs within 45 days of receipt of such notice.
      (3)   If the owner shall fail or shall refuse to make said necessary
change or repairs within said time period, the borough of the Authority may
refuse to permit such person to discharge sanitary sewage and industrial wastes
into the sewer system until such change or repairs shall have been remedied to
the satisfaction of this borough and the Authority.
   (G)   Right to adopt. This borough reserves the right to adopt, from time to
time, additional rules and regulations as it shall deem necessary and proper
relating to connections with a sewer and with the sewer system, which
additional rules and regulations, to the extent appropriate, shall be and shall
be construed as part of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 18, 104) (Ord. 269, passed 1-9-1989) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.05 DECLARATION OF PURPOSE.
   It is declared that enactment of this subchapter is necessary for the
protection, benefit, and preservation of the health, safety, and welfare of
inhabitants of this borough.
(Prior Code, § 18, 106) (Ord. 269, passed 1-9-1989)
SEWER USES
§ 51.20 DOWNSPOUTS, ROOF DRAINAGE, OR SURFACE OR AREAWAY DRAINAGE NOT TO BE
CONNECTED TO SANITARY SEWERAGE SYSTEM.
   No downspout, roof drainage, or surface or areaway drainage shall be
connected into the sanitary sewerage system.
(Prior Code, § 18, 201) (Ord. passed 6-14-1965) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.21 REMOVAL OF PROHIBITED CONNECTIONS FOLLOWING NOTICE.
   All property owners in the borough having downspouts, roof drainage, or
surface or areaway drainage connected to the sanitary sewerage system shall
remove same within 30 days of notice to do so.
(Prior Code, § 18, 202) (Ord. passed 6-14-1965; Ord. 261A, passed 3-24-1986)
Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.22 MANNER OF REMOVAL OF PROHIBITED CONNECTIONS.
   Any property owner or applicant for service shall remove such connections
and adequately and rightly plug his or her system to prevent the entrance of
any downspout, roof, surface, or areaway drainage into the sanitary sewerage
system.
(Prior Code, § 18, 203) (Ord. passed 6-14-1965; Ord. 261A, passed 3-24-1986)
Penalty, see §
51.99
HOLDING TANKS
§ 51.35 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to establish procedures for the use and
maintenance of holding tanks designed to receive and retain sewage whether from
residential or commercial uses, and it is hereby declared that the enactment of
this subchapter is necessary for the protection, benefit, and preservation of
the health, safety, and welfare of the inhabitants of the borough.
(Prior Code, § 18, 301) (Ord. 263, passed 8-27-1986)
§ 51.36 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AUTHORITY. Councilpersons of the Borough of Everett, Bedford County,
Pennsylvania.
   HOLDING TANK. A watertight receptacle which receives and retains sewage and
is designed and constructed to facilitate ultimate disposal of the sewage at
another site. HOLDING TANKS include, but are not limited to, the following.
      (1)   CHEMICAL TOILET. A toilet using chemicals that discharge to a
holding tank.
      (2)   RETENTION TANK. A holding tank where sewage is conveyed to it by a
water-carrying system.
      (3)   VAULT PIT PRIVY. A holding tank designed to receive sewage where
water under pressure is not available.
   IMPROVED PROPERTY. Any property within the borough upon which there is
erected a structure intended for continuous or periodic habitation, occupancy,
or use by human beings or animals and from which structure sewage shall or may
be discharged.
   MUNICIPALITY. Everett Borough, Bedford County, Pennsylvania.
   OWNER. Any person vested with ownership, legal or equitable, sole or
partial, of any property located in the borough.
   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, company, association, corporation, or
other group or entity.
   SEWAGE. Any substance that contains any of the waste products or excrement
or other discharge from the bodies of human beings or animals and any noxious
or deleterious substance being harmful or inimical to the public health, or to
animal or aquatic life, or to the use of water for domestic water supply or for
recreation.
(Prior Code, § 18, 302) (Ord. 263, passed 8-27-1986)
§ 51.37 RIGHTS AND PRIVILEGES GRANTED.
   The Authority is hereby authorized and empowered to undertake within the
borough the control and methods of holding tank sewage disposal and the
collection and transportation thereof.
(Prior Code, § 18, 303) (Ord. 263, passed 8-27-1986)
§ 51.38 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The Authority is hereby authorized and empowered to adopt such rules and
regulations concerning sewage which it may deem necessary from time to time to
effect the purposes herein.
(Prior Code, § 18, 304) (Ord. 263, passed 8-2-1986)
§ 51.39 RULES AND REGULATIONS TO BE IN CONFORMITY WITH APPLICABLE LAW.
   All such rules and regulations adopted by the Authority shall be in
conformity with the provisions herein, all other ordinances of the borough, and
all applicable laws and applicable rules and regulations of administrative
agencies of the commonwealth.
(Prior Code, § 18, 305) (Ord. 263, passed 8-27-1986)
§ 51.40 RATES AND CHARGES.
   The Authority shall have the right and power to fix, alter, charge, and
collect rates, assessments, and other charges in the area served by its
facilities at reasonable and uniform rates as authorized by applicable law.
(Prior Code, § 18, 306) (Ord. 263, passed 8-27-1986)
§ 51.41 HOLDING TANK PERMITS.
   All holding tank permits may be issued for a period not to exceed two years
and for use only where a public health nuisance is to be abated or where a
person or persons applying for said holding tank permit made application for a
permit for the installation of a sewage treatment facility and where connection
to the municipal sewage treatment facility is unfeasible.
(Prior Code, § 18, 307) (Ord. 263, passed 8-27-1986)
§ 51.42 REGULATION OF PUBLIC SEWAGE.
   The borough or the Authority regulating public sewage may require the
posting of a bond in a sufficient amount to ensure the installation of a sewage
treatment facility prior to the expiration of the holding tank permit.
(Prior Code, § 18, 308) (Ord. 263, passed 8-27-1986)
§ 51.43 EXCLUSIVENESS OF RIGHTS AND PRIVILEGES.
   The collection and transportation of all sewage from any improved property
utilizing a holding tank shall be done solely by or under the direction and
control of the Authority, and the disposal thereof shall be made only at such
site or sites as may be approved by the Department of Environmental Resources
of the commonwealth.
(Prior Code, § 18, 309) (Ord. 263, passed 8-27-1986) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.44 DUTIES OF IMPROVED PROPERTY OWNER.
   The owner of an improved property that utilizes a holding thank shall:
   (A)   Maintain the holding tank in conformance with this or any ordinance of
the borough, the provisions of any applicable law, and the rules and
regulations of the Authority and any administrative agency of the commonwealth;
and
   (B)   Permit only the Authority or its agent to collect, transport, and
dispose of the contents therein.
(Prior Code, § 18, 310) (Ord. 263, passed 8-27-1986) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.45 ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE.
   In addition to any other remedies provided in this subchapter, any violation
of §
51.44 shall constitute a nuisance and shall be abated by the borough or the
Authority by either seeking appropriate equitable or legal relief from a court
of competent jurisdiction.
(Prior Code, § 18, 312)
§ 51.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   Any person who shall violate any provision of §§
51.01 through
51.05 shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding
$1,000 and costs, or in default of payment thereof, shall be subject to
imprisonment for a term not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation of §§
51.01 through
51.05 continues shall constitute a separate offense.
      (2)   Fines and costs imposed under provisions of §§
51.01 through
51.05 shall be enforceable and recoverable in the manner at the time provided
by applicable law.
(Prior Code, § 18, 105)
   (C)   Any person who shall violate any provision of §§
51.20 through
51.22 shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding
$1,000 and costs, or in default of payment thereof, shall be subject to
imprisonment for a term not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation of §§
51.20 through
51.22 continues shall constitute a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 18, 204)
   (D)   Any person who shall violate any provision of §§
51.35 through
51.45 shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding
$1,000 and costs, or in default of payment thereof, shall be subject to
imprisonment for a term not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation of §§
51.35 through
51.45 continues shall constitute a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 18, 311)
(Ord. 261A, passed 3-24-1986; Ord. 263, passed 8-27-1986; Ord. 269, passed 1-9-
1989; Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992)
CHAPTER 52: SOLID WASTE
Section
   
52.01   Definitions and interpretation
   
52.02   Dumping prohibited
   
52.03   Accumulation of garbage prohibited
   
52.04   Unlawful means of disposal of garbage
 
   
52.99   Penalty
§ 52.01 DEFINITIONS AND INTERPRETATION.
   In this chapter, the singular shall include the plural, the plural shall
include the singular, and the masculine shall include the feminine and the
neuter. For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   GARBAGE. The animal or vegetable waste from the storage, vending, sale,
preparation, or use of food stuffs, including, but not limited to, meat, fish,
fruit, and vegetables.
   PERSON. Any natural person, partnership, association, firm, or corporation.
   REFUSE. Any discarded articles or material, except sewage and liquid waste,
and including garbage, ashes, and combustible and noncombustible waste.
(Prior Code, § 20, 101) (Ord. 224, passed 4-7-1969)
§ 52.02 DUMPING PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to dump any refuse at any place in the
borough or to use or allow to be used as a dump for refuse any lot in the
borough owned or occupied by such person.
(Prior Code, § 20, 102) (Ord. 224, passed 4-7-1969) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.03 ACCUMULATION OF GARBAGE PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of any premises in the
borough by burning such garbage, by burial thereof, or by placing the same in
sidewalk waste cans.
(Prior Code, § 20, 103) (Ord. 224, passed 4-7-1969) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.04 UNLAWFUL MEANS OF DISPOSAL OF GARBAGE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of any garbage within the
borough by burning such garbage, by burial thereof, or by placing the same in
sidewalk waste cans.
(Prior Code, § 20, 104) (Ord. 224, passed 4-7-1969) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, for each
and every violation, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not
more than $600 plus costs of prosecution and, in default of payment of said
fine and costs, to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 30 days. Each day that
a violation of this chapter continues shall constitute a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 20, 105) (Ord. 224, passed 4-7-1969; Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   GENERAL TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
      
71.   MOVING REGULATIONS
      
72.   PARKING REGULATIONS
      
73.   MOVING SCHEDULES
      
74.   PARKING SCHEDULES
CHAPTER 70: GENERAL TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
70.01   Definitions and interpretations
   
70.02   Manner of adopting permanent traffic and parking regulations
   
70.03   Provisions to be continuation of existing regulations
   
70.04   Temporary and emergency regulations
   
70.05   Experimental regulations
   
70.06   Traffic on streets closed or restricted for construction, maintenance,
or special events
   
70.07   Use of streets by processions and assemblages
   
70.08   Authority of police officers
   
70.09   Authorization for use of speed timing devices; vascar setup
Pedestrians
   
70.20   Pedestrians to obey traffic control signals
   
70.21   Pedestrian control signal locations established
   
70.22   Pedestrian crossing in Business District
Removal and Impoundment of Illegal Parked Vehicles
   
70.35   Applicability and scope
   
70.36   Authority to remove and impound
   
70.37   Designation of approved storage garages; bonding; towing and storage
   
70.38   Payment of towing and storage charges
   
70.39   Reclamation costs
   
70.40   Records of vehicles removed and impounded
   
70.41   Restrictions upon removal of vehicles
   
70.42   Reports and disposition of unclaimed vehicles
 
   
70.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 70.01 DEFINITIONS AND INTERPRETATIONS.
   (A)   Words and phrases, when used in this title, except for sections or
subchapters to which different or additional definitions apply, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in the Vehicle Code (the Act of June 17, 1976, P.L.
162 No. 81), being 75 Pa.C.S. §§ 101 et seq., as amended, except that, in this
title, the word STREET may be used interchangeably with the word HIGHWAY, and
shall have the same meaning as the word HIGHWAY as defined in the Vehicle Code.
   (B)   The term LEGAL HOLIDAYS as used in this title shall mean and include
New Year’s Day, Memorial Day, Juneteenth, Independence Day, Labor Day,
Thanksgiving Day, and Christmas Day.
   (C)   In this title, the singular shall include the plural, the plural shall
include the singular, and the masculine shall include the feminine.
   (D)   Although the streets in the borough run generally in a northeast-
southwest and a northwest- southeast direction, for the purpose of this title,
Spring Street and the street running parallel or generally parallel to Spring
Street shall be deemed to run in a north-south direction, and Main Street and
the streets parallel or generally parallel to Main Street shall be deemed to
run in an east-west direction.
(Prior Code, § 15, 101) (Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992)
§ 70.02 MANNER OF ADOPTING PERMANENT TRAFFIC AND PARKING REGULATIONS.
   All traffic and parking regulations of a permanent nature shall be enacted
as ordinances, as parts of ordinances, as amendments to ordinances, or as
amendments to this title, except where the law specifically authorizes less
formal action.
(Prior Code, § 15, 102) (Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992)
§ 70.03 PROVISIONS TO BE CONTINUATION OF EXISTING REGULATIONS.
   (A)   The provisions of this title, so far as they are the same as those of
ordinances and regulations in force immediately before the enactment of this
title, are intended as a continuation of those earlier ordinances and
regulations, and not as new enactments.
   (B)   Nothing in this title shall affect any act done or liability incurred,
or any suit or prosecution pending or to be instituted under any of those
repealed or superseded ordinances or regulations.
(Prior Code, § 15, 103) (Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992)
§ 70.04 TEMPORARY AND EMERGENCY REGULATIONS.
   (A)   The Mayor shall have the following powers to regulate traffic and
parking temporarily and in time of emergency:
      (1)   In the case of fire, flood, storm, or other emergency, to establish
temporary traffic and/or parking regulations; and
      (2)   In the case of emergency or to facilitate public works, or in
conduct of parades, processions, or public events, to restrict or prohibit
traffic and/or parking in limited areas for periods of not more than 72 hours.
   (B)   Such temporary and emergency regulations shall be enforced by the
Police Department in the same manner as permanent regulations.
(Prior Code, § 15, 104) (Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.05 EXPERIMENTAL REGULATIONS.
   (A)   The Borough Council may, from time to time by resolution, designate
places upon and along the highways in the borough where, for a period of not
more than 90 days, specific traffic and/or parking regulations, prohibitions,
and restrictions shall be in force and effect, and shall designate such
locations by proper signs and markings. Such regulations, prohibitions, and
restrictions shall be effective as if they had been specified in this title.
   (B)   No person shall operate or park a vehicle or tractor in violation of
any such regulation, prohibition, or restriction, and no person shall move,
remove, destroy, or deface any sign or marking erected, posted, or made by
authority of this section; provided, the purpose of this section is to allow
for the test and experimental determination of the feasibility and desirability
of permanent changes in the ordinances of the borough relative to traffic and
parking.
(Prior Code, § 15, 105) (Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.06 TRAFFIC ON STREETS CLOSED OR RESTRICTED FOR CONSTRUCTION, MAINTENANCE,
OR SPECIAL EVENTS.
   (A)   (1)   The Borough Council shall have authority to close any street or
specific part of a street to vehicular traffic and to place barriers or station
police officers at each end of the closed portion, while construction or
maintenance work is under way or a special event is being conducted on the
closed portion.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle upon any
such closed portion.
   (B)   (1)   The Borough Council shall have authority to establish a
restricted traffic area upon any street where construction or maintenance work
is underway and to station flaggers at each end of the restricted portion.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle upon any
such restricted traffic area at any time when the flagger is displaying a sign
directing that vehicle to stop, or is signaling that vehicle, by a flag or
other device, not to proceed.
(Prior Code, § 15, 106) (Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.07 USE OF STREETS BY PROCESSIONS AND ASSEMBLAGES.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      ASSEMBLAGE. A gathering of people without vehicles, which interferes with
the movement of pedestrian or vehicular traffic on any street.
      PROCESSION. A group of individuals, vehicles, animals, and/or objects
moving along a street in a way that interferes with the normal movement of
traffic. A PROCESSION shall not include a funeral caravan or military convoy.
   (B)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to hold or participate in
any assemblage unless the person organizing or conducting the assemblage first
obtains a permit from the Mayor, which shall be issued without fee.
      (2)   Application for the permit shall be made at least one week in
advance of the day on which the assemblage is proposed to be held, but in any
case where a state-designated holiday is proposed to be used, application shall
be made at least three weeks in advance of the proposed date.
      (3)   The permit shall state the place where and the date when the
assemblage is to be held, the hour when the assemblage may convene, and the
hour by which it shall have been completely dispersed.
      (4)   It shall be unlawful for any person to hold or to participate in
any assemblage unless the permit has been granted, or at any time or place
other than that authorized by the permit.
   (C)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to hold or participate in
any procession unless the person organizing or conducting the procession first
obtains a permit from the Mayor, which shall be issued without fee.
      (2)   Application for the permit shall be made at least two weeks in
advance of the day when the procession is proposed to be held, but in any case
where a state-designated highway is proposed to be used, application shall be
made at least three weeks in advance of the proposed date.
      (3)   The permit shall specify the date on which the procession is to be
held, the route to be followed by the procession, the hour when and place where
participants may commence to assemble and form before the procession is under
way, the time when the procession may commence to move along its route, and the
time by which the end of the procession shall have reached the end of the route
of the procession and the procession shall have been disbanded.
      (4)   It shall be unlawful for any person to hold or to participate in
any procession unless the permit shall have been granted, or under any
conditions as to time or route or otherwise than those stated in the permit.
(Prior Code, § 15, 107) (Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.08 AUTHORITY OF POLICE OFFICERS.
   The police officers of the borough are hereby given authority to direct
traffic on highways of the borough and at intersections thereof.
(Prior Code, § 15, 108) (Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992)
§ 70.09 AUTHORIZATION FOR USE OF SPEED TIMING DEVICES; VASCAR SETUP.
   (A)   The Borough Police Department is hereby authorized to use all speed
timing devices for the determination of speed of a motor vehicle as are
approved or will be approved by the Department of Transportation of the
commonwealth, in accordance with 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 3368.
   (B)   This section authorizes the use of said devices upon all highways
within the borough, by the borough, county or state highways, and does also
hereby elect to exercise all powers granted to local authorities under the
Vehicle Code of the commonwealth, 75 Pa.C.S.A. §§ 6101 et seq., as hereafter
amended, supplemented, modified, or reenacted by the General Assembly of the
commonwealth.
 
Street                   Side  Location                        Purpose
E. Main. St.             North Opposite Karns Ave.             Advertise vascar
N. Spring St.            West  215 feet south of north borough Advertise vascar
                               line
W. Main St.              South Between Dishong and Barndollar  Advertise vascar
                               Sts.
S.R. 0026 (Lower bridge) East  54 feet north of north end of   Advertise vascar
                               bridge
S.R. 1029 (Upper bridge) East  57 feet north of north end of   Advertise vascar
                               bridge
 
(Prior Code, § 15, 109) (Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992)
PEDESTRIANS
§ 70.20 PEDESTRIANS TO OBEY TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNALS.
   At all locations in the borough where official traffic control signals are
installed, pedestrians, except where directed otherwise by pedestrian control
signals installed under §
70.21 shall obey the directions of those traffic control signals, as follows.
   (A)   When facing a green signal, a pedestrian may proceed across the
roadway within a crosswalk.
   (B)   When facing a steady yellow signal, a pedestrian shall not start to
cross the roadway.
   (C)   When facing a steady red signal, a pedestrian shall not enter the
roadway.
(Prior Code, § 15, 701) (Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.21 PEDESTRIAN CONTROL SIGNAL LOCATIONS ESTABLISHED.
   At the following locations, official pedestrian control signals shall be
erected (or are ratified if previously erected).
   (A)   Every pedestrian facing a steady or flashing “don’t walk” signal shall
obey the directions of that signal, as follows.
      (1)   When facing a steady “don’t walk” signal, a pedestrian shall not
start to cross the roadway in the direction of the signal, but any pedestrian
who has partially completed his or her crossing on the “walk” signal should
proceed to a sidewalk or safety zone while the “don’t walk” signal is showing.
      (2)   When facing a flashing “don’t walk” signal, a pedestrian shall not
start to cross the roadway in the direction of the indication, but any
pedestrian who has partly completed crossing during the “walk” indication
should proceed to a sidewalk or safety zone.
   (B)   Any pedestrian who fails to obey the directions of a “don’t walk”
signal, as indicated in division (A) above, shall be guilty of a summary
offense and a violation of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 15, 702) (Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.22 PEDESTRIAN CROSSING IN BUSINESS DISTRICT.
   It shall be unlawful for any pedestrian to cross any roadway in a Business
District within the borough except in a crosswalk; provided, nothing in this
section shall permit any pedestrian to cross in a crosswalk at any location
where that crossing is prohibited by §
70.21.
(Prior Code, § 15, 704) (Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992) Penalty, see §
70.99
REMOVAL AND IMPOUNDMENT OF ILLEGAL PARKED VEHICLES
§ 70.35 APPLICABILITY AND SCOPE.
   This subchapter is enacted under authority of § 6109(a-22) of the Vehicle
Code, being 75 Pa.C.S. § 6109(a)(22), and gives authority to the borough to
remove and impound those vehicles which are parked in a tow-away zone and in
violation of parking regulations of this title. Vehicles which have been
abandoned (as defined by the Vehicle Code) or which are parked in such a manner
as to interfere with traffic or pose a hazard to others, may be towed under the
provisions of the State Motor Vehicle Code.
(Prior Code, § 15, 801) (Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992)
§ 70.36 AUTHORITY TO REMOVE AND IMPOUND.
   The borough shall have authority to remove and impound, or to order the
removal and impounding, of any vehicle parked overtime or otherwise illegally,
provided that the circumstances of its parking were within the conditions
stated in §
70.35. Provided, no such vehicle shall be removed or impounded except in strict
adherence to the provisions of this subchapter, or the provisions of the State
Vehicle Code, being 75 Pa.C.S. §§ 101 et seq.
(Prior Code, § 15, 802) (Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992)
§ 70.37 DESIGNATION OF APPROVED STORAGE GARAGES; BONDING; TOWING AND STORAGE.
   Removal and impounding of vehicles under this title shall be done only by
approved storage garages that shall be designated from time to time by the
Borough Council. Every such garage shall submit evidence to the Borough Council
that it is bonded or has acquired liability insurance in an amount satisfactory
to the Borough Council as sufficient to indemnify owners of impounded vehicles
against loss or damage to those vehicles while in the custody of the garage
keeper for the purpose of towing or storage. The approved storage garage shall
submit to the Borough Council its schedule of charges for towing and storage of
vehicles under this title, and, when the schedule is approved by the Borough
Council, those charges shall be adhered to by the approved storage garage; no
different schedule of charges shall be demanded of or collected from any person
whose vehicle is removed or impounded under this title by any approved storage
garage. The Borough Council shall delete from its list of approved storage
garages any garage that makes any unapproved charge in connection with any
vehicle removed or impounded under this title.
(Prior Code, § 15, 804) (Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992)
§ 70.38 PAYMENT OF TOWING AND STORAGE CHARGES.
   The payment of towing and storage charges shall not relieve the owner or
driver of any vehicle from liability for any fine or penalty for the violation
of the provisions of this title for which the vehicle was removed or impounded.
(Prior Code, § 15, 805) (Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992)
§ 70.39 RECLAMATION COSTS.
   In order to reclaim his or her vehicle, the owner shall pay towing and
storage costs, plus a $25 fee of which $10 shall be transferred to the State
Department of Transportation by the garage to which the vehicle was taken.
(Prior Code, § 15, 806) (Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992)
§ 70.40 RECORDS OF VEHICLES REMOVED AND IMPOUNDED.
   The borough shall cause a record to be kept of all vehicles impounded under
this subchapter and shall be able at all reasonable times to furnish the owners
or the agents of the owners of those vehicles with information as to the place
of storage of the vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 15, 807) (Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992)
§ 70.41 RESTRICTIONS UPON REMOVAL OF VEHICLES.
   No vehicle shall be removed under the authority of this subchapter or the
Vehicle Code, being 75 Pa.C.S. §§ 101 et seq., if, at the time of the intended
removal, the owner or the person for the time being in charge of the vehicle is
present and expresses a willingness and intention to remove the vehicle
immediately.
(Prior Code, § 15, 808) (Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992)
§ 70.42 REPORTS AND DISPOSITION OF UNCLAIMED VEHICLES.
   If, after a period of 15 days, the vehicle in storage remains unclaimed, a
report shall be filed with PennDOT in accordance with § 7311 of the Vehicle
Code, by the person having legal custody of the vehicle. If the vehicle has not
been claimed after 30 days, the vehicle may be transferred to a licensed
salvor, who will then be responsible for filing the proper reports and
disposing of the vehicle in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 73 of the
State Motor Vehicle Code (75 Pa.C.S.A. §§ 101 et seq., as amended).
(Prior Code, § 15, 810) (Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992)
§ 70.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this title for which no specific
penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person who shall operate or park a vehicle or tractor in violation
of any such regulations as those described in §
70.04, or who shall move, remove, destroy, injure, or deface any sign or
marking erected, posted, or made to give notice of any such regulation, shall,
upon conviction thereof, be subject to the penalty set forth in the law or
elsewhere in this title for a violation of such nature and, in case of a
violation for which no specific penalty is set forth in the law or elsewhere in
this title, to a fine of not more than $25 together with costs of prosecution.
(Prior Code, § 15, 104)
   (C)   Any person who shall violate any provision of §
70.05 shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the penalty set forth in
the law or elsewhere in this title for a violation of such nature, and in case
of a violation for which no specific penalty is set forth in the law or
elsewhere in this title, to a fine of not more than $25 together with costs of
prosecution.
(Prior Code, § 15, 105)
   (D)   Any person who violates any provision of §
70.06 shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
(Prior Code, § 15, 106)
   (E)   Any person who violates any provision of §
70.07 shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $35 and costs.
(Prior Code, § 15, 107)
   (F)   Any pedestrian who violates any provision of §§
70.20 through
70.22 shall be guilty of a summary offense and, upon conviction, shall be
sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
(Prior Code, § 15, 705)
   (G)   Any person who shall violate any provision of §§
70.35 through
70.42 shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of $50
together with all costs of disposing of the vehicle under provisions of the
Vehicle Code, 75 Pa.C.S. §§ 7301 et seq., as hereafter amended, supplemented,
modified, or reenacted by the General Assembly of the commonwealth.
(Prior Code, § 15, 809)
(Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992)
CHAPTER 71: MOVING REGULATIONS
Section
   
71.01   Maximum speed limits established in parks
   
71.02   Operation of motor vehicles restricted on public lands
   
71.03   Restrictions on use of pushcarts
   
71.04   Skates, coasters, and other toy vehicles
   
71.05   Accident report fee
   
71.06   Truck traffic restricted on certain streets
 
   
71.99   Penalty
§ 71.01 MAXIMUM SPEED LIMITS ESTABLISHED IN PARKS.
   A speed limit of 15 mph is established on all streets and roadways in the
public parks maintained and operated by the borough, except in the following
locations, where the lower maximums, as specified, shall apply.
(Prior Code, § 15, 204) (Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.02 OPERATION OF MOTOR VEHICLES RESTRICTED ON PUBLIC LANDS.
   No motor vehicle or motorcycle or minibike shall be operated on any lands
owned by the borough or any other public body or agency within the borough,
except on those lands specifically designated for the operator of motor
vehicles, motorcycles, or minibikes by resolution of the Borough Council.
(Prior Code, § 15, 216) (Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.03 RESTRICTIONS ON USE OF PUSHCARTS.
   (A)   The word PUSHCART, as used in this section, shall mean a vehicle,
other than a pedalcycle, propelled solely by human power, and used or intended
for use for the display, transport, exhibit, or sale of goods, wares, or
merchandise.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to propel a pushcart upon any
sidewalk in any Business District except as necessary to move the pushcart to a
location from which it is to be loaded or unloaded or from which goods, wares,
or merchandise are to be sold or dispensed under permit from the Borough
Council as provided in division (C) below.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to park a pushcart upon any
sidewalk except for the purpose of selling or dispensing from that pushcart
goods, wares, or merchandise to passersby under permit from the Borough
Council. Every such permit shall be issued to the person making application for
the permit, upon payment of a fee, which shall be for the use of the borough,
of $100 for any calendar year, $50 for any six-month period, or $25 for any
three-month period. The permit shall be granted to the applicant, upon payment
of the fee, and upon his or her signing an agreement with the Borough Council
that he or she shall be bound by the conditions imposed by the Borough Council
and made a part of the permit, dealing with the following matters:
      (1)   Restricting or limiting the parking of the pushcart to one or more
stated locations upon the sidewalk and to stated days and hours at each
location;
      (2)   Stating requirements to be adhered to in connection with the
disposal of garbage and refuse resulting from the operations carried on; and
      (3)   Requiring that there be no violation of any law, part, or
regulation pertaining to health, sanitation, and the handling of food or drink.
(Prior Code, § 15, 217) (Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.04 SKATES, COASTERS, AND OTHER TOY VEHICLES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to ride on skates, coasters,
sleds, bicycles, and other toy vehicles upon any sidewalk in the Business
District of the borough between the red lights on Hopewell Street and North
Spring Street.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in roller skating or to
ride upon or propel any coaster or other toy vehicle upon:
      (1)   Any street except in order to cross the roadway. Nothing contained
herein, however, is intended to be construed nor shall it be construed to
prevent bicycles from being operated upon the cartway or berm or streets within
the borough; or
      (2)   The sidewalk from the store on North Spring Street and Main Street
to the location of the store at the red light on North Hopewell Street and Main
Street, except that nothing in this division (B)(2) shall prevent a pedestrian
from pulling a coaster or other toy vehicle, without or with a rider, upon a
sidewalk. Such prohibition shall include, but not be limited to, the riding of
bicycles upon the sidewalk along such area.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful to ride any bicycle, sled, roller skate, or pull
a pushcart or any other toy vehicle on top of or upon the levee within the
borough.
(Ord. 2018-01-01, passed 1-8-2018) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.05 ACCIDENT REPORT FEE.
   There shall be established an accident report fee of $15.
(Prior Code, § 15, 220) (Ord. passed 1-10-1994)
§ 71.06 TRUCK TRAFFIC RESTRICTED ON CERTAIN STREETS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a commercial vehicle, as
defined in §
72.03, (which does not include a passenger car or pick-up truck), on any of the
following streets or parts of streets: all borough streets. Provided, nothing
in this section shall prohibit any person from driving an emergency vehicle on
any of those streets or parts of streets, or from driving on any of those
streets or parts of streets a truck or other commercial vehicle making local
deliveries to or pickups from premises located along that street or part of a
street.
(Prior Code, § 15, 304) (Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person who violates any provision of §
71.01 shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $35. Any person
exceeding the maximum speed limit by more than five mph shall pay an additional
fine of $2 per mile for each mile in excess of five mph over the maximum speed
limit.
(Prior Code, § 15, 204)
   (C)   Any person who violates any provision of §
71.03, or any condition of any permit granted under §
71.03 shall be guilty of a summary offense and, upon conviction, shall be
sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
(Prior Code, § 15, 217)
   (D)   Any person who violates any provision of §
71.04 shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $35 and costs of
prosecution.
   (E)   Any person who violates any provision of §
71.06 shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
(Prior Code, § 15, 304)
(Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992; Ord. 2018-01-01, passed 1-8-2018)
CHAPTER 72: PARKING REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
72.01   Vehicles to be parked within marked spaces
   
72.02   Vehicles to be parked in direction of travel
   
72.03   Parking of trucks, buses, and certain other vehicles prohibited
   
72.04   Snow emergency parking and snow removal
On-Street Metered Parking
   
72.15   Days and hours parking meters in operation and parking time limits
   
72.16   Placement and characteristics of parking meters
   
72.17   Parked vehicles to be wholly within marked spaces
   
72.18   Coin deposit in meter; overtime parking unlawful
   
72.19   Unlawful to deposit substitute for coin in meter
   
72.20   Unlawful to deposit coin in meter to extend parking time beyond legal
limit
   
72.21   Unlawful to remain parked at meter showing violation
   
72.22   Unlawful to tamper with meter
   
72.23   Ticketing of vehicles parked unlawfully; effect of payment within 48
hours
   
72.24   Exceptions
 
   
72.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 72.01 VEHICLES TO BE PARKED WITHIN MARKED SPACES.
   Wherever a space is marked off on any street for the parking of an
individual vehicle, every vehicle parked there shall be parked wholly within
the lines bounding that space, and it shall be a violation of this chapter for
any person to park a vehicle or allow it to remain parked otherwise.
(Prior Code, § 15, 401) (Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.02 VEHICLES TO BE PARKED IN DIRECTION OF TRAVEL.
   Parking facing traffic shall be prohibited at all times. Every vehicle
parked on any street shall be parked such that it faces in the same direction
as traffic travels on said roadway in the case of one-way streets, or in the
same direction as traffic travels on the side of the roadway on which the
vehicle is parked.
(Prior Code, § 15, 402) (Ord. 278, passed 6-9-1997) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.03 PARKING OF TRUCKS, BUSES, AND CERTAIN OTHER VEHICLES PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to park, or allow to remain
parked, on any of the following streets or parts of streets, any vehicle other
than a passenger car (which shall not include any bus, mobile home, passenger
car attached to a trailer of any kind), as well as any trailer of any kind: all
borough streets.
   (B)   Trucks shall only be parked for delivery purposes. There shall be no
commercial type trucks (box or semi), RVs, trailers, or the like parked on any
of the streets overnight. No dumpsters may be parked on any of the streets at
any time. For the purposes of this section, TRUCK does not include commercial
type vehicles.
(Ord. 2022-07-03, passed 7-11-2022) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.04 SNOW EMERGENCY PARKING AND SNOW REMOVAL.
   (A)   This section shall be known as the “Everett Borough Snow Emergency
Parking and Snow Removal Ordinance.”
   (B)   Following the effective date of this section, it shall be unlawful to
park, or allow to be parked, any motor vehicle or other vehicle, on any street
or road which is part of the borough street or road system after the start of a
snowfall and until the snow has stopped falling and the snow has been
completely plowed for the full width of the cartway unless such motor vehicle
or other vehicle is parked on the side of the street designated for such
purpose. On even-numbered days, motor vehicles or other vehicles may be parked
on the north side of streets within the borough running in a north-south
direction and odd-numbered days on the south side of such streets. Where
streets run in an east-west direction, parking may occur on even days on the
east side of the street and on odd days on the west side of the street.
   (C)   Any member of the Borough Police Department, and employees of the
borough engaged in road work, is hereby authorized to remove any vehicle
abandoned or parking upon any public highway or street in violation of the
terms and provisions of this section, and to take any said vehicle to the
nearest garage or other place of safety. The registered owner of any said
vehicle shall be notified of the fact of the removal and of the place to which
said vehicle has been removed, where he or she may obtain the same upon payment
of any and all towing and storage charges. Neither the borough nor any of its
officers, employees, or Council members shall be held responsible for any
damage to any vehicle occurring as a result of towing and/or storage of a
vehicle parked in violation of the section.
   (D)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for owners, occupants, or tenants of
property to dump, throw, shovel, pile, or push any snow, ice, or other item(s)
removed from driveway or walkways following a snowfall or other winter storm
into any public highway or street with the borough.
      (2)   No snow, ice, slush, or a combination thereof, shall be deposited,
pushed, or maintained within a Commercial, Manufacturing, Light Industrial, or
Multiple-Family Zoning District parking facility or at or near an intersection
in any zoning district, in a manner or at a location which creates a traffic
hazard by impairing visibility from or of a public highway.
      (3)   No person shall damage any borough property, including, but not
limited to, traffic signs, culverts, and the like, while removing snow, ice,
slush, or a combination thereof. Any damage to borough property shall be
repaired or replaced in accordance with the requirements of the borough at the
expense of the property owner and/or snow removal agency.
   (E)   (1)   (a)   Fire hydrants shall not be covered. The owner is hereby
required to remove or cause to be removed all snow, ice, slush, or any
combination thereof or any accumulation and/or impediment which would limit
access to, from, and/or around all of the fire hydrants which are located on
said property, so as to provide immediate access by fire rescue personnel in
cases of emergency.
         (b)   In cases involving a storm, fire hydrants shall be cleared of
all snow, ice, slush, or any combination thereof within 24 hours following the
storm, in any event, any accumulation shall be removed not less not less than
once in every 24-hour period.
      (2)   In all other cases involving the accumulation of natural and/or
human-made items around fire hydrants, the owner is responsible for immediate
removal of said items. In either case fire hydrants shall be cleared
sufficiently so emergency personnel have total access to hydrants. This is
necessary to allow for fire hose connections to be made to access water in the
event of a fire. The owner of a property shall be responsible for conforming to
the requirements of this section where such property is occupied by said owner
or is unoccupied or vacant.
      (3)   In cases where the owner, occupant, or tenant as aforesaid, shall
fail, neglect, or refuse to comply with any of the provisions of the section,
or within the time period required therein, the borough may, in its discretion,
proceed immediately to clear the snow, ice, slush, any combination thereof or
accumulation and/or impediment which would limit access to from, and/or around
fire hydrants as defined within this division (E).
(Ord. 2021-06-01, passed 6-14-2021) Penalty, see §
72.99
ON-STREET METERED PARKING
§ 72.15 DAYS AND HOURS PARKING METERS IN OPERATION AND PARKING TIME LIMITS.
   Parking meters shall be operated, by the deposit of a coin in the meter, as
prescribed by §
72.18, and the parking rates for specified lengths of time, as well as the
maximum parking times prescribed in
Chapter 74 Sched. VII, shall apply at all times between the hours of 9:00 a.m.
and 6:00 p.m. Monday through Thursday and Saturday, and between the hours of 9:
00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. Friday, in the parking meter zones listed in
Chapter 74 Sched. VII. Provided, however, the requirements of this subchapter
as to parking time limits and as to deposit of coins in meters shall not apply
on borough holidays.
(Prior Code, § 15, 502) (Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992)
§ 72.16 PLACEMENT AND CHARACTERISTICS OF PARKING METERS.
   (A)   Parking meters installed in the parking meter zones established by
Chapter 74 Sched. VII shall be placed upon the curb or sidewalk, and
immediately adjacent to the individual parking spaces described in §
72.17. Each parking meter shall be placed or set so as to show that the parking
space adjacent to that meter is or is not legally occupied.
   (B)   Each parking meter installed shall indicate by a proper legend the
legal parking time established by the borough, and when the adjacent space is
occupied by a vehicle, the parking meter shall indicate on and by its dial and
pointer the duration of the period of legal parking, and, on the expiration of
that period, shall indicate illegal parking or over parking.
(Prior Code, § 15, 503) (Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992)
§ 72.17 PARKED VEHICLES TO BE WHOLLY WITHIN MARKED SPACES.
   (A)   Lines and/or marking shall be painted or placed upon the curb,
sidewalk, or roadway adjacent to each parking meter for the purpose of
delineating the parking space for which that meter shall be used. Every vehicle
parked at any parking meter shall be parked wholly within the lines or markings
so placed and applicable to that meter.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful and a violation of this subchapter for any person
to park a vehicle across any such line or marking, or to park a vehicle in such
a position that that vehicle is not wholly within the area designated by those
lines or markings.
(Prior Code, § 15, 504) (Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.18 COIN DEPOSIT IN METER; OVERTIME PARKING UNLAWFUL.
   (A)   Whenever a vehicle is to be parked in any space adjacent to a parking
meter, at any time in the period of limited parking as prescribed by §
72.15, the driver of the vehicle, upon entering the parking space, shall
immediately deposit, or cause to be deposited, in that parking meter, one or
more proper coins of the United States of America as specified in the legend on
the parking meter.
   (B)   Upon the deposit of the coin or coins, and placing the meter in
operation, the parking space may be lawfully occupied by the vehicle for the
time indicated on the meter. If any vehicle shall remain in any such parking
space for such length of time that the meter shall indicate by proper signal
that the lawful parking time has expired, that vehicle shall be considered as
having been parked overtime, and the parking of a vehicle overtime shall be a
violation of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 15, 505) (Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.19 UNLAWFUL TO DEPOSIT SUBSTITUTE FOR COIN IN METER.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit in any parking meter
installed under the provisions of this subchapter any slug or other substitute
for a coin of the United States of America.
(Prior Code, § 15, 506) (Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.20 UNLAWFUL TO DEPOSIT COIN IN METER TO EXTEND PARKING TIME BEYOND LEGAL
LIMIT.
   It shall be unlawful and a violation of this subchapter for any person to
deposit or cause to be deposited, in any parking meter installed under the
provisions of this subchapter, any coin for the purpose of increasing or
extending the parking time of any vehicle beyond the legal parking time of 15
minutes in any 15-minute parking meter zone, one-half hour in any half-hour
parking meter zone, one hour in any one-hour parking meter zone, or two hours
in any two-hour parking meter zone.
(Prior Code, § 15, 507) (Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.21 UNLAWFUL TO REMAIN PARKED AT METER SHOWING VIOLATION.
   It shall be unlawful, and a violation of this subchapter, for any person to
permit a vehicle to remain in a parking space adjacent to a parking meter
installed under this subchapter, when that meter displays a signal indicating
that the vehicle has already been parked there beyond the period of time
prescribed for that parking space, or the time for which a coin or coins was
deposited in that meter for the parking of that vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 15, 508) (Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.22 UNLAWFUL TO TAMPER WITH METER.
   It shall be unlawful, and a violation of this subchapter, for any person to
deface, tamper with, open, or willfully break, destroy, or impair the
usefulness of any parking meter installed under the provisions of this
subchapter; provided, nothing in this section shall apply to the servicing or
opening of parking meters by officers, employees, or police officers of the
borough under the direction of the Mayor or the Borough Council.
(Prior Code, § 15, 509) (Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.23 TICKETING OF VEHICLES PARKED UNLAWFULLY; EFFECT OF PAYMENT WITHIN 48
HOURS.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the police officers and parking enforcement
personnel of the borough, acting in accordance with the directions of the Chief
of Police, to report:
      (1)   The number of each parking meter that indicates that a vehicle
occupying the adjacent parking space is, or has been, parked in violation of
any provision of this subchapter;
      (2)   The date and hour of the violation;
      (3)   The license number of the vehicle; and
      (4)   Any other facts, the knowledge of which is necessary for a thorough
understanding of the circumstances attending the violation.
   (B)   The police officer or other person making the report shall also place
on or attach to the vehicle a notice to the owner or driver of the vehicle that
the vehicle was parked in violation of this subchapter, and instructing the
owner or driver that if he or she will report to the office of the Chief of
Police and pay, for the use of the borough, the sum of $15 with 48 hours after
the time of the notice, or will place the sum of $15 enclosed within the
envelope provided, in any of the special parking fine boxes installed at
various locations within the borough within that time limit, that act will save
the violator from prosecution and from payment of the fine prescribed in §
72.99(C)(1).
(Prior Code, § 15, 510) (Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992)
§ 72.24 EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   By resolution, the Borough Council may temporarily suspend the
provisions of this subchapter by requiring coin deposit in meters and
establishing a maximum parking time at meters.
   (B)   The borough shall have authority to establish no-parking or special
purpose-parking zones within any parking meter zone, and to remove parking
meters from those areas as previously installed there, and the provisions of
this subchapter shall not apply in those areas where no-parking or special
purpose- parking is in effect.
(Prior Code, § 15, 512) (Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992)
§ 72.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
70.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person who violates any provision of §§
72.01 through
72.03 shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $15
and costs. Provided, it shall be the duty of the police officers and of parking
enforcement personnel of the borough to report to the appropriate official all
violations of any provision of §§
72.01 through
72.03, indicating, in each case, the section violated, the license number of
the vehicle involved in the violation, the location where the violations took
place, and any other facts that might be necessary in order to secure a clear
understanding of the circumstances attending the violation. The police officer
or other person making the report shall also attach to or place upon or other
person making the report shall also attach to or place upon every such vehicle
a notice stating that the vehicle was parked in violation of §§
72.01 through
72.03.
(Prior Code, § 15, 401)
   (C)   Any person violating any of the provisions of §
72.04 shall, upon summary conviction before a District Magistrate, be sentenced
to pay a fine of not less than $25, and each violation thereafter will add an
additional $5 per violation of that registered vehicle, but not to exceed more
than $100 and the cost of prosecution, including attorney’s fees incurred by
the borough, such fines to be collected as like fines are now collected by law,
and in default shall undergo imprisonment not exceeding 30 days.
   (D)   (1)   Any person who violates any provision of §§
72.15 through
72.24, with the exception of §
72.22, and who fails to pay the fine set forth in §
72.23, shall be cited within 15 days of the violation and, upon conviction, be
sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs and, in default of payment of fines
and costs, to imprisonment for two days.
      (2)   Any person who violates any provision of §
72.22 shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $300
and costs and, in default of payment of fine and costs, to imprisonment for not
more than 30 days.
(Prior Code, § 15, 511)
(Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992; Ord. 278, passed 6-9-1997; Ord. 2021-06-01, passed
6-14-2021)
CHAPTER 73: MOVING SCHEDULES
Schedule
      
I.   Maximum speed limits established on certain streets
      
II.   Traffic signals at certain locations
      
III.   One-way streets; entrances and exits established
      
IV.   Turning at certain intersections prohibited or restricted
      
V.   Right turns only permitted at certain locations
      
VI.   No-passing zones established
      
VII.   Through highways established
      
VIII.   Stop intersections established
      
IX.   “Watch children” signage locations
      
X.   Motor vehicle weight limitation
      
XI.   Locations where pedestrian crossing in unmarked crosswalks restricted
SCHEDULE I. MAXIMUM SPEED LIMITS ESTABLISHED ON CERTAIN STREETS.
   (A)   Maximum speed limits are established on portions of specified streets,
as follows, and it shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle, on any
part of a street where a maximum speed limits applies, at a higher speed than
the maximum prescribed for that part of the street:
Street Between Maximum Speed Limit
Street           Between                                 Maximum Speed Limit
E. Main Street   Karns Avenue and River Lane             25 mph
E. Main Street   Spring Street and River Lane            25 mph
E. South Street  Karns Avenue and River Lane             15 mph
E. South Street  Hopewell Street and S. Spring Street    25 mph
Karns Avenue     E. Main Street and Sewer Plant Road     15 mph
N. Spring Street Eleventh Street and Third Street        35 mph
N. Spring Street Main Street and Third Street            25 mph
Sewer Plant Road Karns Avenue and Sewer Plant Deadend    15 mph
W. Main Street   Spring Street and W. Fifth Avenue (S.R. 25 mph
                 1029)
W. Main Street   W. Fifth Avenue and west borough line   35 mph
Water Street     E. Third Street and Main Street         25 mph
West Street      Eleventh Street and Third Street        25 mph
 
   (B)   Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $35. Any person exceeding the maximum
speed limit by more than five mph shall pay an additional fine of $2 per mile
for each mile in excess of five mph over the maximum speed limit.
(Prior Code, § 15, 201) (Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992; Ord. 2001-07-01, passed 7-
9-2001)
SCHEDULE II. TRAFFIC SIGNALS AT CERTAIN LOCATIONS.
   (A)   At the following locations, traffic signals as indicated below shall
be erected (or are ratified if previously erected), and traffic at those
location shall be directed by those signals:
 
Location                        Type of Signal
Main Street and Hopewell Street Light
Main Street and Spring Street   Light
 
   (B)   Any driver of a vehicle who disobeys the directions of any traffic
signal shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
(Prior Code, § 15, 205) (Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992)
SCHEDULE III. ONE-WAY STREETS; ENTRANCES AND EXITS ESTABLISHED.
   (A)   The following are established as one-way streets, entrances, and
exits, and it shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle on any one-
way street other than in the direction established for traffic on that street:
 
Street         From          To                        Direction of Travel
Center Street  Main Street   Foundry Street            North
W. Main Street Rt. 30        Inbound to Dishong Street East
W. Main Street Tussey Street Rt. 30 on-ramp            West
 
Type     From                To
Entrance N. Spring Street    37 N. Spring Street
Exit     37 N. Spring Street Center Street
 
   (B)   Any person who violates any provision of this schedule shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
(Prior Code, § 15, 207) (Ord. 2004-11-01, passed 11-8-2004Ord. 271, passed 6-8-
1992; Ord. 2004-11-01, passed 11-8-2004)
SCHEDULE IV. TURNING AT CERTAIN INTERSECTIONS PROHIBITED OR RESTRICTED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle, of the type
indicated, traveling upon the first-named street at any of the following
intersections, in the direction or directions indicated in each case, to make a
left turn and/or a right turn into the second-named street, as indicated, at
any time when such a turn is prohibited by this schedule:
 
Vehicles     Direction of Not to Make Into          When     Type of Vehicle
Traveling On Travel                                          Applicable To
E. Foundry   West         Left        Center Street Any time All
Street
E. Fourth    East         Right       Water Street  Any time All
Street
 
   (B)   Any person who violates any provision of this schedule shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
(Prior Code, § 15, 209) (Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992; Ord. 2023-07-01, passed 11-
8-2024)
SCHEDULE V. RIGHT TURNS ONLY PERMITTED AT CERTAIN LOCATIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle, traveling upon the
first-named street at any of the following intersections, in the direction or
directions indicated in each case, to make other than a right turn, at any time
stated, both left turns and straight-across traffic being prohibited:
 
Vehicles Traveling On Direction of Travel Times Not to Make Left Turn Into or
                                                Travel Straight Across
Bank Street           North               All   E. Main Street
 
   (B)   Any person who violates any provision of this schedule shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
(Prior Code, § 15, 210) (Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992)
SCHEDULE VI. NO-PASSING ZONES ESTABLISHED.
   (A)   The following are established as no-passing zones, and it shall be
unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to overtake or pass another vehicle or
to drive on the left side of the roadway in any no-passing zone:
 
Street           Direction of Travel Between
N. Spring Street North and south     First Street and north borough line
 
   (B)   Any person who violates any provision of this schedule shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
(Prior Code, § 15, 212) (Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992)
SCHEDULE VII. THROUGH HIGHWAYS ESTABLISHED.
   (A)   The following highways are established as through highways, thus
authorizing stop or yield signs to be erected facing traffic approaching every
intersection with the through highway except for those intersections with
traffic signals, or with exceptions or modifications as indicated below. Every
driver of a vehicle approaching a stop or yield sign authorized by this
schedule shall stop the vehicle or yield right-of-way as required by §§ 3323(b)
or 3323(c) of the Vehicle Code, being 75 Pa.C.S. §§ 3323(b) or 3323(c), as the
case may be, and shall not proceed into or across the through highway until he
or she has followed all applicable requirements of that section of the law:
 
Highway       Between
Main Street   E. borough line and west borough line
Spring Street North borough line and Spring Street terminus
 
   (B)   Any person who violates any provision of this schedule shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
(Prior Code, § 15, 213) (Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992)
SCHEDULE VIII. STOP INTERSECTIONS ESTABLISHED.
   (A)   The following intersections (in addition to intersections with the
through highways established by Chapter 73 Sched. VII) are established as stop
intersections, and official stop signs shall be erected (or are ratified if
previously erected) in such a position as to face traffic approaching the
second-named street (the intersecting of through street) on the first-named
street (the stop street) in the direction or directions indicated for that
intersection. Every driver of a vehicle approaching the intersection on the
first-named or stop street, in the direction indicated in each case, shall stop
the vehicle as required by § 3323(b) of the Vehicle Code, and shall not proceed
into or across the second-named or intersecting or through street until he or
she has followed all applicable requirements of that section of the law:
Stop Street Intersecting of Through Street Direction of Travel
Stop Street               Intersecting of Through Street Direction of Travel
Bank Street               E. Foundry Street              North
Barndollar Street         Dishong Street                 South
Center Street             E. First Street                North/south
Center Street             E. Foundry Street              North/south
Center Street             E. Second Street               North/south
Center Street             E. Third Street                North
Dishong Street            Elizabeth Street               East/west
Dishong Street            S.R. 1029                      East
E. Asa Street             S. Hopewell Street             East
E. Asa Street             S. River Lane                  East
E. Dike Street            S. Ridge Avenue                East
E. First Street           N. Hopewell Street             East/west
E. First Street           Water Street                   East/west
E. Foundry Street         Center Street                  East/west
E. Foundry Street         N. Hopewell Street             East
E. Foundry Street         Water Street                   East/west
E. Fourth Street          Water Street                   East
Eleventh Street           Railroad Street                East
E. Second Street          Hopewell Street                West
E. Second Street          N. Hopewell Street             East
E. Second Street          Water Street                   East/west
E. South Street           S. Hopewell Street             East
E. Third Street           Water Street                   East/west
Gump Street               E. First Street                North
Hill Street               Laher Avenue                   East
Hill Street               N. Hopewell Street             West
Hillside Street           N. Juniata Street              East
Hilltop Street            N. Hopewell Street             West
Huntingdon Street         Sixth Street                   South
Laher Avenue              E. First Street                South
Masters Avenue            E. First Street                South
N. Cunard Street          Mechanic Street                North/south
N. Cunard Street          W. Foundry Street              South
N. Hopewell Street        E. First Street                South
N. Ridge Avenue           Mechanic Street                South
N. Ridge Avenue           W. First Street                North
Ninth and One-Half Street West Street                    West
Railroad Street           Sixth Street                   North/south
Railroad Street           Tenth Street                   South
Robin Lane                N. Hopewell Street             East
S. Bank Street            E. Asa Street                  North
S. Bank Street            E. South Street                South
S. Cunard Street          Dike Street                    South
S. Cunard Street          South Street                   North/south
S. Cunard Street          W. Asa Street                  North/south
S. Patton Street          W. Asa Street                  South
S. Ridge Avenue           Asa Street                     North/south
S. Ridge Avenue           Dike Street                    South
S. Ridge Avenue           South Street                   North/south
S. Spring Street          South Street                   North
S. Spring Street          South Street                   South
South Juniata Street      South Street                   North
South Street Extension    Karns Avenue                   East
South Street              Juniata Street                 East
Squirrel Street           W. Fifth Street                North
Squirrel Street           W. First Street                North/south
Squirrel Street           W. Foundry Street              North/south
Squirrel Street           W. Fourth Street               South
Squirrel Street           W. Second Street               North/south
Squirrel Street           W. Third Street                North/south
Ten and One-Half Street   Railroad Street                East
Ten and One-Half Street   West Street                    West
Tenth Street Extension    West Street                    Southeast
W. Asa Street             Juniata Street                 West/east
W. Asa Street             S. Cunard Street               East/west
W. Asa Street             S. Ridge Avenue                West
W. Fifth Street           West Street                    West
W. First Street           N. Ridge Avenue                East
W. Foundry Street         Cunard Street                  East/west
W. Foundry Street         N. Juniata Street              West
W. Foundry Street         N. Ridge Avenue                East/west
W. Fourth Street          West Street                    East
W. Seventh Street         West Street                    West
Walnut Street             South Street Extended          South
Water Street              E. First Street                North/south
Water Street              E. Foundry Street              East/west
Water Street              E. Foundry Street              North/south
Water Street              E. Second Street               North/south
West Street               Sixth Street                   North/south
West Street               Tenth Street                   North/south
Willow Street             E. Asa Street                  South
 
   (B)   Any person who violates any provision of this schedule shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
(Prior Code, § 15, 214) (Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992; Ord. 2006-08-01, passed 8-
14-2006; Ord. 2006-10-01, passed 10-10-2006; Ord. 2007-12-02, passed 12-10-
2007; Ord. 2010-09-01, passed 9-13-2010; Ord. 2023-07-02, passed 8-14-2023)
SCHEDULE IX. “WATCH CHILDREN” SIGNAGE LOCATIONS.
Street Side Location
Street         Side  Location
E. Asa Street  North 59 feet west of River Lane
Peach Street   West  16.5 feet south of E. Main Street
Seventh Street North 80 feet west of N. Spring Street
Seventh Street South 375 feet west of N. Spring Street
West Street    East  23 feet north of W. Seventh Street
West Street    West  142 feet south of 2000 block
Willow Street  East  29 feet south of E. Main Street
 
(Prior Code, § 15, 219) (Ord. passed 9-14-1992; Ord. 2001-12-02, passed 12-10-
2001; Ord. 2003-07-01, passed 7-14-2003)
SCHEDULE X. MOTOR VEHICLE WEIGHT LIMITATION.
   (A)   This schedule shall be known as the “Everett Borough Motor Vehicle
Weight Limitation Ordinance.”
   (B)   This schedule is enacted pursuant to the authority conferred by the
“Vehicle Code” Act of 1976, June 17, P.L. 1962, No. 81, § 1, effective July 1,
1977 (75 Pa.C.S.A. §§ 101 et seq.), as amended and is intended to include and
be subject to all provisions of § 4902 of the Vehicle Code (75 Pa.C.S.A. §
4902) and all Pennsylvania Department of Transportation (hereinafter,
“PennDOT”) regulations promulgated or to be promulgated under the Vehicle Code.
   (C)   For the purpose of this schedule, the following definitions apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      COMBINATION. Two or more vehicles physically interconnected in tandem.
      EMERGENCY VEHICLE. A Fire Department vehicle, police vehicle, ambulance,
blood delivery device, armed forces emergency vehicle, one private vehicle of a
Fire or Police Chief or Assistant Chief, or ambulance corps commander or
assistant commander, or a river rescue commander used for answering emergency
calls, or other vehicle designated by the State Police under § 6010 of the
Vehicle Code, being 75 Pa.C.S. § 102, (relating to designation of emergency
vehicles by State Police).
      GROSS WEIGHT. The combined weight of a motor vehicle and its load and
driver.
      LOCAL TRAFFIC. The following shall be regarded as LOCAL TRAFFIC:
         (a)   Emergency vehicles;
         (b)   School buses;
         (c)   Vehicles and combinations of government agencies and utilities
or their contractors engaged in construction or maintenance on a posted highway
or in a location which can be reached only via a posted highway; and/or
         (d)   Vehicles and combinations going to or coming from a residence or
farm located on a posted highway or which can be reached only via a posted
highway.
      MOTOR VEHICLE. Any vehicle or combination as defined and/or governed by
the Vehicle Code, 75 Pa.C.S.A. §§ 101 et seq., as amended.
      PERSON. Any natural person of either sex, firms, copartnerships and
corporations, and all associations of natural persons, whether acting by
themselves, or by a servant or employee.
      SCHOOL BUS. A motor vehicle designated for carrying more than ten
passengers, exclusive of the driver, and used for transportation of school
children.
   (D)   The Borough Council has determined and hereby determine, based upon an
engineering study conducted by P. Joseph Lehman, Inc. Consulting Engineers
dated October 7, 2022, that the entire length of the following roads may be
subject to increased likelihood of damage or destruction unless the permissible
weight of motor vehicles is restricted to the weight limits listed:
 
Street Name       From/To                                Weight Limit (Ton)
E. Foundry Street N. Spring Street to N. Hopewell Street 5
 
   (E)   (1)   Pursuant to the findings under division (D) above, and by
authority of § 4902 of the Vehicle Code (75 Pa.C.S.A. § 4902) and regulations
promulgated thereunder, no motor vehicle or combination shall be operated upon
any of the roads listed in division (D) above, at any time, with gross weight
in excess of the weight limits listed for said road in division (D) above.
      (2)   Local traffic as defined herein shall be exempted from the
restrictions imposed under division (E)(1) above.
   (F)   (1)   The Borough Council, or its authorized agents, may issue permits
for movement of motor vehicles or combinations with weight in excess of the
restrictions promulgated under division (D) above, and may require such
undertaking, security, or bond as it may deem necessary to cover the costs of
doing inspections of the roads and the costs of repairs and restoration
necessitated by the permitted movement of vehicles.
      (2)   Any and all road inspections, including preliminary and final
inspections, which are done as part of the permit issuing process, shall be
done by the Borough Engineer. All inspection costs shall be paid by the person
(i.e., the bondee) requesting the permit.
      (3)   All action taken under authority of this division (F) shall be
taken in accordance with PennDOT regulations and § 4902 of the Vehicle Code (75
Pa.C.S.A. § 4902).
   (G)   The borough, through its authorized agents which include, but may not
be limited to, the Borough Council, shall erect or cause to be erected and
maintained restriction signs designating the weight restrictions at each end of
the portion of road restricted under division (D) above. In the case of a
weight restriction on a road which does not begin or end at an intersection
with an unrestricted road, the borough, through its authorized agents which
include, but may not be limited to, the Borough Council, shall also place an
advance informational sign at the intersection nearest each end of the
restricted portion of road which would allow drivers to avoid the restricted
portion of road.
   (H)   (1)   Any person operating a motor vehicle or combination upon a road
in violation of the weight restriction imposed under division (D)(1) of this
schedule is guilty of a summary offense and shall, upon conviction by action
brought before a District Justice by the borough’s Solicitor (without need for
prior consent of the District Attorney to do so) in the same manner provided
for the enforcement of summary offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of
Criminal Procedure, be sentenced to pay a fine of $150 plus $150 for each 500
pounds, or part thereof, in excess of 3,000 pounds over the maximum allowable
weight specified in division (D)(1) above. When a person so convicted defaults
on payment of the applicable fine as determined by the District Justice, such
person shall be imprisoned in the county prison for a period not to exceed ten
days. Each day or portion thereof during which any violation of this schedule
continues shall constitute a separate offense and/or violation, and the person
in violation thereof shall be liable for the penalty imposed, plus court costs
and reasonable attorney’s fees incurred by the borough in the enforcement
proceedings. Likewise, each section of this schedule which is violated shall
constitute a separate offense and/or violation, and the person in violation
thereof shall be liable for the penalty imposed, plus court costs and
reasonable attorney’s fees incurred by the borough in the enforcement
proceedings. In addition to the above penalties, all other actions are hereby
reserved, including an action in equity, for the proper enforcement of this
schedule. The imposition of a fine or penalty for any violation of, or
noncompliance with, this schedule shall in no way be considered express or
implied permission for such violation to continue; and all such persons
violating this schedule shall be required to correct or remedy such violations
and noncompliance immediately upon notification by the borough and/or its
Council members, agents, servants, employees, or authorized representatives.
Any violation of this schedule may be declared by the Borough Council to be
public nuisance and abatable as such.
      (2)   Division (H)(1) above is promulgated in this schedule so as to be
consistent with the penalties authorized under 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 4902(g).
   (I)   All terms in the singular shall also include the plural, and all terms
in the masculine gender shall also include the feminine gender unless the
context clearly indicates otherwise or would lead to an absurd interpretation.
(Ord. 2022-11-01, passed 12-12-2022)
SCHEDULE XI. LOCATIONS WHERE PEDESTRIAN CROSSING IN UNMARKED CROSSWALKS
RESTRICTED.
   Except when authorized by a police officer or other appropriately attired
person authorized to direct, control, or regulate traffic, it shall be unlawful
for any pedestrian to cross the roadway at any of the following streets, at the
intersection with that street indicated:
Street Intersection Direction of Travel
Street              Intersection        Direction of Travel
Center Street       Main Street         Both
Main Street         Center Street       Both
Main Street         Hopewell Street     Both
Main Street         North Bank Street   Both
Main Street         North River Lane    Both
Main Street         North Spring Street Both
Main Street         Patton Street       Both
Main Street         Ridge Avenue        Both
Main Street         Water Street        Both
North Bank Street   Main Street         Both
North Spring Street West Third Street   Both
North Spring Street West Sixth Street   Both
South Bank Street   Main Street         Both
Water Street        Main Street         Both
 
(Prior Code, § 15, 703) (Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992) Penalty, see §
70.99
CHAPTER 74: PARKING SCHEDULES
Schedule
      
I.   Parking prohibited at all times in certain locations
      
II.   Parking prohibited in certain locations certain days and hours
      
III.   Parking time limited in certain locations certain days and hours
      
IV.   Special purposes parking zones established; parking otherwise prohibited
      
V.   Standing or parking on roadway for loading or unloading
      
VI.   Residential permit parking
      
VII.   Parking meter zones established
SCHEDULE I. PARKING PROHIBITED AT ALL TIMES IN CERTAIN LOCATIONS.
   Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or to protect the
safety of any person or vehicle or in compliance with law of the directions of
a police officer or official traffic control device, no person shall:
   (A)   Stand or park a vehicle:
      (1)   On a crosswalk;
      (2)   On a sidewalk;
      (3)   Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant;
      (4)   Within an intersection;
      (5)   Within 15 feet of an intersection, with the following exception:
 
Street        Distance Intersection
Second Street 30 feet  N. Spring Street and Second Street
 
      (6)   In front of a public or private driveway or accessway; or
      (7)   In a yellow zone or safety zone.
   (B)   Park a vehicle in the following locations:
Streets Side Between
Streets            Side  Between
Center Street      Both  E. Main Street and E. Third Street
E. First Street    North Hopewell Street and N. Hopewell Street
E. First Street    South Hopewell Street and Masters Avenue
E. First Street    South N. Spring Street and Center Street
E. Main Street     North N. River Lane and E. borough line
E. Main Street     North River Lane and Masters Avenue
E. Main Street     South Gump Street and Karns Avenue
Foundry Street     Both  N. Spring Street and Hopewell Street
Hopewell Street    East  E. Main Street and E. First Street
Hopewell Street    West  E. First Street and E. Foundry Street
Hopewell Street    West  E. Main Street and metered parking
Masters Avenue     East  E. Main Street and E. First Street
N. Hopewell Street Both  E. First Street and N. borough line
N. Spring Street   Both  E. Foundry Street and E. First Street
Ridge Avenue       Both  Main Street and Mechanic Street
South Street       South S. Juniata Street and S. Spring Street
South Street       South West of S. Spring Street to corner
W. Main Street     South Dishong Street and Barndollar Avenue
Water Street       Both  Main Street to E. First Street
Water Street       West  E. First Street to Fourth Street
West Third Street  South Squirrel Street and West Street
 
   (C)   Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or to
protect the safety of any person or vehicle or in compliance with law of the
directions of a police officer or official traffic control device, no person
shall park a vehicle in the following location:
 
Streets     Side Between
West Street Both LaSalle Street and W. Third Street
 
(Prior Code, § 15, 403) (Ord. 278, passed 6-9-1997; Ord. 2009-10-01, passed 10-
13-2009; Ord. 2016-12-1, passed 12- -2016; Ord. 2024-07-08, passed 7-8-2024;
Ord. 2025-03-10, passed 3-10-2025) Penalty, see §
70.99
SCHEDULE II. PARKING PROHIBITED IN CERTAIN LOCATIONS CERTAIN DAYS AND HOURS.
   Parking shall be prohibited in the following locations at all times on the
days and between the hours indicated in this section, as follows:
 
Street        Side Reasoning    Months           Hours
Main Street   Both Snow removal Nov. 1 to Apr. 1 2:00 a.m. to 7:00 a.m.
Spring Street Both Snow removal Nov. 1 to Apr. 1 2:00 a.m. to 7:00 a.m.
 
(Prior Code, § 15, 404) (Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992) Penalty, see §
70.99
SCHEDULE III. PARKING TIME LIMITED IN CERTAIN LOCATIONS CERTAIN DAYS AND HOURS.
   No person shall park a vehicle, to allow it to remain parked, for longer
than the time indicated, in any of the following locations, at any time on the
days and between the hours indicated:
 
Street          Side  Between       Days           Hours           Parking Time
                                                                   Limit
                      S. Spring                    8:30 a.m. to 5:
E. South Street North Street and    -              30 p.m.         30 minutes
                      parking lot
                      Ridge Avenue                 9:00 a.m. to 4:
Mechanic Street South and Cunard    -              00 p.m.         10 minutes
                      Street
                      S. Cunard     Every day      8:00 a.m. to 6:
W. Main Street  Both  Street and S. except Sundays 00 p.m.         2 hours
                      Ridge Avenue
 
(Prior Code, § 15, 406) (Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992; Ord. 2001-01-01, passed 1-
2-2001; Ord. 2016-12-1, passed 12- -2016) Penalty, see §
70.99
SCHEDULE IV. SPECIAL PURPOSES PARKING ZONES ESTABLISHED; PARKING OTHERWISE
PROHIBITED.
   The following are established as special purpose parking zones, and its
shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle or to allow it to remain
parked, in any such zone, except as specifically provided for that zone:
Street Side Location Authorized Purpose or Vehicle
Street                   Side  Location                Authorized Purpose or
                                                       Vehicle
E. First Street          South Between Center Street   AAA van
                               and Water Street
Main Street              North 25 feet west of Center  Postal patrons only (10
                               Street                  minutes)
Mechanic Street          South 22 feet east of Cunard  Police
                               Street
E. Main Street           North 30 feet East of N. Bank Police
                               Street
E. Main Street (2 signs) North Front of Methodist      Handicap
                               Church
E. Main Street           South Opposite Water Street   Handicap
W. Main Street           North Front of 219 W. Main    Handicap
                               Street
W. Main Street           North Front of 507 W. Main    Handicap
                               Street
W. Main Street           South Front of 220 W. Main    Handicap
                               Street
N. Ridge Avenue          West  Front of 36 N. Ridge    Handicap
                               Avenue
 
(Prior Code, § 15, 407) (Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992; Ord. 2001-01-01, passed 1-
2-2001; Ord. 2003-04-01, passed 4-14-2003; Ord. 2004-04-01, passed 4-12-2004;
Ord. 2010-09-02, passed 9-13-2010; Ord. 2013-02-01, passed 2-11-2013) Penalty,
see §
70.99
SCHEDULE V. STANDING OR PARKING ON ROADWAY FOR LOADING OR UNLOADING.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, stand, or park a vehicle (other
than a pedalcycle) on the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the
edge of curb of any street, except that standing or parking for the purpose of
loading or unloading persons or property shall be permitted on the following
named streets on Monday through Saturday, between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and
11:30 a.m. and between the hours of 1:30 p.m. and 4:00 p.m., and for no longer
than necessary for the loading or unloading:
 
Street             Side Between
N. Hopewell Street West Main Street and E. Foundry Street
 
(Prior Code, § 15, 408) (Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992) Penalty, see §
70.99
SCHEDULE VI. RESIDENTIAL PERMIT PARKING.
   (A)   Findings and purpose. The borough finds that:
      (1)   Certain residential areas in the borough are subjected to commuter
vehicle parings, therefore depriving the residents of those areas of spaces in
which to park their own vehicles;
      (2)   Those residential streets are also subjected to a high degree of
commuter traffic which substantially reduces the quality of the ambient air
level; and
      (3)   The establishment of a parking permit program for certain affected
areas should facilitate efficient movement of traffic by providing for parking
preference during certain hours of the day and days of the week. Therefore, the
borough considers it to be in the interest of the people of the borough to
provide for the establishment of a residential permit parking program to ensure
primary access to available parking spaces by neighborhood residents and also
to provide a cleaner ambient air level.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this schedule, the following
definitions apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      COMMUTER VEHICLE. A motor vehicle parked in a residential area by the
person not a resident of that residential area.
      PROPRIETOR. A person who owns or leases real estate within a residential
area of which he or she is not a resident, but who owns or manages a business
enterprise or professional office maintained at that address. For the purposes
of this schedule, a PROPRIETOR shall be entitled to one parking permit for that
business or professional office address.
      RESIDENT. A person who owns or leases real property within a residential
area and who maintains either a voting residence, or bona fide occupancy, or
both, at that address.
      RESIDENTIAL AREA. A contiguous area containing public highways or parts
of public highways primarily abutted by residential property or residential and
non-business property, such as schools, parks, places of worship, hospitals,
and nursing homes.
   (C)   Criteria.
      (1)   The residential areas designated in division (D) below are those
deemed impacted and hence eligible for residential parking on the basis of the
following criteria.
         (a)   During any period between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:30 p.m.,
Monday through Saturday, except legal holidays, the number of vehicles parked
(or standing), legally or illegally, on the streets in the area is equal to 70%
or more of the legal, on-street parking capacity of the area. For the purpose
of this division (C)(1)(a), a legal parking space shall be 20 linear feet.
         (b)   During the same period as specified in division (C)(1)(a) above,
10% or more of the vehicles parked (or standing) on the streets in the area are
not registered in the name of a person residing in the area. For the purpose of
this division (C)(1)(b), the latest available information from the Bureau of
Motor Vehicles and Licensing of the State Department of Transportation
regarding registration of motor vehicles shall be used.
      (2)   Provided, in determining that a specific area identified as
impacted and eligible for residential permit parking is designated as a
residential permit parking area, the following factors are taken into
consideration:
         (a)   The local and metropolitan needs with respect to clean air and
environment;
         (b)   The possibility of a reduction in total vehicle miles driven in
the borough;
         (c)   The likelihood of alleviating traffic congestion, illegal
parking, and related health and safety hazards;
         (d)   The proximity of public transportation to the residential areas;
         (e)   The desire and need of the residents for residential permit
parking and their willingness to bear the administrative costs in connection
with it; and
         (f)   The need for parking in excess of the residential permit parking
program in proximity to establishments located in the residential permit
parking area and used by the general public for religious, health, or
educational purposes.
   (D)   Designation of residential permit parking areas. Signs shall be
erected along the streets in each residential permit parking area, indicating
the days, hours, locations, and conditions under which parking shall be by
permit only.
   (E)   Application for permit.
      (1)   Application for a residential parking permit shall be made to the
Chief of Police by the person desiring the permit, who shall be only the owner
or the driver of a motor vehicle who resides on or is a proprietor of property
immediately adjacent to a street or other location within a residential parking
permit area. A separate application shall be required for each motor vehicle,
and each application shall be accompanied by a $10 permit fee, which shall be
for the use of the borough, to be applied to the cost of administering the
residential permit parking program. Each application shall contain the
following information:
         (a)   The name of the owner or the driver, as the case may be, of the
motor vehicle;
         (b)   The address of the resident or the proprietor, as the case may
be;
         (c)   The make, model, and registration number of the motor vehicle;
and
         (d)   The driver number as taken from the applicant’s current driver’s
license.
      (2)   At the discretion of the Chief of Police, the applicant shall be
required, at the time of making application, to present his or her driver’s
license and the vehicle registration card.
   (F)   Issuance of permit. Upon receipt of the application and the permit
fee, and determination by him or her that the information upon the application
shows that the applicant is entitled to a residential parking permit, the Chief
of Police shall issue to the applicant a residential parking permit, which
shall be valid for the remainder of the calendar year. The permit shall display
the serial and registration numbers of the motor vehicles, the residential
parking area number, and the expiration date. The permit shall be renewable
annually before the expiration date, upon making application for renewal and
payment of the $10 permit fee. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this
schedule for any person to display other than the current and valid permit
while standing or parking in a residential permit parking area at any time when
those permits are to be displayed.
   (G)   Temporary and exemption parking permits. Temporary parking permits may
be issued by the Chief of Police, upon payment of a fee of $2, to bona fide
visitors of residents of a designated residential permit parking area, and
exemption parking permits may be issued, without payment of a fee, to
handicapped persons.
   (H)   Responsibility of permit holder.
      (1)   Notwithstanding any provision of this section to the contrary, the
holder of a residential parking permit shall be permitted to stand or park a
motor vehicle operated by him or her in any designated residential parking area
during those times when parking of motor vehicles is permitted in that area.
While a vehicle for which a residential parking permit has been issued is so
parked, that permit shall be displayed so as to be clearly visible through the
windshield of the vehicle. A residential parking permit shall not guarantee or
reserve to the holder a parking space within a designated residential permit
parking area.
      (2)   A residential parking permit shall not authorize its holder to
stand or park a motor vehicle in any place where or at any time when stopping,
standing, or parking of motor vehicles is prohibited or set aside for other
specified types of vehicles, nor shall the permit exempt its holder from the
observance of any traffic or parking regulation other than residential permit
parking regulation or restriction.
      (3)   No person other than the permit holder whose name appears on the
permit shall use a residential parking permit or display it on a vehicle
operated. Any such use or display by a person other than the permit holder
shall constitute a violation of this schedule by the permit holder and by the
person who so used or displayed the parking permit.
      (4)   It shall constitute a violation of this section for any person
falsely to represent himself or herself as eligible for a residential parking
permit or to furnish false information in an application to the Chief of Police
in order to obtain a residential parking permit.
      (5)   The Chief of Police shall have authority to revoke the residential
parking permit of any permit holder found to be in violation of any provision
of this schedule. Upon written notification to him or her of the revocation,
the permit holder shall surrender the permit to the Chief of Police. Failure to
do so, when so requested, shall constitute a violation of this schedule.
Provided, any person receiving such a notice may, within ten days after the
date of the notice, appeal to the Borough Council for a hearing on the
revocation, and the decision of the Borough Council shall be final.
(Prior Code, § 15, 409) (Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992) Penalty, see §
70.99
SCHEDULE VII. PARKING METER ZONES ESTABLISHED.
   Parking meter zones are established upon and along certain streets in the
borough, as follows:
Street Between Rates Maximum Parking Time
Street             Between               Rates             Maximum Parking Time
E. Main Street     Spring Street and     $0.10/half hour   2 hours
                   Hopewell Street       $0.25/convenience
N. Hopewell Street Main Street and First $0.10/half hour   2 hours
                   Street                $0.25/convenience
N. Spring Street   Main Street and First $0.10/half hour   2 hours
                   Street                $0.25/convenience
S. Spring Street   Main Street and South $0.10/half hour   2 hours
                   Street Extended       $0.25/convenience
 
(Prior Code, § 15, 501) (Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992; Ord. 2004-04-02, passed 4-
13-2004; Ord. 2014-08-01, passed 8-11-2014) Penalty, see §
70.99
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   PARKS AND RECREATION
      
91.   HOUSING
      
92.   ANIMALS
      
93.   HEALTH AND SAFETY
      
94.   CEMETERIES
      
95.   FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
CHAPTER 90: PARKS AND RECREATION
Section
   
90.01   Definitions
   
90.02   Park hours
   
90.03   Prohibited conduct
   
90.04   Fishing
   
90.05   Reservation for specific uses
   
90.06   Authority to close areas
   
90.07   Enforcement
 
   
90.99   Penalty
§ 90.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PARK or PARKS. Unless specifically limited, shall be deemed to include all
parks, playgrounds, recreation areas, tennis courts, beaches, recreation
structures and facilities, and also entrances and approaches thereto, and all
other land or property or structures under the jurisdiction of the Borough
Council, now or hereafter owned or acquired by the borough for park or
recreational purposes.
   PERSON. Any natural person, corporation, organization of persons, company,
association, or partnership.
   PRIMITIVE CAMPING. Camping which occurs less than five days in any year
related to which sleeping bags and tents as opposed to campers are used.
   RULES AND REGULATIONS. Any rules and regulations hereby or hereafter
promulgated by the Borough Council under the authority herein conferred.
(Prior Code, § 16, 101) (Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992; Ord. 2011-11-01, passed 11-
14-2011)
§ 90.02 PARK HOURS.
   All parks shall be opened daily to the public from 8:00 a.m. until 9:00 p.m,
or otherwise as the Borough Council may from time to time hereafter designate
by resolution, but in no event shall any person be permitted to be in
attendance in any park between 9:00 p.m. and sunrise, unless special permission
shall be granted by the Borough Council or its authorized representative.
(Prior Code, § 16, 102) (Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992; Ord. 2011-11-01, passed 11-
14-2011) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.03 PROHIBITED CONDUCT.
   No person in attendance at a park shall:
   (A)   Injure, deface, remove, cut, or damage any of the trees, plants,
shrubs, turf, buildings, structures, signs, or fixtures, or any other property
of the borough located within the park;
   (B)   Litter any area of the park with garbage, paper, bottles, cans, or
other waste material, nor dispose of the same in any way except in receptacles
designated for such purpose;
   (C)   Kindle or maintain any fire in the park except in fireplaces or areas
specifically designated for that purpose and located by authority of the
Borough Council;
   (D)   Remove any bench, seat, table, or other appliance without permission
of the Borough Council;
   (E)   Injure, deface, destroy, or remove any notice, rule, or regulation
posted at any place within the park by authority of the Borough Council, nor
shall any notice or placard be posted within the park other than by authority
of said Council;
   (F)   Set up any booth, table, or stand for the sale of any article or
service whatsoever within the limits of the park without permission of the
Borough Council, nor distribute, sell, service, or rent any services or
commodity or solicit for any purpose without permission of the Borough Council;
   (G)   Operate, stop or park any vehicle, bicycle, or other means of
conveyance except in areas where permitted or designated by proper authority of
the Borough Council, or operate the same in a reckless or negligent manner or
in excess of any posted speed limit or in such a manner as to become a nuisance
to other area users;
   (H)   Operate commercial vehicles, unless providing authorized services;
   (I)   Bring onto the premises, possess, or consume any alcoholic beverage or
illegal drugs of any kind. No person shall enter the park in an intoxicated
state or otherwise be under the influence of alcohol or illegal drugs;
   (J)   Carry or discharge any firearms, slingshots, firecrackers, fireworks,
or other missile propelling instruments or explosives or arrows, or other
dangerous weapons which have such properties as to cause annoyance or injury to
any person or property, unless permission has been granted by the Borough
Council in designated areas. Police officers in the performance of their duties
will be exempt from these provisions;
   (K)   Play ball, swim, golf, pitch horseshoes, engage in archery, or launch,
dock, or land any boat, engage in finding buried objects with special
detectors, or participate in any other form of recreation, sporting endeavor,
or pastime, except in those areas which may be designated from time to time
hereafter by resolution for that purpose by the Borough Council;
   (L)   Disrobe or change clothing except in buildings or facilities made
available for that purpose;
   (M)   Disturb the peace by any conduct so as to annoy any other person using
the park for recreational purposes;
   (N)   Operate a snowmobile, minibike, motorcycle, or any vehicle,
recreational or otherwise, except on designated roads, trails, or areas set
aside for their use;
   (O)   Use threatening, abusive, insulting, profane, or obscene language or
words;
   (P)   Commit any disorderly or immoral acts;
   (Q)   Hold any public meeting or rally with more than five persons or engage
in any marching or driving as members of a military, political, or other
organization without permission of the Borough Council, which requires a
statement of information, including the name of the organization, its purpose,
number of persons expected to be invited, expected duration, and name(s) of
person(s) in charge;
   (R)   Disobey a proper order of a police officer or Borough Council member,
or disobey or disregard or fail to comply with any rule or regulation, warning,
prohibition, instruction, or direction given by an authorized person and posted
or displayed by sign, notice, bulletin, card, poster, or when notified or
informed as to its existence by the Borough Council or an authorized person;
   (S)   Hunt for, capture, or kill, or attempt to capture or kill, or aid or
assist in the capturing or killing of, in any manner, any wild bird or wild
animal of any description, either game or otherwise, and to that end, it is
unlawful for any person to carry onto or possess in any park, a shotgun or
rifle or pistol or firearm of any make or kind unless specific permission is
granted for a designated area by authority of the Borough Council;
   (T)   Allow pets to run at large out of control;
   (U)   Swim or wade in any pond;
   (V)   Ride horses;
   (W)   Use a powered recreation vehicles within any park or recreational area
owned or maintained by the borough;
   (X)   Bathe or wash clothes or dishes in any pond or stream; or
   (Y)   Feed wildlife.
(Prior Code, § 16, 103) (Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992; Ord. 2011-11-01, passed 11-
14-2011) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.04 FISHING.
   All laws pertaining to fishing in the commonwealth shall apply to fishing in
parks and recreation areas, and provisions thereof are hereby incorporated by
reference.
(Prior Code, § 16, 104) (Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.05 RESERVATION FOR SPECIFIC USES.
   The use of all parks shall be on a first come, first served basis unless
otherwise reserved:
   (A)   By annual permission granted by the Borough Council for the scheduling
of various league games and the like;
   (B)   For school or college athletic games, practice, contests, or
exhibitions;
   (C)   For regularly scheduled school district or municipal recreation
programs; or
   (D)   By permission granted by the Borough Council for a specific requested
use.
(Prior Code, § 16, 105) (Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992)
§ 90.06 AUTHORITY TO CLOSE AREAS.
   Recreation facilities which become hazardous for public use due to weather,
water, fire, or unforeseeable conditions may be closed only at the discretion
of the Borough Council.
(Prior Code, § 16, 106) (Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992)
§ 90.07 ENFORCEMENT.
   The police officers of the borough are charged with enforcement of the
provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 16, 107) (Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992)
§ 90.99 PENALTY.
   Any person, firm, or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine not more
than $600 plus costs, and in default of payment of such fines and costs, the
imprisonment for a term not to exceed 30 days.
(Prior Code, § 16, 108) (Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992)
CHAPTER 91: HOUSING
Section
   
91.01   Purposes
   
91.02   Definitions and interpretations
   
91.03   Reports by landlords
   
91.04   Reports by persons upon becoming landlords
   
91.05   Reports of changes in use or occupancy
   
91.06   Duties of the Borough Secretary
 
   
91.99   Penalty
§ 91.01 PURPOSES.
   This chapter is enacted to provide for the uniform and equitable
distribution of the tax levies in the borough and upon the inhabitants thereof
and to promote the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the
inhabitants of the borough.
(Prior Code, § 11, 101) (Ord. 235, passed 3-2-1970; Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992)
§ 91.02 DEFINITIONS AND INTERPRETATIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BUSINESS UNIT. A parcel of real estate, with or without improvement located
thereon utilized by any person or persons for any commercial activity or
purpose.
   DWELLING UNIT. One or more rooms used for living and sleeping purposes
arranged for occupancy by one family or by one or more persons.
   LANDLORD. A lessor, or person who acts as agent for the lessor, of any
parcel of real estate located in the borough, or a lessor, or person who acts
as agent for the lessor, of any improvements on real estate or any building
located in the borough.
   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, association, firm, or corporation.
   TENANT. A person who has the use, either by himself or herself or with
others, of a dwelling unit or a business unit owned by a person other than
himself or herself, for a period exceeding 30 days.
(Prior Code, § 11, 102) (Ord. 235, passed 3-2-1970; Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992)
§ 91.03 REPORTS BY LANDLORDS.
   Within 30 days from the effective date of this chapter, each landlord shall
submit to the Borough Council a report form supplied by the Borough Council
which includes the following information:
   (A)   List of the dwelling units and business units owned by the landlord,
located within the borough limits, whether occupied or not occupied;
   (B)   Address of each dwelling unit and business unit;
   (C)   Brief description of each dwelling unit or business unit;
   (D)   Whether or not said dwelling unit or business unit is inhabited or
utilized by tenants; and
   (E)   Names of the tenant or tenants utilizing the aforementioned dwelling
unit or business unit, if any.
(Prior Code, § 11, 103) (Ord. 235, passed 3-2-1970; Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992)
Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.04 REPORTS BY PERSONS UPON BECOMING LANDLORDS.
   After the effective date of this chapter, any person who becomes a landlord
of any parcel of real estate or any improvement on real estate or building
located in the borough by agreement of sale, by deed, or by any other means,
shall, within 30 days thereafter, report to the Borough Council the information
and data set forth in §
91.03 and on forms to be provided by the Borough Council.
(Prior Code, § 11, 104) (Ord. 235, passed 3-2-1970; Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992)
Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.05 REPORTS OF CHANGES IN USE OR OCCUPANCY.
   After the effective date of this chapter, each and every landlord of
property within the borough shall report to the Borough Council on a report
form to be supplied by the Borough Council, any change in the use or occupancy
of any dwelling unit or business unit owned by such landlord. The reported
change shall include the name or names of new tenants of such dwelling unit or
business unit, the date when such change was effected, and the forwarding
address of the old tenant or tenants if known. A landlord of a hotel, inn, or
boarding house shall not be required to report a person as a tenant until that
person has resided in such landlord’s establishment for a period exceeding 30
days. In the event that a dwelling unit or business unit was used or utilized
by a tenant and then becomes vacant, this change shall also be reported to the
Borough Council. All reports required by this section shall be made within ten
days after a landlord has knowledge that such a unit has had a change in
occupancy or has become vacant.
(Prior Code, § 11, 105) (Ord. 235, passed 3-2-1970; Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992)
Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.06 DUTIES OF BOROUGH SECRETARY.
   The Borough Council, under the authority of this chapter, shall:
   (A)   Maintain on file at the borough office the names of the landlords
owning dwelling units and business units in the borough, said list to include
the names of the current tenants of said dwelling units and business units;
   (B)   Maintain a supply of forms for landlords to use in making reports to
the Borough Council as required by §§
91.03,
91.04, and
91.05; and
   (C)   Notify the Chief of Police and the Fire Chief of the borough of the
address and description of any dwelling unit or business unit that is vacant,
unoccupied, and not in use.
(Prior Code, § 11, 106) (Ord. 235, passed 3-2-1970; Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992)
§ 91.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding $600 and costs, or
in default of payment thereof, shall be subject to imprisonment for a term not
to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation of this chapter continues shall
constitute a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 11, 107) (Ord. 235, passed 3-2-1970; Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992)
CHAPTER 92: ANIMALS
Section
Prohibiting Animals Running at Large
   
92.01   Definitions
   
92.02   Unlawful to allow any animal to run at large
   
92.03   Seizing of dogs
   
92.04   Licensed dogs
   
92.05   Unlicensed dogs
   
92.06   Threatening dogs
Regulating Keeping of Animals
   
92.20   Definitions
   
92.21   Certain animals prohibited
   
92.22   Keeping of animals regulated
   
92.23   Household pets
   
92.24   Violation of state law
   
92.25   Animal defecation on public and private property restricted
 
   
92.99   Penalty
PROHIBITING ANIMALS RUNNING AT LARGE
§ 92.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   OWNER. Any dog having a right of property in any dog or having custody of
any dog, or any person who harbors or permits a dog to remain on or around his
or her property.
   RUNNING AT LARGE. Any animal being upon any public highway, street, avenue,
way, drive, alley, park, or any other public land, or upon property of another
person other than the owner, and not being accompanied by or under the control
of the owner of any other person having custody of said animal.
(Prior Code, § 2, 101) (Ord. 248, passed 1-22-1977; Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992;
Ord. 2024-11-12, passed 11-12-2024)
§ 92.02 UNLAWFUL TO ALLOW ANY ANIMAL TO RUN AT LARGE.
   It shall be unlawful for the owner of any animal to allow or permit or
prevent such animal from running at large in the borough.
(Prior Code, § 2, 102) (Ord. 248, passed 1-22-1977; Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992;
Ord. 2024-11-12, passed 11-12-2024) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.03 SEIZING OF DOGS.
   Any police officer or dog warden may seize any dog found at large in the
borough. Such dogs are to be impounded in a licensed kennel.
(Prior Code, § 2, 103) (Ord. 248, passed 1-2-1977; Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992)
§ 92.04 LICENSED DOGS.
   (A)   Owners of licensed dogs are to be notified by registered or certified
mail, with return receipt, that the dog is impounded and will be disposed of in
five days if not claimed.
   (B)   Five days after the return receipt has been received, and the dog has
not been claimed, the dog may be sold or destroyed in accordance with the 1982
Dog Law, being 3 P.S. Chapter 8, Articles I through XII.
(Prior Code, § 2, 104) (Ord. 248, passed 1-22-1977; Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992)
§ 92.05 UNLICENSED DOGS.
   Unlicensed dogs that are seized are to be held in such kennel for 48 hours
and, if not claimed, may be destroyed in accordance with the 1982 Dog Law,
being 3 P.S. Chapter 8, Articles I through XII.
(Prior Code, § 2, 105) (Ord. 248, passed 1-22-1977; Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992)
§ 92.06 THREATENING DOGS.
   Dogs that, in the opinion of any police officer or dog warden, constitutes a
threat to public health and welfare, may be killed by the police or dog warden.
(Prior Code, § 2, 106) (Ord. 248, passed 1-22-1977; Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992)
REGULATING KEEPING OF ANIMALS
§ 92.20 DEFINITIONS.
   In this subchapter, the singular shall include the plural, the plural shall
include the singular, and the masculine shall include the feminine. For the
purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ANIMAL. Any domestic animal or fowl, any wild animal, or any household pet.
   DOMESTIC ANIMAL. Any animal normally or ordinarily domesticated or raised in
this area and climate as livestock or for work or breeding purposes, or
normally or ordinarily kept as a household pet.
   HOUSEHOLD PET. Any dog, cat, or other domestic animal normally and
ordinarily kept in or permitted to be at large in the dwelling of its owner.
   LARGE ANIMAL. Any wild or domestic animal of the bovine, equine, goat, emu,
llama, ostrich, sheep, or swine family.
   PERSON. Any person, firm, partnership, association, or corporation.
   SMALL ANIMAL. Any wild or domestic animal such as a rabbit, hare, guinea
pig, rat, mouse, or chinchilla, and any domestic fowl such as a chicken,
turkey, goose, duck, or pigeon (excepting homing pigeons).
   WILD ANIMAL. Any animal, including bird, fowl, or reptile not normally or
ordinarily domesticated, not normally or ordinarily raised in this area and
climate as livestock or for work or breeding purposes, or not capable of being
kept as a household pet.
(Prior Code, § 2, 201) (Ord. passed 7-2-1962; Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992; Ord.
2024-11-12, passed 11-12-2024)
§ 92.21 CERTAIN ANIMALS PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep any large animals, pigs, hogs,
swine, alligators, poisonous reptiles, or other types of poisonous animals,
poisonous spiders, poisonous insects, or snakes exceeding three feet in length
at any place within the borough.
(Prior Code, § 2, 202) (Ord. passed 7-2-1962; Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992; Ord.
2024-11-12, passed 11-12-2024) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.22 KEEPING OF ANIMALS REGULATED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep any domestic animals, except
household pets, except as provided in this section.
   (A)   Large animals shall be confined in quarters no part of which shall be
closer than 100 feet from the exterior limits of any dwelling or of any
property line.
   (B)   Small animals shall be kept confined in quarters no part of which
shall be closer than 25 feet from the exterior limits of any dwelling or of any
property line.
   (C)   The keeper of every such animal shall confine the same in an enclosure
sufficient to prevent such animal from running at large, and such enclosure
shall be of a size and construction conducive to the animal’s health, and
adequate sanitary drainage facilities shall be provided.
   (D)   Every keeper of any animal shall cause the litter and droppings
therefrom to be collected daily in a container or receptacle that when closed
shall be rat-proof and fly-tight, and after every such collection shall cause
such container or receptacle to be kept closed. At least twice a week, every
such keeper shall cause all litter and droppings so collected to be disposed of
in such manner as not to permit the presence of fly larvae.
   (E)   Every keeper of any animal shall cause all feed provided therefor to
be stored and kept in a rat-proof and fly-tight building, box, container, or
receptacle.
(Prior Code, § 2, 203) (Ord. passed 7-2-1962; Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992)
Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.23 HOUSEHOLD PETS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep any household pet, except as
provided in this section.
   (A)   If any such pet shall be kept in a dwelling owned or occupied by its
owner, such owner shall be required to follow such procedures and practices, as
to the number of such pets to be kept there, and as to sanitation, to ensure
that no public nuisance shall be created or maintained and no threat to the
health of persons living elsewhere than in such dwelling shall be created. A
limit of two dogs per household is hereby imposed.
   (B)   If any such pet shall be kept in an enclosure outside such dwelling,
the provisions of §
92.23, insofar as the same applies to small animals, shall be applicable to the
keeping of such household pets.
(Prior Code, § 2, 204) (Ord. passed 7-2-1962; Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992)
Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.24 VIOLATION OF STATE LAW.
   Any violation of this subchapter that would also violate any state law shall
be prosecuted under that state law and not under this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 2, 205) (Ord. passed 7-2-1962; Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992)
§ 92.25 ANIMAL DEFECATION ON PUBLIC AND PRIVATE PROPERTY RESTRICTED.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      ANIMAL. Any domestic animal or fowl, any wild animal, or any household
pet, including, but not limited to, dog or cat.
      PERSON. Any individual, firm, partnership, association, or corporate
entity.
   (B)   Regulation. No person, having possession, custody, or control of any
animal, shall knowingly or negligently permit any dog or other animal to
defecate upon any gutter, street, driveway, alley curb, or sidewalk in the
borough, or upon the floors or stairways of any building or place frequented by
the stairways of any building abutting on a public park, cemetery, or public
area, or upon any private property, with the exception of private property
which is owned or leased by the person having possession, custody, or control
of the animal; or a guide accompanying any blind person or a dog used to assist
any other physically handicapped person.
(Ord. 2023-07-03, passed 8-14-2023; Ord. 2024-11-12, passed 11-12-2024)
Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   The first two times an animal is seized pursuant to §
92.03, the owner shall pay a fine of $50 to the borough as well as reasonable
fees for keeping the animal in a kennel as fixed pursuant to a resolution by
the Borough Council.
      (2)   Any person allowing an animal to run at large a third time in
violation of §§
92.01 through
92.06 shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less
than $100 and not more than $600; and in default of payment, to imprisonment
for a term not to exceed 30 days.
(Prior Code, § 2, 107)
   (C)   Any person who shall violate any provision of §§
92.22 through
92.24 shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine not less than
$50 and not exceeding $600 plus costs and, in default of payment, to undergo
imprisonment for a term not to exceed 30 days.
(Prior Code, § 2, 206)
   (D)   Any person found to be in violation of §
92.25 shall, upon conviction therefor, pay a fine not less than $100 nor more
than $600 and, in default of payment, be imprisoned for a term not to exceed 30
days.
(Ord. passed 7-2-1962; Ord. 248, passed 1-22-1977; Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992;
Ord. 2023-07-03, passed 8-14-203; Ord. 2024-11-12, passed 11-12-2024)
CHAPTER 93: HEALTH AND SAFETY
Section
Private Property Maintenance
   
93.001   Short title
   
93.002   Preface
   
93.003   Authority
   
93.004   Definitions
   
93.005   Application
   
93.006   Buildings and structures
   
93.007   Yards, open lots, parking areas
   
93.008   Infestation, prevention, and correction
   
93.009   Miscellaneous provisions
   
93.010   Responsibilities of occupants
   
93.011   Responsibilities of owners
   
93.012   Inspection
   
93.013   Notice to comply
   
93.014   Authority to remedy noncompliance
   
93.015   Hearing
   
93.016   Owners severally responsible
   
93.017   Remedies not mutually exclusive
Maximum Sound Levels
   
93.030   Purpose and scope
   
93.031   Application
   
93.032   Exemptions
   
93.033   Definitions
   
93.034   Enforcement
   
93.035   Administration
   
93.036   Appeals Board
   
93.037   Noise limitations
   
93.038   Use of property
   
93.039   Test procedures
Storage of Motor Vehicle Nuisances
   
93.050   Definitions
   
93.051   Motor vehicle nuisances prohibited
   
93.052   Storage of motor vehicle nuisances permitted
   
93.053   Inspection of premises; notice to comply
   
93.054   Authority to remedy noncompliance
   
93.055   Hearing
   
93.056   Remedies not mutually exclusive
Storage of Abandoned Equipment
   
93.070   Definitions
   
93.071   Storage of nuisances prohibited
   
93.072   Storage requirements
   
93.073   Inspection of premises; notice to comply
   
93.074   Authority to remedy noncompliance
   
93.075   Hearing
   
93.076   Remedies not mutually exclusive
 
   
93.999   Penalty
PRIVATE PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
§ 93.001 SHORT TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known and cited as the “Borough of Everett Property
Maintenance Ordinance.”
(Prior Code, § 10, 101) (Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992)
§ 93.002 PREFACE.
   Recognizing the need within the borough to establish certain minimum health
and safety requirements for those buildings, structures, or properties which
are used or associated with human occupancy, this subchapter hereby establishes
standards which the Borough Council considers to be fair and essential in
meeting those minimum requirements.
(Prior Code, § 10, 102) (Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992)
§ 93.003 AUTHORITY.
   This subchapter, and the objectives leading to its enactment, are authorized
by this code.
(Prior Code, § 10, 103) (Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992)
§ 93.004 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BUILDING. A roofed structure, enclosed by one or more walls, for the
shelter, housing, storage, or enclosure of persons, goods, materials,
equipment, or animals.
   COURT. An open and unoccupied space on a lot enclosed on at least three
sides by the walls of a building.
   DANGEROUS BUILDING. All buildings or structures which have any or all of the
following defects shall be deemed DANGEROUS BUILDINGS:
      (1)   Those whose interior walls or other vertical structure members
list, lean, or buckle to such an extent that a plumb line passing through the
center of gravity falls outside the middle third of its base;
      (2)   Those which, exclusive of the foundation, show damage or
deterioration to 33% of the supporting member or members, or damage or
deterioration to 50% of the non-supporting enclosing or outside walls or
covering;
      (3)   Those which have improperly distributed loads upon the floors or
roofs or in which the same are overloaded, or which have insufficient strength
to be reasonably safe for the purpose used;
      (4)   Those which have been damaged by fire, wind, or other causes so as
to be dangerous to life, safety, or the general health and welfare of the
occupants or the public;
      (5)   Those which are so damaged, dilapidated, decayed, unsafe,
unsanitary, vermin infested, or which so utterly fail to provide the amenities
essential to decent living that they are unfit for human habitation or are
likely to cause sickness or disease so as to work injury to the health, safety,
or general welfare of the occupants or the public;
      (6)   Those which have parts thereof which are so attached that they may
fall and work injury to the health, safety, or general welfare of the occupants
or the public, or cause damage to public property;
      (7)   Those which lack illumination, ventilation, or sanitation
facilities or, because of another condition, are unsafe, unsanitary, or
otherwise dangerous to the health, safety, or general welfare of the occupants
or the public;
      (8)   Those which, because of their location, are unsanitary or otherwise
dangerous to the health, safety, or general welfare of the occupants or the
public; and/or
      (9)   Those existing in violation of any provision of the codes or other
ordinances of the borough.
   GARBAGE. Putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking, and consumption of food.
   INFESTATION. The presence of insects, rodents, vermin, and/or other pests.
   LESSEE. Owner for the purpose of this subchapter, when the lessor holds the
LESSEE responsible for maintenance and repairs.
   LOT. Plot, tract, premises, or parcel of land, with or without improvements
thereto.
   OWNER. Any person or persons, jointly or severally, firm, corporation, or
other entity which, either by conveyance or inheritance or otherwise, is vested
with the title to a lot and/or improvements thereto or who retains the
exclusive control of such a lot and/or improvements thereto in his or her
capacity as a legal representative, such as an administrator, trustee,
executor, and the like.
   PERSON. A natural person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, or
other legal entity.
   REFUSE. All putrescible and non-putrescible solid wastes, including garbage,
rubbish, ashes, dead animals, and market and industrial wastes.
   RUBBISH. Combustible and noncombustible waste materials, including garbage,
refuse, glass, metal, paper, wood, rags, cartons, boxes, rubber, leather, tin
cans, bottles, mineral matter, crockery, lumber, wire, pipe, broken stone or
cement, tree branches, plant growth, building materials, plumbing or electrical
materials, furniture, or scrap iron.
   UNOCCUPIED HAZARD. Any building, or part thereof, or human-made structure,
which remains unoccupied for a period of more than six months, with either
doors, windows, or other openings broken, removed, boarded or sealed up, or any
building under construction upon which little or no construction work has been
performed for a period of more than six months.
   YARD. Any open space on the same lot with a building and, for the most part,
unobstructed from the ground up.
(Prior Code, § 10, 104) (Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992; Ord. 2004-07-01, passed 7-
12-2004)
§ 93.005 APPLICATION.
   The provisions of this subchapter shall supplement local laws, ordinances,
or regulations existing in the borough or those of the commonwealth. Where a
provision of this subchapter is found to be in conflict with any provision of a
local law, ordinance, code, or regulation or those of the commonwealth, the
provisions which are more restrictive or which establish the higher standard
shall prevail.
(Prior Code, § 10, 105) (Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992)
§ 93.006 BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES.
   (A)   No owner of any building or structure shall fail to take steps and
perform such maintenance thereto, as may be required from time to time, to
ensure the property is safe, sound, sanitary, and secure and does not present a
health and/or safety hazard to surrounding properties and to the general
populace.
   (B)   No owner of any unoccupied building or structure shall fail to take
such steps as may be required to ensure that these are securely closed so as to
prohibit and deter entry thereto and to ensure that no health and/or safety
hazard, or threat thereof, is precipitated due to a lack of maintenance or due
to neglect.
   (C)   Owners of any and all unoccupied buildings and/or structures which,
through neglect, have deteriorated to the point of being classified as
unoccupied hazards, and therefore constitute a severe health and/or safety
hazard, shall, upon direction of the Borough Council, remove, or cause the
removal of, the building and/or structure.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to allow a
dangerous building and/or structure to exist.
   (E)   Persons, firms, or corporations owning dangerous buildings or
structures shall, upon direction of the borough, remove or cause the removal of
the dangerous building and/or structure.
(Prior Code, § 10, 106) (Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992; Ord. 2004-07-01, passed 7-
12-2004) Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.007 YARDS, OPEN LOTS, PARKING AREAS.
   No person shall permit the following.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, or lessee to permit:
      (1)   Fences and/or minor structures to be constructed and maintained so
as to prevent a safety or health hazard to persons and/or property;
      (2)   The development or accumulation of hazards, rodent harborage, and/
or infestation upon yards, courts, or lots;
      (3)   Objectionable materials to accumulate and to be blown about the
surrounding neighborhood;
      (4)   Wells, cesspools, cisterns, sedimentation ponds, stormwater
management impoundment ponds, and/or ponds of a similar nature to remain open
without adequate fencing or barricades to prevent access thereto by the general
public;
      (5)   The accumulation of heavy undergrowth and/or vegetation which would
impair the health and/or safety of the neighborhood, nor shall they permit any
trees, plants, or shrubbery, or any portion thereof, to grow on his or her
property which constitute a safety hazard to pedestrian and/or vehicular
traffic; or
      (6)   Weeds, brush, grass to grow in height in excess of six inches upon
the land owned, occupied, or leased by any owner, occupant, or lessee to the
person having an interest in land in the borough. All such weeds, brush, or
grass in excess of six inches in height shall be cut and removed by the owner,
occupant, lessee, or other person having an interest in the land. It shall be
unlawful for any person having an interest in the land as set forth above not
to cut or remove any weeds, brush, grass which exceeds six inches in height.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, or lessee to permit
rubbish to be stored, maintained, or accumulated upon any yard, lot, parking
area, or other private grounds or in or upon any porch, carport, breezeway, or
unenclosed garage or areas open to the public view of such person, owner, or
lessee within the borough.
(Prior Code, § 10, 107) (Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992; Ord. 99-09-02, passed 9-13-
1999; Ord. 2004-07-01, passed 7-12-2004) Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.008 INFESTATION, PREVENTION, AND CORRECTION.
   (A)   Grounds, buildings, and structures shall be maintained free of insect,
vermin, and rodent harborage and infestation.
   (B)   Adequate sanitary facilities and methods shall be used for the
collection, storage, handling, and disposal of garbage and refuse.
   (C)   Where there exists rodent and vermin infestation, corrective measures
shall be undertaken by the property owner and/or occupant to alleviate the
existing problem(s), to include screening, extermination, and/or garbage and
refuse control. Methods employed for extermination shall conform with generally
accepted practices.
(Prior Code, § 10, 108) (Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992) Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.009 MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS.
   No person shall permit:
   (A)   Roof, surface, and/or sanitary drainage to create a safety and/or
health hazard to persons and/or property by reason of inadequate and/or
improper construction, or maintenance or manner of discharge;
   (B)   Roof gutters, drains, or any other systems designed and constructed to
transport stormwater to be discharged into any sanitary sewage system and/or
any part thereof; or
   (C)   Any refrigerator, freezer, and/or other similar storage chest to be
discarded, abandoned, or stored in any place or location which is accessible to
the general public without first completely removing any and all locking
devices and/or doors.
(Prior Code, § 10, 109) (Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992) Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.010 RESPONSIBILITIES OF OCCUPANTS.
   Any occupant of a premises shall be responsible for compliance with the
provisions of this subchapter with respect to the maintenance of that part of
the premises which he or she occupies and/or controls in a safe, sound, and/or
sanitary condition pursuant to the terms of the contract/agreement under which
he or she exercises occupancy and/or control thereof.
(Prior Code, § 10, 110) (Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992)
§ 93.011 RESPONSIBILITIES OF OWNERS.
   (A)   Owners of premises shall comply with the provisions of this subchapter
as well as operators and occupants, regardless of any agreements between owners
and occupants or occupants as to which party shall assume such responsibility.
   (B)   In instances where an occupant is responsible, or shares
responsibility with an owner, for the existence of one or more violations of
this subchapter, said occupant shall be deemed responsible and treated as if an
owner within the true intent and meaning of the subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 10, 111) (Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992) Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.012 INSPECTION.
   (A)   The Borough Council may, or may cause, through an authorized
representative of the borough, entry onto premises for the purpose of
inspection of any and all premises, properties, buildings, and/or structures
located within the borough for ascertaining the existence of violations. In
those matters where the nature of an alleged violation is such that an
inspection of the interior of a building or structure is necessary, prior
arrangements must be made with the owner, or his or her agent, to secure access
thereof.
   (B)   Whenever the borough or its authorized representative find that an
emergency exists which requires immediate action to protect the public health,
it may, without notice or hearing, issue an order reciting the existence of
such emergency and requiring that such action be taken as is necessary to meet
the emergency. Notwithstanding the other provisions of this subchapter, such an
order shall be effective immediately. Any person, firm, or corporation to whom
such an order is directed shall comply therewith immediately but, upon petition
to the borough or its authorized representative, shall be afforded a hearing as
soon as possible. After such hearing, depending upon the findings as to whether
the provisions of the subchapter have been complied with, the borough or its
authorized representative shall continue such order in effect or modify or
revoke it. The cost of abating such emergency shall be collected in the same
manner as provided herein for other causes.
(Prior Code, § 10, 112) (Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992; Ord. 2004-07-01, passed 7-
12-2004)
§ 93.013 NOTICE TO COMPLY.
   (A)   If noncompliance with the provisions of this subchapter constitutes a
nuisance, or if any condition, structure, or improvement poses a threat to the
health, safety, or welfare of the public, the Police Department shall issue a
written notice to be served by registered or certified mail upon the owner of
said premises, or, if the owner’s whereabouts or identity be unknown, by
posting the notice conspicuously upon the offending premises.
   (B)   Said notice shall specify the condition or structure or improvement
complained of, and shall require the owner to commence to remove or otherwise
rectify the condition or structure or improvement as set forth therein within
ten days of mailing or posting of said notice, and thereafter, to fully comply
with the requirements of the notice within a reasonable time.
(Prior Code, § 10, 113) (Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992) Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.014 AUTHORITY TO REMEDY NONCOMPLIANCE.
   If the owner does not comply with the notice to abate the conditions, within
the time limit prescribed, the borough shall have the authority to take
measures to correct the conditions and collect the cost of such corrections
plus 10% of all costs. The borough, in such event and pursuant to its statutory
or otherwise authorized police powers, shall have the right and power to enter
upon the offending premises to accomplish the foregoing.
(Prior Code, § 10, 114) (Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992)
§ 93.015 HEARING.
   (A)   Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Police Department may
request and shall then be granted a hearing before the Borough Council;
provided, he or she files with the Borough Council within ten days after notice
of the Police Department’s decision, a written petition requesting such hearing
and setting forth a brief statement of the grounds therefor. The hearing shall
commence not later than 30 days after the date on which the petition was filed
unless postponed for sufficient cause.
   (B)   After such hearing, the Borough Council shall sustain, modify, or
overrule the action of the Police Department.
(Prior Code, § 10, 115) (Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992)
§ 93.016 OWNERS SEVERALLY RESPONSIBLE.
   If the premises are owned by more than one owner, such owner shall severally
be subject to prosecution for the violation of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 10, 117) (Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992)
§ 93.017 REMEDIES NOT MUTUALLY EXCLUSIVE.
   The remedies provided herein for the enforcement of this subchapter, or any
remedy provided by law, shall not be deemed mutually exclusive; rather, they
may be employed simultaneously or consecutively, at the option of the Borough
Council.
(Prior Code, § 10, 118) (Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992)
MAXIMUM SOUND LEVELS
§ 93.030 PURPOSE AND SCOPE.
   It is the purpose and scope of this subchapter to provide regulations
defining the maximum sound levels that vehicles, appliances, and equipment
shall be allowed to produce at specified distances from these devices, and also
to provide for the prohibition of other kinds of prohibited noises. These
regulations and prohibitions are intended to protect the physical, mental, and
social wellbeing of the residents of the borough.
(Prior Code, § 10, 301) (Ord. 226, passed 4-7-1969; Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992)
§ 93.031 APPLICATION.
   This subchapter shall apply:
   (A)   To all types of vehicles, appliances, and equipment, whether privately
or publicly owned;
   (B)   To sounds of any time duration; and
   (C)   To both the owner and operator of vehicles, appliances, equipment,
devices, animals, or any other object creating noises.
(Prior Code, § 10, 302) (Ord. 226, passed 4-7-1969; Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992)
§ 93.032 EXEMPTIONS.
   The following devices are exempt from the provisions of these regulations:
   (A)   Aircraft (except model aircraft);
   (B)   Police, fire, ambulance, and other governmental emergency vehicles;
   (C)   Backup alarm devices on trucks and other equipment when installed and
operated in accordance with Society of Automotive Engineers recommended
practice J 994, “Criteria for Backup Alarm Devices;” and
   (D)   Governmental warning devices (i.e., civil defense or fire siren).
(Prior Code, § 10, 303) (Ord. 226, passed 4-7-1969; Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992)
§ 93.033 DEFINITIONS.
   All acoustical terminology shall be that contained in ANSI S1.1, “Acoustical
Terminology.” For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ANSI. American National Standards Institute or its successors.
   APPLIANCE. Any device or combination of devices used or capable of being
used as a means of accomplishing a desired end, such as a window air
conditioning unit.
   DAY. The 24-hour period starting at local midnight.
   DAYTIME. 6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.
   DECIBEL (dB). A unit of sound level which is a division of logarithmic scale
used to express the ratio of the sound intensity of the source to the intensity
of an arbitrarily chosen reference intensity. The ratio is expressed on the
DECIBEL SCALE by multiplying its base ten logarithm by ten.
   EQUIPMENT. Any devices or combination of devices to accomplish a desired
end, such as a chainsaw, bulldozer, and the like.
   EXCESSIVE NOISE. The sound which is:
      (1)   Injurious or which unreasonably interferes with the comfortable
enjoyment of life and property. Measured noise levels in excess of limits
established in these regulations or those specified in valid permits are
declared to be excessive noise; or
      (2)   Annoying to a person of ordinary sensibilities.
   FLUCTUATING NOISE. A noise whose sound level varies significantly with time.
   IMPULSIVE NOISE. Characterized by brief excursions of sound level. The
duration of a single impulse is usually less than one second.
   INTERMITTENT NOISE. A noise whose sound level exceeds the ambient noise
levels at least twice during the period of observation, which is one minute or
more. The period of time during which the level of the noise remains at an
essentially constant value different from that of the ambient is on the order
of one second or more.
   NOISE. Any sound emitted by a person, animal, vehicle, appliance, equipment,
or other device and its environmental interaction.
   ORDINANCE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. Any person appointed by the borough with
responsibility to enforce municipal ordinances, or any sworn member of the
Borough Police Department.
   PERIOD OF OBSERVATION. The time interval during which acoustical data are
obtained. The PERIOD OF OBSERVATION is determined by the characteristics of the
noise being measured and the instrumentation being used. The PERIOD OF
OBSERVATION must be at least as long as the response time of the
instrumentation. The greater the variance in individual sound level, the longer
must be the OBSERVATION TIME for a given expected accuracy of measurement.
   PERSON. Either the owner or operator of vehicles, appliances, equipment, or
devices.
   S.A.E. Society of Automotive Engineers.
   SOUND LEVEL (NOISE LEVEL). Airborne sound levels are expressed in dB and
obtained by the sue of specific frequency dependent weighting networks, as
specified in the referenced standards. The specific weighting network used must
be indicated by the proper notation. If the A-weighting is employed, the SOUND
LEVEL is identified as dB(A).
   SOUND LEVEL METER. An instrument, or combination of instruments, which meets
or exceeds the requirements for an ANSI type S1A or S2A SOUND LEVEL METER.
   STEADY NOISE. A noise whose level remains essentially constant (i.e.,
fluctuations are less than five dB) during the period of observation is a
STEADY NOISE.
   VEHICLE. Any device, or combination of devices, used for or capable of being
used for transporting persons or property. VEHICLES include, but are not
limited to, the following: automobiles, trucks, buses, motorcycles, motorized
bicycles, snowmobiles, scooters, all-terrain vehicles, go-carts, racers and
like devices, farm machinery, industrial machinery, highway graders, trailers,
graders, and semitrailers.
(Prior Code, § 10, 304) (Ord. 226, passed 4-7-1969; Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992)
§ 93.034 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Any emission of noise from any source in excess of the limitation
established in or pursuant to this subchapter herein described shall be deemed
and is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and may be abated, in addition
to the administrative proceedings, fines, and penalties herein provided. Such
abatement may be made by any police officer or the Ordinance Enforcement
Officer, or may be made by order of the Court of Common Pleas of the county on
complaint or petition filed on behalf of the borough.
   (B)   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed to impair any cause of
action, or legal remedy thereof, of any person or the public for injury or
damage arising from the emission or release into the atmosphere or ground from
any source whatever of noise in such place or manner, or at such levels, which
may give rise to such cause of action.
   (C)   The noise enforcement officers of the borough shall:
      (1)   Be qualified by training and experience to perform the necessary
measurements and procedures required to determine violations of the provisions
of this subchapter;
      (2)   File complaints with the District Justice to prosecute violations
of this subchapter;
      (3)   Investigate complaints of violations of this subchapter and make
inspections and observations of noise conditions; and
      (4)   Be authorized to issue a warning to persons considered in violation
of these regulations, a warning which may allow an appropriate time not to
exceed 30 calendar days for correction to bring the offending vehicle(s),
appliance(s), equipment, or other device(s) within the provisions of these
regulations before enforcement by prosecution.
(Prior Code, § 10, 305) (Ord. 226, passed 4-7-1969; Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992)
§ 93.035 ADMINISTRATION.
   The borough shall:
   (A)   Have available in convenient form as in a unit the provisions of this
subchapter and the recommended practices, rules, regulations, and standards
which have been adopted. A copy of the information sources shall be kept on
file in the borough offices;
   (B)   Prepare and maintain records of all orders issued by the noise
enforcement officers and the Appeals Board;
   (C)   By the Police Chief, issue all standards, permits, certificates,
notices, or other matters required under the provisions of this subchapter and
notify all persons concerned of any decisions rendered and provided such
persons with an opportunity to be heard as herein set forth; and
   (D)   Establish an Advisory Committee to investigate and make
recommendations from time to time to the Borough Council with respect to needed
additions or revisions of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 10, 306) (Ord. 226, passed 4-7-1969; Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992)
§ 93.036 APPEALS BOARD.
   (A)   The Borough Council shall establish an Appeals Board consisting of
five members to hear and decide cases regarding interpretations of this
subchapter and variances for undue hardship situations.
   (B)   The membership of the Appeals Board shall contain at least one member
who is qualified by training and experience in the field of noise control and
noise control regulations.
(Prior Code, § 10, 307) (Ord. 226, passed 4-7-1969; Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992)
§ 93.037 NOISE LIMITATIONS.
   (A)   General. No person shall make, permit, or cause to be made any
excessive noise of any kind by crying, calling, or shouting, or by means of any
whistle, rattle, bell, gong, clapper, hammer, drum, horn, hand organ,
mechanically operated piano, other musical instrument, wind instrument,
mechanical device, radio, phonograph, sound amplifying or other similar
electronic device unless said person has obtained a special permit from the
Police Chief as provided in this subchapter.
   (B)   Musical instruments. No person shall use or perform on any hand organ
or other musical instrument or device, for pay or in expectation of payment, in
any public way or public open space of the borough before 6:00 a.m. or after
10:00 p.m. of the day unless said person has obtained a special permit from the
Police Chief.
   (C)   Noise from premises. No person owning, or in possession or control of,
any building or premises shall use the same, permit the use of the same, or
rent the same to be used for any business or employment or residential use, or
for any purpose of pleasure or recreation, if such use shall, by its boisterous
nature, disturb or destroy the peace of the neighborhood as measured at the
property line in which such building or premises is situated, or be dangerous
or detrimental to health.
   (D)   Equipment noise. It shall be unlawful for any person to use any air
power equipment, pile driver, shovel, hammer, derrick, hoist, tractor, roller,
or other mechanical equipment operated by fuel, by electric power, or air power
in building or construction operations from 10:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. of the
following day, except for emergency work on public improvements, work of public
service utilities, and municipal services unless such equipment has been
manufactured or modified for sound control and meets the provisions of this
subchapter.
   (E)   Noise in handling refuse cans. No person shall make any unnecessary
noise in the handling of ash, trash, and garbage cans, either in loading or
unloading, whether full or empty.
   (F)   Noise in vicinity of hospitals, schools, and churches. No person shall
make any unnecessary noise in the vicinity of any hospital or church during
hours of public worship, or school during school hours.
   (G)   Unlawful to keep noisy animals. No person shall keep, or permit to be
kept, harbor, or otherwise maintain any animal which shall disturb the quiet of
any public street or other public place, or of any neighborhood. Provided,
however, that a NOISY ANIMAL shall be defined as one or more animals which
makes noises habitually, so as to constitute annoyance to a person of ordinary
sensibilities.
   (H)   Noise by peddlers. No peddler or other person who plies a trade or
calling of any nature on the streets of the borough shall use any horn, bell,
or other sound instrument to make any noise tending to disturb the peace and
quiet of the neighborhood, for the purpose of directing attention to his or her
wares, trade, or calling.
   (I)   Use of horns and other devices on vehicles. No person operating any
vehicle, other than police, fire, public service, or ambulance operators, shall
sound any horn, bell, gong, siren, or whistle, except for the ordinary horn
installed on such vehicle by the manufacturer, or sound any type of horn except
when reasonably necessary to prevent accidents or to otherwise comply with the
law of motor vehicles.
   (J)   Public performances. The operational performance standards established
by this subchapter shall not apply to any public performance being conducted in
accordance with provisions of a special permit obtained from the Police Chief
for the conduct thereof.
   (K)   Vehicles. No person shall operate either a motor vehicle of a type
subject to registration, except in police, fire equipment, ambulances, or other
government emergency vehicles at any time or under any condition of grade,
load, acceleration, or deceleration in such a manner as to exceed the following
noise limits for the category of minor vehicles based on a distance of 50 feet
from the center of the lane traveled on within the speed limit specified in
this section under test procedures established by §
93.039.
 
                                                                             Speed Speed
                                                                             Limit Limit
                                                                             of 35 of
Type of Vehicle                                                              mph   more
                                                                             or    than
                                                                             Less  35
                                                                                   mph
Any motorcycle or motor-driven cycle                                         78 dB 82 dB
                                                                             (A)   (A)
Any motor vehicle with a manufacturer’s gross combination weight rating of 86 dB 90 dB
10,000 lbs. or more and any combination of vehicles towed by such motor      (A)   (A)
vehicle
Any other vehicle or any combination of vehicles towed by such motor         76 dB 82 dB
vehicles                                                                     (A)   (A)
 
      (1)   This division (K) applies to the total noise from a vehicle or
combination of vehicles and shall not be construed as limiting or precluding
the enforcement of any other provisions of this code relating to motor vehicle
mufflers for noise control.
      (2)   No person shall modify or change the exhaust muffler, intake
muffler, or any other noise abatement device of a motor vehicle so that the
noise level is increased above that emitted by the vehicle as originally
manufactured. Procedures used to establish compliance with this division (K)
shall be those used to establish compliance of a new motor vehicle with the
requirements of this subchapter.
      (3)   No person shall sell or lease or offer for sale or lease a new or
secondhand vehicle that produces a maximum noise exceeding the noise limit at a
distance of 50 feet from the center line of travel as stated in this division
(K). The manufacturer, distributor, importer, or designated agent shall, if
requested, certify in writing to the borough that his or her vehicle sold or
leased within the borough complies with the provisions of this subchapter.
      (4)   No person shall operate, or permit to be operated, a gasoline
powered or diesel powered motor vehicle on the streets, roads, alleys, or
highways within the borough utilizing, in said operation, an engine brake,
permitting excessive noise to be created by said motor vehicle. This section
shall not apply to emergency driving situations requiring the utilization of an
engine brake to protect the safety and property of the residents of the
borough, other motor vehicle operators, pedestrians, and the operator and
passengers of the motor vehicle involved in said emergency situation.
   (L)   Equipment.
      (1)   No person shall operate any powered equipment or powered hand tool
that produces a maximum noise level exceeding the following noise limits at a
distance of 50 feet, under test procedures established by §
93.039:
         (a)   Construction and industrial machinery, such as crawler-tractors,
dozers, rotary drills and augers, loaders, power shovels, cranes, derricks,
motor graders, paving machines, off-highway trucks, ditchers, trenchers,
compactors, scrapers, pavement breakers, compressors, and pneumatic power
equipment, but not including pile drivers: 86 dB(A);
         (b)   Agricultural tractors and equipment: 86 dB(A);
         (c)   Powered commercial equipment of 2 hp or less intended for
infrequent use in residential areas, such as chain saws, pavement breakers, log
chippers, powered hand tools, and the like: 84 dB(A); and
         (d)   Powered equipment intended for repetitive use in residential
areas, such as lawn mowers, small lawn and garden tolls, riding tractors, snow
removal equipment, and the like: 70 dB(A).
      (2)   No person shall sell or lease or offer for sale or lease new or
secondhand equipment that produces a maximum noise exceeding the noise limit at
a distance of 50 feet as stated in division (L)(1) above. The manufacturer,
distributor, importer, or designated agent shall, if requested, certify in
writing to the borough that his or her equipment sold or leased within the
borough complies with the provisions of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 10, 308) (Ord. 226, passed 4-7-1969; Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992;
Ord. 99-09-01, passed 9-13-1999) Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.038 USE OF PROPERTY.
   (A)   Any property use established in a zoning district as defined and
designated under the provisions of the borough zoning ordinance, if any, shall
be such as to comply with the performance standards governing noise set forth
hereinafter for the district in which such use shall be located.
   (B)   Noise levels shall be measured in terms of the sound level in dB(A)
using equipment which meets the requirements established in this subchapter.
   (C)   In all Commercial and Industrial Zoning Districts, if any, at no point
on the boundary of any residential zoning district shall the sound level of any
individual operation or business, or the combined operations of any person,
firm, or corporation exceed the dBA levels shown below for the zoning district
indicated from 10:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. of the following day, as measured under
the test procedures established by §
93.039(B).
   (D)   Maximum sound levels dB(A) along district boundaries as measured by
conventional sound level meters on slow response:
 
               Residential Commercial/Industrial
A-scale levels 55 dB(A)    62 dB(A)
 
   (E)   In Commercial Zoning Districts, all activities involving the
production, processing, cleaning, servicing, testing, repair of materials,
goods or products, or any property use shall conform with the performance
standards stated above, provided that performance standards shall, in every
case, be applied at the boundaries of the lot on which any such activities take
place, except in such cases where the maximum permitted sound levels may be
exceeded at a more distant point.
   (F)   In residential zoning districts, any property use shall conform with
the performance standards stated above for Residential District boundaries,
provided that performance standards shall, in every case, be applied at the
boundaries of the lot on which such use is established, except in such cases
where the maximum permitted sound levels may be exceeded at a more distant
point.
   (G)   The maximum sound levels established in this section to be applied to
the boundaries of a lot shall not apply to construction sites and emergency
operations. Construction site noise levels shall be regulated by §
93.037(K).
(Prior Code, § 10, 309) (Ord. 226, passed 4-7-1969; Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992)
Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.039 TEST PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Test procedures to determine whether maximum noises emitted by new
motor vehicles sold or offered for sale or lease meet the noise limits stated
in §
93.037(L) shall be in substantial conformity with standards and recommended
practice established by the S.A.E., Incorporated, and the State Department of
Environmental Resources as well as the United States Environmental Protection
Agency and such other and further standards as may be propounded in the Code of
Recommended Practices of the borough.
   (B)   Test procedures to determine whether maximum noises emitted by powered
equipment or powered hand tools, sold or leased, or offered for sale or lease,
meet the noise limits stated in §
93.037(L) shall be in substantial conformity with Standards and Recommended
Practices established by the S.A.E., Incorporated, and the State Department of
Environmental Resources as well as the United States Environmental Protection
Agency and such other and further standards as may be propounded in the Code of
Recommended Practices of the borough.
(Prior Code, § 10, 310) (Ord. 226, passed 4-7-1969; Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992)
STORAGE OF MOTOR VEHICLE NUISANCES
§ 93.050 DEFINITIONS.
   In this subchapter, the singular shall include the plural, the plural shall
include the singular, and the masculine shall include the feminine and the
neuter. For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   LESSEE. Owner for the purpose of this subchapter when the lessor holds the
LESSEE responsible for maintenance and repairs.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Any type of mechanical device, propelled by a motor, in which
persons or property may be transported upon public streets or highways, and
including trailers or semitrailers pulled thereby.
   NUISANCE. Any condition, structure, or improvement which shall constitute a
danger or potential danger to the health, safety, or welfare of the citizens of
the borough.
   OWNER. The actual owner, agent, or custodian of the property on which motor
vehicles are stored, whether individual or partnership, association, or
corporation.
   PERSON. A natural person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, or
other legal entity.
(Prior Code, § 10, 401) (Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992)
§ 93.051 MOTOR VEHICLE NUISANCES PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, or lessee to maintain a
motor vehicle nuisance upon the open private grounds of such person, owner, or
lessee within the borough.
   (B)   A motor vehicle nuisance shall include any motor vehicle which is
unable to move under its own power and has any of the following physical
defects:
      (1)   Broken windshields, mirrors, or other glass with sharp edges;
      (2)   One or more flat or open tires or tubes which could permit vermin
harborage;
      (3)   Missing doors, windows, hood, trunk, or other body parts which
could permit animal harborage;
      (4)   Any body parts with sharp edges, including holes resulting from
rust;
      (5)   Missing tires resulting in unsafe suspension of the motor vehicle;
      (6)   Upholstery which is torn or open which could permit animal and/or
vermin harborage;
      (7)   Broken head lamps or tail lamps with sharp edges;
      (8)   Disassembled chassis parts apart from the motor vehicle stored in a
disorderly fashion or loose in or on the vehicle;
      (9)   Protruding sharp objects from the chassis;
      (10)   Broken vehicle frame suspended from the ground in an unstable
manner;
      (11)   Leaking or damaged oil pan or gas tank which could cause fire or
explosion;
      (12)   Exposed battery containing acid;
      (13)   Inoperable locking mechanism for doors or trunk;
      (14)   Open or damaged floor boards, including trunk and firewall;
      (15)   Damaged bumpers pulled away from the perimeter of the vehicle;
      (16)   Broken grill with protruding edges;
      (17)   Loose or damaged metal trim and clips;
      (18)   Broken communication equipment antennas;
      (19)   Suspended on unstable supports; or
      (20)   Such other defects which could threaten the health, safety, and
welfare of the citizens of the borough.
(Prior Code, § 10, 402) (Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992) Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.052 STORAGE OF MOTOR VEHICLE NUISANCES PERMITTED.
   (A)   (1)   Any person, owner, or lessee who has one or more motor vehicle
nuisances as defined in §
93.051 may store such vehicle(s) in the borough only in strict compliance with
the regulations provided herein. Such person, owner, or lessee must first apply
for a permit for either temporary or permanent storage and pay a fee to the
borough in an amount as established, from time to time, by resolution of the
Borough Council.
      (2)   The motor vehicle nuisance(s) must be stored within a garage or
other enclosed building or outside within an opaque fence at least six feet
high which is locked at all times when unattended.
   (B)   (1)   With special approval of the Borough Council, motor vehicle
nuisances may also be stored outside in an area enclosed by a chain link fence,
at least six feet high, screened by shrubbery around the perimeter to the
height of the fence, with an unobstructed gate capable of admitting fire or
emergency equipment. Such gate shall remain locked at all times when
unattended.
      (2)   In addition, all gas and oil or other flammable liquid shall be
removed from the motor vehicle and its shall be kept free of vermin infestation
while being stored.
      (3)   The total area of storage of motor vehicle nuisances may not exceed
400 square feet.
   (C)   Nothing herein shall be construed to permit the storage of motor
vehicle nuisances contrary to the provisions of the borough zoning ordinance,
if any.
(Prior Code, § 10, 403) (Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992) Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.053 INSPECTION OF PREMISES; NOTICE TO COMPLY.
   (A)   (1)   The Police Department is hereby empowered to inspect private
property on which motor vehicles are stored to determine if there is compliance
with the provisions of this subchapter.
      (2)   If noncompliance with the provisions of this subchapter constitutes
a nuisance, or if any condition, structure, or improvement poses a threat to
the health, safety, or welfare of the public, he or she shall issue a written
notice to be served by registered or certified mail upon the owner of said
premises, or, if the owner’s whereabouts or identity be unknown, by posting the
notice conspicuously upon the offending premises.
   (B)   Said notice shall specify the condition or structure or improvement
complained of, and shall require the owner to commence to remove or otherwise
rectify the condition or structure or improvement as set forth therein within
ten days of mailing or posting of said notice, and thereafter, to fully comply
with the requirements of the notice within a reasonable time.
(Prior Code, § 10, 404) (Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992)
§ 93.054 AUTHORITY TO REMEDY NONCOMPLIANCE.
   (A)   If the owner of grounds on which motor vehicles are stored does not
comply with the notice to abate the nuisance within the time limit prescribed,
the borough shall have the authority to take measures to correct the conditions
and collect the cost of such corrections plus 10% of all costs.
   (B)   The borough, in such event and pursuant to its statutory or otherwise
authorized police powers, shall have the right and power to enter upon the
offending premises to accomplish the foregoing.
(Prior Code, § 10, 405) (Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992)
§ 93.055 HEARING.
   (A)   (1)   Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Police Department
may request and shall then be granted a hearing before the Borough Council,
providing he or she files with the Borough Council within ten days after notice
of the Police Department’s decision, a written petition requesting such hearing
and setting forth a brief statement of the grounds therefor.
      (2)   The hearing shall commence not later than 30 days after the date on
which the petition was filed unless postponed for sufficient cause.
   (B)   After such hearing, the Borough Council shall sustain, modify, or
overrule the action of the Police Department.
(Prior Code, § 10, 406) (Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992)
§ 93.056 REMEDIES NOT MUTUALLY EXCLUSIVE.
   The remedies provided herein for the enforcement of this subchapter, or any
remedy provided by law, shall not be deemed mutually exclusive; rather, they
may be employed simultaneously or consecutively, at the option of the Borough
Council.
(Prior Code, § 10, 408)
STORAGE OF ABANDONED EQUIPMENT
§ 93.070 DEFINITIONS.
   In this subchapter, the singular shall include the plural, the plural shall
include the singular, and the masculine shall include the feminine and the
neuter. For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   LESSEE. Owner for the purpose of this subchapter when the lessor holds the
LESSEE responsible for maintenance and repairs.
   NUISANCE. Any condition, structure, or improvement which shall constitute a
threat or potential threat to the health, safety, or welfare of the citizens of
the borough.
   OWNER. The actual owner, agent, or custodian of the property on which
machinery, equipment, or materials are stored, whether individual or
partnership, association, or corporation.
   PERSON. A natural person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, or
other legal entity.
(Prior Code, § 10, 501) (Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992)
§ 93.071 STORAGE OF NUISANCES PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to store or maintain abandoned,
unused, stripped, damaged, and generally unusable appliances, machinery, or
equipment, or construction materials in the open on private property.
   (B)   Such storage shall constitute a nuisance and/or health hazard if any
of the following conditions exist:
      (1)   Broken glass or metal parts with sharp or protruding edges;
      (2)   Containers which are conducive to the harboring and growth of
vermin or animals;
      (3)   Storage in any manner which would allow the equipment, machinery,
material, or any parts thereof to easily shift, tilt, or fall from its original
storage position;
      (4)   Containers of any liquid or material of a hazardous or potentially
hazardous nature including, but not limited to, gasoline, oil, battery acids,
refrigeration agents, and poisons;
      (5)   Refrigerators with the doors remaining attached; or
      (6)   Any other condition which shall threaten the health, safety, or
welfare of the citizens.
(Prior Code, § 10, 502) (Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992) Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.072 STORAGE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Storage of such items as listed in §
93.071 on private property shall be permitted only in strict compliance with
the regulations provided herein or with stricter regulations in other borough
ordinances, or in state or federal laws. Each person, owner, or lessee desiring
to store items described in §
93.071 shall apply for a permit for either temporary or permanent storage and
pay a fee as established, from time to time, by resolution of the Borough
Council. Such nuisance(s) must be stored within a garage or other enclosed
building or, outside, within an opaque fence at least six feet high which is
locked at all times when unattended.
   (B)   With the special approval of the Borough Council, nuisances may also
be stored outside in an area enclosed by a chain link fence, at least six feet
high, screened by shrubbery around the perimeter to the height of the fence,
with an unobstructed gate capable of admitting fire or emergency equipment.
Such gate shall remain locked at all times when unattended. In addition, the
appliances, machinery, equipment, or construction materials shall be kept free
of vermin infestation while being stored; and all gas, oil, or other
potentially hazardous substances shall be removed. The total area of storage of
such nuisances may not exceed 600 square feet.
   (C)   Nothing herein shall be construed to permit the storage of appliance,
machinery, equipment, or material nuisances contrary to the provisions of the
borough zoning ordinance, if any.
(Prior Code, § 10, 503) (Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992) Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.073 INSPECTION OF PREMISES; NOTICE TO COMPLY.
   (A)   The Police Department is hereby empowered to inspect private property
on which appliances, machinery, equipment, and/or various construction
materials are stored to determine if there is compliance with the provisions of
this subchapter. If noncompliance with the provisions of this subchapter
constitutes a nuisance, or if any condition, structure, or improvement poses a
danger to the health, safety, or welfare of the public, he or she shall issue a
written notice to be served by registered or certified mail upon the owner of
said premises, or, if the owner’s whereabouts or identity be unknown, by
posting the notice conspicuously upon the offending premises.
   (B)   Said notice shall specify the condition considered to be a hazard and/
or nuisance and shall require the owner to commence to remove or otherwise
rectify the condition as set forth in the notice within ten days of mailing or
posting of said notice, and thereafter, to fully comply with the requirements
of the notice within a reasonable time.
(Prior Code, § 10, 504) (Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992)
§ 93.074 AUTHORITY TO REMEDY NONCOMPLIANCE.
   If the owner of property on which appliances, machinery, equipment, and/or
construction materials are stored does not comply with the notice to abate the
nuisance, within the time limit prescribed, the borough shall have the
authority to take measures to correct the conditions and collect the cost of
such corrections plus 10% of all costs. The borough, in such event and pursuant
to its statutory or otherwise authorized police powers, shall have the right
and power to enter upon the offending premises to accomplish the foregoing.
(Prior Code, § 10, 505) (Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992)
§ 93.075 HEARING.
   (A)   Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Police Department may
request and shall then be granted a hearing before the Borough Council;
provided, he or she files with the Borough Council within ten days after notice
of the Police Department’s decision, a written petition requesting such hearing
and setting forth a brief statement of the grounds therefor. The hearing shall
commence not later than 30 days after the date on which the petition was filed
unless postponed for sufficient cause.
   (B)   After such hearing, the Borough Council shall sustain, modify, or
overrule the action of the Police Department.
(Prior Code, § 10, 506) (Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992)
§ 93.076 REMEDIES NOT MUTUALLY EXCLUSIVE.
   The remedies provided herein for the enforcement of this subchapter, or any
remedy provided by law, shall not be deemed mutually exclusive; rather, they
may be employed simultaneously or consecutively, at the option of the Borough
Council.
(Prior Code, § 10, 508) (Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992)
§ 93.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person who shall violate any provision of §§
93.001 through
93.017 shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine not more than
$600 plus costs, and in default of payment, to undergo imprisonment for a term
not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation of §§
93.001 through
93.017 shall constitute a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 10, 116)
   (C)   Any person, firm, or corporation who shall violate any provision of §§
93.030 through
93.039 shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $600 and costs, and in default of payment of said fine and costs, shall be
subject to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 30 days. Every day that a
violation of §§
93.030 through
93.039 continues shall constitute a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 10, 311)
   (D)   Any person who shall violate any provision of §§
93.050 through
93.056 shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $600 plus costs, and in default of payment of said fine and costs, to
undergo imprisonment for a term not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a
violation of §§
93.050 through
93.056 continues shall constitute a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 10, 407)
   (E)   Any person who shall violate any provision of §§
93.070 through
93.076 shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $600 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to
undergo imprisonment for a term not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a
violation of §§
93.070 through
93.076 continues shall constitute a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 10, 507)
(Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992)
CHAPTER 94: CEMETERIES
Section
   
94.01   Establishment of cemeteries or burial grounds prohibited
   
94.02   Burial of the dead in the borough prohibited
 
   
94.99   Penalty
§ 94.01 ESTABLISHMENT OF CEMETERIES OR BURIAL GROUNDS PROHIBITED.
   It shall hereinafter be unlawful for any person or persons to lay out and
use any ground or land, whether publicly or privately owned, within the borough
for burial or interment purposes, except upon that land now owned and set aside
for burial or interment purposes by the Borough Cemetery Association.
(Prior Code, § 10, 201) (Ord. 260, passed 3-11-1985) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.02 BURIAL OF THE DEAD IN THE BOROUGH PROHIBITED.
   The burial or interment of deceased persons within the borough shall
hereinafter be prohibited, except upon that land now owned and set aside for
burial or interment purposes by the Borough Cemetery Association.
(Prior Code, § 10, 202) (Ord. 260, passed 3-11-1985) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding $600 and costs, or
in default of payment thereof, shall be subject to imprisonment for a term not
to exceed 30 days. The body, if not removed, shall be exhumed and placed on
those lands of the Borough Cemetery Association at the expense of the property
owner.
(Prior Code, § 10, 203) (Ord. 260, passed 3-11-1985; Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992)
CHAPTER 95: FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
Section
Open Burning
   
95.01   Definitions
   
95.02   Enforcement
   
95.03   Regulations
Outdoor Wood-Fire Boilers
   
95.15   Definitions
   
95.16   Prohibition against use of outdoor wood-fired boilers within borough
   
95.17   Grandfather clause
   
95.18   Permitting and regulation of grandfathered boilers
   
95.19   Separate offense
   
95.20   Abatement of violations
Certain Fire Losses; Rehabilitation Cost Recovery
   
95.35   Use of fire insurance proceeds
   
95.36   Limits of liability
   
95.37   Insurance company rights reserved
   
95.38   Agreements with property owners
   
95.40   Notification of State Department of Community and Economic Development
   
95.41   Saving clause
   
95.42   Effective date
Fire Department and Other Emergency Services to Recoup Cost
   
95.55   Definitions
   
95.56   Authorization of services and equipment
   
95.57   Authorization to recover costs
   
95.58   Charges and invoicing
   
95.59   Schedule of fees
   
95.60   Enforcement
   
95.61   Remedies not mutually exclusive
 
   
95.99   Penalty
OPEN BURNING
§ 95.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BOROUGH COUNCIL. The Borough Council of the Borough of Everett.
   FURNACE. Any enclosed device specifically designed for burning any material
for the production of heat.
   GARBAGE. All putrescible animal and vegetable matter resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking, and consumption of food.
   INCINERATOR. Any device specifically designed for the destruction by burning
of refuse, sewage sludge, or any other combustible material.
   OPEN FIRE. A fire in which any material is burned in the open or in a
receptacle other than a furnace or incinerator.
   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, association, corporation, department,
bureau, agency, or other legal entity.
   REFUSE. Garbage, rubbish, and trade waste.
   RUBBISH. Solids not considered to be highly flammable or explosive,
including, but not limited to, rags, old clothes, leather, rubber, carpets,
wood, excelsior, paper, ashes, tree branches, tree leaves, yard trimmings,
furniture, tin cans, glass crockery, masonry, and other similar materials.
   SALVAGE OPERATION. Any business, trade, or industry engaged in whole or in
part in salvaging or reclaiming any product or material, including, but not
limited to, metals, chemicals, shipping containers, or drums.
   TRADE WASTE. All solid or liquid material or rubbish resulting from
construction, building operations, or the prosecution of any business, trade,
or industry, including, but not limited to, plastic products, cartons, paint,
grease, oil, and other petroleum products, chemicals, cinders, and other forms
of solid or liquid waste materials; provided, that TRADE WASTE shall not
include any coal refuse associated with the mining or preparation of coal.
(Prior Code, § 7, 101) (Ord. passed 5-6-1930; Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992)
§ 95.02 ENFORCEMENT.
   The Borough Council shall have the power and duty to enforce the provisions
of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 7, 102) (Ord. passed 5-6-1930; Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992)
§ 95.03 REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Prohibitions. Within the borough limits, no person shall:
      (1)   Ignite or feed an open fire for the destruction of refuse or in the
conduct of a salvage operation in any public or private place outside any
building; or
      (2)   Cause, suffer, allow, or permit the maintenance of any open fire
for the destruction of refuse, or in the conduct of a salvage operation on any
property under his or her control outside of any building.
   (B)   Exceptions.
      (1)   Open fires may be set in the performance of an official duty of any
public officer if the fire is necessary for:
         (a)   The prevention of a fire hazard which cannot be abated by other
means; or
         (b)   The protection of public health.
      (2)   Open fires may be set with approval of the authorized enforcement
agent of this subchapter, provided:
         (a)   Leaves, branches, and other non-putrescible vegetable matter
only are burned;
         (b)   There is no practical available alternative method for disposal
of the material to be burned;
         (c)   No hazardous or other objectionable condition will be created by
such burning;
         (d)   No such burning is allowed on any street or sidewalk within the
borough; and
         (e)   All such burning takes place between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and
9:00 p.m.
      (3)   Allowed open burning shall be conducted in a safe manner, when wind
and weather conditions minimize adverse effects and not to create visibility
hazard on roadways. Open burning shall be conducted in conformance with state
and local protection regulations and contained in an appropriate manner.
      (4)   Outdoor campfires and small bonfires for cooking in an appropriate
grill, or related container of such, for ceremonies or recreation, are allowed,
provided they do not cause a public nuisance and contained in an appropriate
manner and shall be properly extinguished by 11:00 p.m.
      (5)   Open burning shall be constantly attended and supervised by a
competent person of at least 18 years of age until the fire is extinguished and
is cold. The person shall have readily available for such use fire
extinguishing equipment as to be necessary for the total control of the fire.
      (6)   If in a container, a fire must be at least 15 feet from a
structure. If on an open pile, a fire must be at least 50 feet from a
structure.
      (7)   The public officer may ban burning when deemed necessary and order
any unsafe fire extinguished.
(Prior Code, § 7, 103) (Ord. passed 5-6-1930; Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992; Ord.
2024-11-11, passed 11-11-2024) Penalty, see §
95.99
OUTDOOR WOOD-FIRED BOILERS
§ 95.15 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BOROUGH. The Borough of Everett, Bedford County, Pennsylvania, a political
subdivision of the commonwealth, acting by and through its Borough Council or,
in appropriate cases, acting by and through its authorized representatives.
   OUTDOOR WOOD-FIRED BOILER. Any stove, furnace, equipment, device, or
apparatus kept or operated OUT-OF-DOORS (meaning outside of any residential or
commercial structure located within the borough) fired with wood or any other
material, matter, substance, refuse, or thing, including, but not limited to,
any outdoor wood-fired hydronic heater(s) or furnace, which may generate heat
for indoor heating or cooling purposes, including hot water heating, or to any
accessory uses or structures, including, but not limited to, residences,
businesses, garages, warehouses, greenhouses, swimming pools, or spas, and/or
which may be utilized to burn wood or any other material, matter, substance,
refuse, garbage, or thing and usually having a smokestack, pipe, chimney, or
other apparatus so as to emit smoke or particulate ash or other byproduct of
combustion into the air and surrounding environment.
   PERSON. Any natural person, corporation, partnership, or business entity of
whatsoever nature or kind.
(Prior Code, § 7, 201) (Ord. 2008-11-01, passed 11-10-2008)
§ 95.16 PROHIBITION AGAINST USE OF OUTDOOR WOOD-FIRE BOILERS WITHIN BOROUGH.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to utilize or attempt to utilize any
wood-fired boiler within the borough and/or the limits of the borough at any
time.
(Prior Code, § 7, 202) (Ord. 2008-11-01, passed 11-10-2008) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.17 GRANDFATHER CLAUSE.
   This subchapter shall not be construed to be retroactive and shall not
require the removal of any external fuel burning device in existence and
installed with the borough at the effective date of this subchapter. All
outdoor wood-fired boilers which are subject to this grandfather clause,
however, shall be further subject to the provisions of §
95.18.
(Prior Code, § 7, 203) (Ord. 2008-11-01, passed 11-10-2008)
§ 95.18 PERMITTING AND REGULATION OF GRANDFATHERED BOILERS.
   (A)   The owner of an outdoor wood-fired boiler which is grandfathered
pursuant to §
95.17 shall obtain a permit for the boiler from the borough officer within 60
days after the effective date of this subchapter.
   (B)   The permit shall allow continued use of the boiler subject to the
following provisions.
      (1)   It shall be used in a manner that complies with all manufacturer’s
specifications.
      (2)   It shall not be used to burn rubbish, garbage, treated or painted
wood, plastic, rubber, or any material not recommended for burning by the
manufacturer of the boiler.
      (3)   It shall be used in a manner so as to assure that smoke, fumes, or
odors are not dispensed to other properties or public streets.
      (4)   It shall not be moved without written approval from the borough
unless it is being permanently removed from the borough.
      (5)   It shall be cleaned and maintained to assure that it is in proper
operating condition. In the event the boiler is damaged more than 50% or it is
physically destroyed or decayed, it must be torn down and removed from the
property.
      (6)   Ashes and waste shall be disposed of promptly, in a lawful manner
so as to comply with all applicable federal, state, and local laws, rules,
codes, and regulations, and shall not be permitted to accumulate on the
property.
      (7)   Acceptance of a permit shall be deemed consent by the property
owner for any authorized officer, agent, or representative of the borough to
enter the property for the purpose of inspecting the outdoor wood-fire boiler
to assure compliance with the terms of the permit.
(Prior Code, § 7, 204) (Ord. 2008-11-01, passed 11-10-2008) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.19 SEPARATE OFFENSE.
   Each day’s continuance of anything prohibited by this subchapter shall be a
separate offense hereunder.
(Prior Code, § 7, 206) (Ord. 2008-11-01, passed 11-10-2008)
§ 95.20 ABATEMENT OF VIOLATIONS.
   In the event that any person is found to be in violation of this subchapter
insofar as use or attempted use of any outdoor wood-fired boiler within the
borough and/or its limits, the Borough Council and/or its authorized
representative(s) may take such steps and measures to abate such use or
attempted use, including removal and destruction of any such device. All costs
and expenses incurred by the borough in relation to any abatement activity
shall be assessed to the person(s) found in violation of this subchapter. Any
costs and expenses assessed hereunder shall be paid by the owner(s) or other
person against whom the same are assessed within 30 days of service of notice
of any such violation by the borough. Failure to pay the costs and expenses
incurred by the borough within the time period set forth in this subchapter
shall also constitute a violation of this subchapter subject to the penalties
set forth in §
95.17.
(Prior Code, § 2, 207) (Ord. 2008-11-01, passed 11-10-2008) Penalty, see §
95.99
CERTAIN FIRE LOSSES; REHABILITATION COST RECOVERY
§ 95.35 USE OF FIRE INSURANCE PROCEEDS.
   (A)   No insurance company, association, or exchange (hereinafter,
“insurer”) doing business in the commonwealth shall pay a claim of a named
insured for fire damage to a structure located within the borough where the
amount recoverable for the fire loss to the structure under all policies
exceeds $7,500, unless the insurer is furnished by the Borough Treasurer with a
certificate pursuant to 40 P.S. § 638 (the “Act”) and unless there is
compliance with the procedures set forth in the Act.
   (B)   (1)   Where there are delinquent taxes, assessments, penalties, or
user charges against the property (“municipal claims”), or there are expenses
which the borough has insured as a cost for the removal, repair, or securing of
a building or other structure on the property (collectively “municipal
expenses”), the Treasurer of the borough shall immediately render a bill for
such work, if he or she has not already done so. Upon written request of the
named insured specifying the tax description of the property, the name and
address of the insurer and the date of receipt by the insurer of a loss report
of the claim, the Treasurer shall furnish a certificate within 14 working days
after the request, to the insurer, either:
         (a)   Stating that there are no unpaid municipal claims or municipal
expenses against the property; or
         (b)   Specifying the nature and amounts of such claims or expenses,
accompanied by a bill for such amounts.
      (2)   Taxes, assessments, penalties, and user charges shall be deemed
delinquent for this purpose if a lien could have been filed for such claims
under applicable law. Upon receipt of a certificate and bill pursuant to
division (B)(1)(a) above, the insurer shall transfer to the Treasurer an amount
from the insurance proceeds sufficient to pay such sums prior to making payment
to the named insured, subject to the provision of division (C) below.
   (C)   When all municipal claims and municipal expenses have been paid
pursuant to division (B) above, or where the Treasurer has issued a certificate
described in division (B)(1)(a) above indicating that there are no municipal
claims or municipal expenses against the property, the insurer shall pay the
claim of the named insured; provided, however, that if the loss agreed upon by
the named insured and the insurer equals or exceeds 60% of the aggregate limits
of liability on all fire policies covering the building or structure, the
following procedures must be followed.
      (1)   The insurer shall transfer from the insurance proceeds to the
Treasurer, in the aggregate, $2,000 for each $15,000 of such claim or fraction
thereof.
      (2)   If, at the time a loss report is submitted by the insured, such
insured has submitted to the insurer, with a copy to the borough, a
contractor’s signed estimate of the cost of removing, repairing, or securing
the building or other structure in an amount less than the amount calculated
under the foregoing transfer formula, the insurer shall transfer to the
Treasurer from the insurance proceeds the amount specified in the estimate. If
there is more than one insurer, the transfer of proceeds shall be on a pro rata
basis by all insurers insuring the building or other structure.
      (3)   Upon receipt of the portion of the insurance proceeds described in
divisions (C)(1) and (C)(2) above, the Treasurer shall do the following:
         (a)   Place the proceeds in a separate fund to be used solely as
security against the total municipal expenses anticipated by the borough to be
required in removing, repairing, or securing the building or structure as
required by this subchapter. Such costs shall include, without limitation, any
engineering, legal, or administrative costs incurred by the borough in
connection with such removal, repair, or securing or any proceedings related
thereto;
         (b)   Mail to the named insured, at the address received from the
insurer, a notice that the proceeds have been received by the borough and that
the procedures under this division (C) shall be followed;
         (c)   After the transfer, the named insured may submit to the borough
a contractor’s signed estimate of the cost of removing, repairing, or securing
the building or other structure, in which event, the Treasurer shall, if such
estimate is deemed by the Treasurer to be reasonable, return to the insured the
amounts of the funds transferred to the borough in excess of that required to
pay the municipal expenses; provided, the borough has not commenced to remove,
repair, or secure the building or other structure, in which case the borough
will complete the work;
         (d)   Pay to the Treasurer, for reimbursement to the Borough General
Fund, the amount of the municipal expenses paid by the borough; and
         (e)   Pay the remaining balance in the fund (without interest) to the
named insured upon receipt of a certificate issued by the Borough Manager that
the repair, removal, or securing of the building or other structure has been
completed in accordance with all applicable codes and regulations of the
borough.
   (D)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the ability of the
borough to recover any deficiency in the amount of municipal claims or
municipal expenses recovered pursuant to this subchapter, or to insurance
proceeds, by an action at law or in equity, to enforce the codes of the
borough.
(Prior Code, § 7, 301) (Ord. 2006-07-01, passed 7-10-2006) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.36 LIMITS OF LIABILITY.
   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed to make an insurance company,
association, or exchange liable for any amount in excess of proceeds payable
under its insurance policy or for any other act performed pursuant to this
subchapter or to make this borough, any borough official, a municipality or
public official an insured under a policy of insurance or to create an
obligation to pay delinquent property taxes or unpaid removal liens or expenses
other than as provided in this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 7, 302) (Ord. 2006-07-01, passed 7-10-2006)
§ 95.37 INSURANCE COMPANY RIGHTS RESERVED.
   An insurance company, association, or exchange making payments of policy
proceeds under this subchapter for delinquent taxes or structure removal liens
or removal expenses incurred by the borough shall have a full benefit of such
payment, including all rights of subrogation and of assignment.
(Prior Code, § 7, 303) (Ord. 2006-07-01, passed 7-10-2006)
§ 95.38 AGREEMENTS WITH PROPERTY OWNERS.
   The Borough Manager or Borough Council shall be authorized to enter into an
agreement with the named insured which provides for a disposition of the
insurance proceeds in a manner other than as provided in this subchapter. Such
an agreement shall not be deemed as a waiver of any of the rights of the
borough to file subsequent municipal liens or claims, or to proceed against the
named insured or property owner at law or in equity.
(Prior Code, § 7, 304) (Ord. 2006-07-01, passed 7-10-2006)
§ 95.39 CONSTRUCTION.
   This subchapter shall be liberally construed to accomplish its purpose to
deter the commission of arson and related crimes, to discourage the abandonment
of property, and to prevent urban blight and deterioration.
(Prior Code, § 7, 305) (Ord. 2006-07-01, passed 7-10-2006)
§ 95.40 NOTIFICATION OF STATE DEPARTMENT OF COMMUNITY AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT.
   The Secretary of the borough shall transmit a certified copy of this
subchapter promptly to the State Department of Community and Economic
Development.
(Prior Code, § 7, 306) (Ord. 2006-07-01, passed 7-10-2006)
§ 95.41 SAVING CLAUSE.
   (A)   The provisions of this subchapter, so far as they are the same as
those of ordinances endorsed immediately prior to the enactment of this
subchapter, are intended as a continuation of such ordinances and not as new
enactments.
   (B)   The provisions of this subchapter shall not affect any act done or
liability incurred, nor shall it affect any suit or prosecution pending or to
be instituted to enforce any right or penalty or to punish any offense under
the authority of any ordinance repealed by this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 7, 308) (Ord. 2006-07-01, passed 7-10-2006)
§ 95.42 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This subchapter shall take effect in accordance with law.
(Prior Code, § 7, 310) (Ord. 2006-07-01, passed 7-10-2006)
FIRE DEPARTMENT AND OTHER EMERGENCY SERVICES TO RECOUP COST
§ 95.55 DEFINITIONS.
   In this subchapter, the singular shall include the plural, the plural shall
include the singular, and each gender shall include all other genders. For the
purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BOROUGH. The Borough of Everett, Bedford County, Pennsylvania.
   EMERGENCY RESCUE SERVICE ORGANIZATIONS. The Borough Fire Company and any and
all persons providing emergency rescue services in the borough to any borough
resident or other person or property within the borough, or as otherwise
authorized by the Borough Council.
   INSURANCE CARRIER. Any business or entity authorized to issue any policy of
insurance in the commonwealth.
   PERSON. A natural person or individual, partnership, corporation,
association, firm, or any legal entity.
(Ord. 2023-06-01, passed 6-12-2023)
§ 95.56 AUTHORIZATION OF SERVICES AND EQUIPMENT.
   The borough authorizes all emergency rescues service organizations to
utilize such tools, equipment, or materials to provide fire fighting,
ambulance, or other emergency rescue services as authorized by law or the
borough, for purposes of saving lives and property within the borough or any
other area in which the emergency rescue services organizations are authorized
by the borough to provide the same.
(Ord. 2023-06-01, passed 6-12-2023)
§ 95.57 AUTHORIZATION TO RECOVER COSTS.
   All emergency rescue service organizations are authorized to effect the
recovery of costs of their respective services, tools, equipment, and/or
materials from any person for whom or for whose property such services were
rendered or such tools, equipment, or material were used, and from any
insurance carrier or person providing insurance covering such persons or
property.
(Ord. 2023-06-01, passed 6-12-2023)
§ 95.58 CHARGES AND INVOICING.
   All emergency rescue services organizations may charge and invoice:
   (A)   Any insurance carrier or other person providing insurance covering any
person, vehicle, structure, business (profit or nonprofit) or other property;
or
   (B)   Any person for whom or for whose property an emergency rescue services
organization performs services or utilizes tools, equipment, materials, for the
cost of such services rendered or tools, equipment, or materials used for
persons or their property.
(Ord. 2023-06-01, passed 6-12-2023)
§ 95.59 SCHEDULE OF FEES.
   The Borough Council may, by resolution, from time to time, establish,
revise, amend, or rescind a schedule of fees for the services tools, equipment,
and materials described herein.
(Ord. 2023-06-01, passed 6-12-2023)
§ 95.60 ENFORCEMENT.
   In the event that an insurance carrier or person fails to pay any invoice
described herein within 30 days of the mailing or delivery of such invoice or
notice of charges, the emergency rescue services organizations who mailed or
delivered such invoice may recover and collect such charges and invoices from
the insurance carrier or person to whom such invoice or notice of charges was
given, together with interest, costs, and attorney fees, in any manner provided
by law, including, without limitation, a civil action at law.
(Ord. 2023-06-01, passed 6-12-2023)
§ 95.61 REMEDIES NOT MUTUALLY EXCLUSIVE.
   The remedies provided herein for the enforcement of this subchapter,
including, but not limited to, equitable actions, and all other remedies
provided by law shall not be deemed mutually exclusive, rather, they may be
employed simultaneously or consecutively, at the option of the borough, or
borough’s emergency rescue services organizations.
(Ord. 2023-06-01, passed 6-12-2023)
§ 95.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person who shall violate any provision of §§
95.01 through
95.03 shall, upon conviction thereof, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not
less than $100 and not more than $1,000 and costs, or in default of payment
thereof, shall be subject to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 30 days.
Each day that a violation of §§
95.01 through
95.03 continues shall constitute a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 7, 104)
   (C)   Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of §§
95.15 through
95.20 shall be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000 and/or imprisonment not exceeding 30
days for each violation. The borough shall initiate an enforcement proceeding
by an action brought before a District Justice in the same manner provided for
the enforcement of summary offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal
Procedure. Sections
95.15 through
95.20 may also be enforced by the borough through an action seeking injunctive
or equitable relief brought in the Court of Common Pleas of the county where
the borough is situate.
(Prior Code, § 7, 205)
   (D)   Any owner of property, any named insured, or insurer who violates the
provisions of §§
95.35 through
95.42 or who shall fail to comply with any of the requirements hereof shall be
sentenced, upon conviction thereof, to a fine of not more than $1,000 plus
costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of
imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day on which an offense shall continue
shall be deemed a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 7, 307)
   (E)   Any insurance carrier or person found in violation of §§
95.55 through
95.61 or any part thereof shall be guilty of a summary offense and, upon
conviction thereof before a District Magistrate, shall be subject to a fine of
$1,000, plus attorney’s fees and costs incurred by the borough in the
prosecution thereof. The borough’s Solicitor may assume charge of the
prosecution without the consent of the District Attorney as required under
Pa.R.Crim.P. No. 454. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a
separate offense subject to prosecution hereunder.
(Ord. passed 5-6-1930; Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992; Ord. 2006-07-01, passed 7-10-
2006; Ord. 2008-11-01, passed 11-10-2008; Ord. 2023-06-01, passed 6-12-2023;
Ord. 2024-11-11, passed 11-11-2024)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
110.   GENERAL BUSINESS REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 110: GENERAL BUSINESS REGULATIONS
Section
Transient Business Regulations
   
110.01   Definitions
   
110.02   License required; conditions of issuance; fee
   
110.03   Exceptions
   
110.04   License application
   
110.05   Issuance of license; custody, display, and exhibit
   
110.06   Prohibited acts
   
110.07   Supervision; records and reports
   
110.08   Suspension and revocation of license; appeal
 
   
110.99   Penalty
TRANSIENT BUSINESS REGULATIONS
§ 110.01 DEFINITIONS.
   The singular shall include the plural; the plural shall include the
singular; and the masculine shall include the feminine and the neuter. For the
purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   LEGAL HOLIDAY. New Year’s Day, Memorial Day, Juneteenth, Independence Day,
Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day, and Christmas.
   PERSON. Any natural person, partnership, association, corporation, or other
legal entity.
   TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESS.
      (1)   Engaging in peddling, soliciting, or taking orders, either by
sample or otherwise, for any goods, wares, or merchandise upon any street,
alley, sidewalk, or public ground, or from house to house, within the borough;
or
      (2)   Selling, soliciting, or taking orders for any goods, wares, or
merchandise, from a fixed location within the borough, on a temporary basis,
which shall include, but not be limited to, such activities conducted at the
time of special occasions or celebrations, for seasonal purposes, or for or in
advance of specific yearly holidays.
(Prior Code, § 13, 101) (Ord. 227, passed 4-7-1969; Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992)
§ 110.02 LICENSE REQUIRED; CONDITIONS OF ISSUANCE; FEE.
   (A)   No person shall engage in any transient retail business within the
borough without first having obtained from the Mayor a license, for which a
fee, which shall be for the use of the borough, to be set, from time to time,
by resolution of the Borough Council, shall be charged.
   (B)   The transient business license fee is established by the Borough
Council to be $25 per day.
(Prior Code, § 13, 102) (Ord. 227, passed 4-7-1969; Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992;
Res. 95-3-1, passed 3-13-1995) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.03 EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   No license fee shall be charged:
      (1)   To farmers selling their own produce;
      (2)   For the sale of goods, wares, and merchandise, donated by the
owners thereof, the proceeds whereof are to be applied to any charitable or
philanthropic purpose;
      (3)   To any manufacturer or producer in the sale of bread and bakery
products, meat and meat products, or milk and milk products;
      (4)   To children under the age of 18 years who take orders for and
deliver newspapers, greeting cards, candy, bakery products, and the like, or
who represent the Girl Scouts or Scouting America or similar organizations;
      (5)   To any honorable discharged member of any of the armed services who
complies with state law, hereafter amended, supplemented, modified, or
reenacted by the General Assembly of the commonwealth, and who procures from
the Prothonotary a certificate in pursuance of the Act of 1867;
      (6)   To the seeking or taking of orders by insurance agents or brokers
licensed under the insurance laws of the commonwealth;
      (7)   To any person who has complied with the provisions of the
Charitable Organization Reform Act, 10 P.S. §§ 162.1 et seq., as hereafter
amended, supplemented, modified, or reenacted by the General Assembly of the
commonwealth; or
      (8)   For taking orders for merchandise, by sample, from dealers or
merchants for individuals or companies who pay a license or business privilege
tax at their chief place of business.
   (B)   (1)   But, all persons exempted hereby from the payment of the license
fee shall be required to register with the Mayor and obtain a license without
fee; provided, any person dealing in one or more of the exempted categories
mentioned in division (A) above, and dealing with other goods, wares, or
merchandise not so exempted, shall be subject to the payment of the license fee
fixed by this subchapter for his or her activities in connection with the sale
of goods, wares, and merchandise not in such exempted categories.
      (2)   Provided further, the Mayor may similarly exempt from payment of
the license fee, but not from registering with him or her, persons working
without compensation and selling goods, wares, or merchandise for the sole
benefit of any nonprofit corporation. Provided further, every license issued
under the provisions of this subchapter shall be issued on an individual basis
to any person or persons engaging in such business.
      (3)   Every individual shall obtain a separate license, issued to him or
her in his or her name, and the license fee hereby imposed shall be applicable
to every such individual license, except that a representative of a charitable
organization may obtain licenses for the applicants therein.
(Prior Code, § 13, 103) (Ord. 227, passed 4-7-1969; Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992)
Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.04 LICENSE APPLICATION.
   (A)   Every person desiring a license under this subchapter shall first make
application to the Mayor for such license. He or she shall, when making
application, exhibit a valid license from any state or county officer, if such
license is also required.
   (B)   The applicant shall state:
      (1)   His or her criminal record, if any;
      (2)   Name and address of the person by whom he or she is employed;
      (3)   Type of goods, wares, and merchandise he or she wishes to deal with
in such transient retail business;
      (4)   Length of time for which license is to be issued; and
      (5)   Type and license number of the vehicle to be used, if any.
(Prior Code, § 13, 104) (Ord. 227, passed 4-7-1969; Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992)
§ 110.05 ISSUANCE OF LICENSE; CUSTODY, DISPLAY, AND EXHIBIT.
   (A)   Upon receipt of such application and the prescribed fee, the Mayor, if
he or she shall find such application in order, shall issue the license
required under this subchapter. Such license shall contain the information
required to be given on the application therefor.
   (B)   (1)   Every license holder shall carry such license upon his or her
person if engaged in transient retail business from house to house or upon any
of the streets, alleys, sidewalks, or public grounds, or shall display such
license at the location where he or she shall engage in such business if doing
so at a fixed location.
      (2)   He or she shall exhibit such license, upon request, to all police
officers, municipal officials, and citizens or residents of the borough.
(Prior Code, § 13, 105) (Ord. 227, passed 4-7-1969; Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992)
Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.06 PROHIBITED ACTS.
   No person in any transient retail business shall:
   (A)   Sell any product or type of product not mentioned in his or her
license;
   (B)   Hawk or cry his or her wares upon any of the streets, alleys,
sidewalks, or public grounds in the borough;
   (C)   When operating from a vehicle, stop or park such vehicle upon any of
the streets or alleys in the borough for longer than necessary in order to sell
therefrom to persons residing or working in the immediate vicinity;
   (D)   Park any vehicle upon any of the streets or alleys in the borough for
the purpose of sorting, rearranging, or cleaning any of his or her goods,
wares, or merchandise or of disposing of any carton, wrapping material, or
stock, wares, or foodstuffs which have become unsaleable through handling, age,
or otherwise; or
   (E)   Engage in any business activity, except by prior appointment, at any
time on a Sunday or legal holiday or at any time before 8:00 a.m. or after 6:00
p.m. on any day of the week other than a Sunday or legal holiday.
(Prior Code, § 13, 106) (Ord. 227, passed 4-7-1969; Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992)
Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.07 SUPERVISION; RECORDS AND REPORTS.
   The Mayor shall supervise the activities of all persons holding licenses
under this subchapter. He or she shall keep a record of all licenses issued
hereunder and shall make a report thereof each month to the Borough Council.
(Prior Code, § 13, 107) (Ord. 227, passed 4-7-1969; Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992)
§ 110.08 SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION OF LICENSE; APPEAL.
   (A)   The Mayor is hereby authorized to suspend or revoke any license issued
under this subchapter when he or she deems such suspension or revocation to be
beneficial to the public health, safety, or morals, for violation of any
provision of this subchapter, or for giving false information upon any
application for a license hereunder.
   (B)   Appeals from any suspension or revocation may be made to the Borough
Council at any time within ten days after such suspension or revocation.
   (C)   No part of a license fee shall be refunded to any person whose license
shall have been suspended or revoked.
(Prior Code, § 13, 108) (Ord. 227, passed 4-7-1969; Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992)
§ 110.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person, firm, or corporation who shall violate any provision of §§
110.01 through
110.08 shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine not more than
$600 and costs or, in default of payment, shall be subject to imprisonment for
not more than 30 days. Each day that a violation of §§
110.01 through
110.08 continues shall constitute a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 13, 109) (Ord. 227, passed 4-7-1969; Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
      
130.   GENERAL OFFENSES
CHAPTER 130: GENERAL OFFENSES
Section
General Provisions
   
130.01   Alcoholic beverages
   
130.02   Disorderly conduct
   
130.03   Throwing of objects into streets
Firearms
   
130.15   Discharge of firearms prohibited
   
130.16   Use of air rifles, bow and arrows, or similar devices restricted
   
130.17   Exceptions
Curfew for Minors
   
130.30   Definitions and interpretations
   
130.31   Purposes
   
130.32   Curfew; exceptions
   
130.33   Parents not to permit violations
   
130.34   Procedure upon violation
   
130.35   Procedure in case of repeated violations or other factors interfering
with enforcement
   
130.36   Police discretion in age determination
 
   
130.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 130.01 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES.
   (A)   Legislative findings. It is hereby found by the Borough Council that
the consumption of alcoholic beverages on or in public streets, sidewalks,
parks, alleys, or other public places constitutes a public nuisance and
threatens the public health, safety, and welfare. The purpose of this section
is to promote public safety and convenience, prevent accidents, reduce
littering, preserve the character of the borough and promote the general peace,
good order, comfort, and welfare of the borough inhabitants.
(Prior Code, § 6, 101)
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE. Any liquor, spiritous, vinous, fermented, or
otherwise alcoholic beverage. The term includes any beer, lager beer, ale,
porter, or similar fermented beverage by whatsoever name such BEVERAGE may be
called.
      BOROUGH. The Borough of Everett, County of Bedford, Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, with its administrative office at Mechanic Street, Everett,
Pennsylvania.
      SHALL. The act referred to is always mandatory and not merely directory.
(Prior Code, § 6, 102)
   (C)   Prohibited activities.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person, whether inside or outside of a
motor vehicle, to consume an alcoholic beverage or portion thereof on or in any
public street, sidewalk, park, alley, or other public place within the borough.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful for any person, whether inside or outside of a
motor vehicle, to transport, possess, or have physical control over an
alcoholic beverage in an open bottle, can, glass, or other container on or in
any public street, sidewalk, park, alley, or other public place within the
borough.
(Prior Code, § 6, 103)
(Ord. 265, passed 8-10-1987) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.02 DISORDERLY CONDUCT.
   (A)   Disorderly conduct, as defined in the Pennsylvania Crime Code of 1972,
18 Pa.C.S.A. § 5503, is hereby prohibited within the borough. A person is
guilty of disorderly conduct if he or she:
      (1)   Engage in fighting or in threatening, violent, or tumultuous
behavior;
      (2)   Make unreasonable noise; or
      (3)   Create a hazardous or physically offensive condition by any act
which serves no legitimate purpose of the actor.
   (B)   Provided, as used in this section, the word PUBLIC means affecting or
likely to affect persons in a place to which the public or a substantial group
has access. Among the places included are streets, alleys, and sidewalks,
transport facilities, schools, prisons, apartment houses, places of business or
amusement, any neighborhood, or any premises which are open to the public.
(Prior Code, § 6, 201) (Ord. 218, passed 4-7-1969; Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992)
Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.03 THROWING OF OBJECTS INTO STREETS.
   The throwing, kicking, or knocking of any ball, snowballs, stones, or any
other missile upon or into any of the public streets, alleys, or sidewalks in
the borough is hereby prohibited.
(Prior Code, § 6, 401) (Ord. 220, passed 4-7-1969; Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992)
Penalty, see §
130.99
FIREARMS
§ 130.15 DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS PROHIBITED.
   Except in necessary defense of person and property and except as provided in
§
130.17, it shall be unlawful for any person to use, fire, or discharge any gun
or other firearm within the borough.
(Prior Code, § 6, 301) (Ord. 219, passed 4-7-1969; Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992)
Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.16 USE OF AIR RIFLES, BOW AND ARROWS, OR SIMILAR DEVICES RESTRICTED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any air rifle, air pistol,
spring gun, spring pistol, BB gun, bow and arrow, or similar device, or any
implement that is not a firearm but which impels a pellet of any kind with a
force that can reasonably be expected to cause bodily harm, at any place within
the borough, except as provided in §
130.17, and except on a target range which is properly constructed to trap or
stop the projectile as ascertained by the Chief of Police.
(Prior Code, § 6, 302) (Ord. 219, passed 4-7-1969; Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992)
Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.17 EXCEPTIONS.
   This subchapter shall not apply to:
   (A)   Persons licensed to hunt in this commonwealth while actually engaged
in hunting where permitted under the laws of the commonwealth;
   (B)   Members of any organization incorporated under laws of this
commonwealth engaged in target shooting upon the grounds or property belonging
to or under the control of such organization; or
   (C)   Any law enforcement officers when used in the discharge of their
official duties.
(Prior Code, § 6, 303) (Ord. 219, passed 4-7-1969; Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992)
CURFEW FOR MINORS
§ 130.30 DEFINITIONS AND INTERPRETATION.
   In this subchapter, the singular shall include the plural, the plural shall
include the singular, and the masculine shall include the feminine and the
neuter. For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   MINOR. Person under the age of 18 years.
   PARENT. Any natural parent of a minor, as herein defined, or a guardian, or
any adult person responsible for the care and custody of a minor. When used in
this subchapter, PARENT shall mean one or both parents.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Any public street, alley, sidewalk, park, playground, public
building, or vacant lot in the borough.
   REMAIN. To stay behind, to tarry, and to stay unnecessarily upon the
streets, including the congregating of groups (or of interacting minors)
totaling four or more persons in which any minor involved would not be using
the streets for emergencies or ordinary purposes such as mere passage of going
home.
(Prior Code, § 6, 601) (Ord. 222, passed 4-7-1969; Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992)
§ 130.31 PURPOSES.
   This is a curfew subchapter prescribing, in accordance with prevailing
community standards, regulations for the conduct of minors on streets at night,
for the protection of younger children in the borough from each other and from
other persons on the streets during nighttime hours, for the enforcement of
parental control and responsibility for their children, for the protection of
the public from nocturnal mischief by minors, and for the reduction of the
incident of juvenile criminal activity, all for the good of minors, for the
furtherance of family responsibility, and for the public good, safety, and
welfare.
(Prior Code, § 6, 602) (Ord. 222, passed 4-7-1969; Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992)
§ 130.32 CURFEW; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any minor 15 years of age and under to be or
remain in or upon any public highway, park, or other public place within the
borough, or in any enclosure or vehicle which is on or in close proximity to
any such public place within the borough, between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and
6:00 a.m. on the following day, without being accompanied by an adult family
member. It shall be unlawful for any minor aged 16 to 17 years old to be or
remain on the same between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. on the
following day, without being accompanied by an adult family member.
   (B)   Exceptions to division (A) above are the following:
      (1)   Minor accompanied by parent, guardian, or other person having legal
care or custody of such minor;
      (2)   Minor possessing a written statement dated that day and signed by
parent, guardian, or other person having the legal care or custody of such
minor, which statement specifies the time, place, purpose, and necessity of the
minor being in a public place contrary to this subchapter;
      (3)   Minor lawfully employed, making it necessary to be on or in
highways, streets, parks, and the like, as stated in division (A) above, and
possessing a current letter certifying the same and signed by employer, parent,
or guardian;
      (4)   Minor on an emergency errand; or
      (5)   Minor traveling to and from church, school, or municipal activity
with personal permission statement as in division (B)(2) above.
(Prior Code, § 6, 603) (Ord. 222, passed 4-7-1969; Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992;
Ord. 2024-12-09, passed 12-9-2024) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.33 PARENTS NOT TO PERMIT VIOLATIONS.
   It is hereby made unlawful for any parent, guardian, or the person having
the legal care or custody of a minor to allow or permit such minor to violate
any of the provisions of this subchapter without legal justification therefor.
(Prior Code, § 6, 604) (Ord. 222, passed 4-7-1969; Ord. 271, passed 6-8-2991)
Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.34 PROCEDURE UPON VIOLATION.
   (A)   Any minor found upon the streets, alleys, parks, or public places
within the borough in violation of §
130.32 shall be taken into custody by the borough police or legally deputized
individual, be delivered to his or her parent(s), guardian, or person having
the legal custody of said minor, and be given a copy of this subchapter. A
report shall be filed and kept in a book for that specific purpose.
   (B)   If said parent, guardian, or person having the legal custody of said
minor shall again allow him or her to be on the streets, alleys, parks, or
public places in violation of §
130.32, said parent, guardian, or person having the legal custody of said minor
so offending shall, upon the second offense, be called along with the offender
and be so advised once again as to the penalty provisions contained in this
subchapter.
   (C)   Upon the third violation, said parent, guardian, or person will be
remanded to the District Justice for disposition.
(Prior Code, § 6, 605) (Ord. 222, passed 4-7-1969; Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992)
§ 130.35 PROCEDURE IN CASE OF REPEATED VIOLATIONS OR OTHER FACTORS INTERFERING
WITH ENFORCEMENT.
   Any minor who shall violate this subchapter more than three times may, at
the discretion of the proper borough officials, be reported to a society or
organization the purpose of which is to take charge of incorrigibles and
delinquents, and proceedings shall then be taken in the proper court of the
permanent welfare of such minor and a like procedure may be taken in cases
where the arrest of the parent is not effective, or where for any other reason,
the provisions of §
130.32 cannot be made effective by the imposition of fines and penalties.
(Prior Code, § 6, 607) (Ord. 222, passed 4-7-1969; Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992)
§ 130.36 POLICE DISCRETION IN AGE DETERMINATION.
   (A)   The police officers of the borough, in taking minors into custody,
shall use their discretion in determining age and, in doubtful cases, may
require positive proof of age.
   (B)   Until such age is furnished, the officer’s judgment shall prevail.
(Prior Code, § 6, 608) (Ord. 222, passed 4-7-1969; Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992)
§ 130.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person who shall violate any provision of §
130.01 shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding
$600 and costs, or, in default of payment thereof, shall be subject to
imprisonment for a term not to exceed 30 days.
(Prior Code, § 6, 104)
   (C)   Any person who shall violate any provision of §
130.02 shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $600 plus costs and, in default of payment thereof, to a term of
imprisonment for a term not to exceed 30 days.
(Prior Code, § 6, 202)
   (D)   Any person who shall violate any provision of §
130.03 shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $600 and costs, or in default of payment thereof, shall be subject to
imprisonment for a term not to exceed 30 days.
(Prior Code, § 6, 402)
   (E)   Any person who shall violate any provision of §§
130.15 through
130.17 shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $600 and costs, or in default of payment thereof, shall be subject to
imprisonment for a term not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation of §§
130.15 through
130.17 continues shall constitute a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 6, 304)
   (F)   Any person who shall violate any provision of §§
130.30 through
130.36 shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $600 and costs, or, in default of payment thereof, shall be subject to
imprisonment for a term not to exceed 30 days.
(Prior Code, § 6, 606)
(Ord. 218, passed 4-7-1969; Ord. 219, passed 4-7-1969; Ord. 220, passed 4-7-
1969; Ord. 222, passed 4-7-1969; Ord. 265, passed 8-10-1987; Ord. 271, passed
6-8-1992)
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   STREETS, SIDEWALKS, AND PUBLIC WAYS
      
151.   BUILDING REGULATIONS
      
152.   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
      
153.   SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT
CHAPTER 150: STREETS, SIDEWALKS, AND PUBLIC WAYS
Section
General Provisions
   
150.001   Definition and interpretations
   
150.002   Tampering with public property on streets, alleys, or public grounds
prohibited
   
150.003   Tampering with stakes, posts, and monuments prohibited
   
150.004   Tampering with warning lamps, signs, or barricades prohibited
   
150.005   Removal of material from streets, alleys, or public grounds
   
150.006   Deposit of harmful substances on streets, alleys, sidewalks, or
public grounds prohibited
   
150.007   Exceptions
   
150.008   Snow and ice removal from sidewalks
   
150.009   Sidewalk obstructions and uses
   
150.010   Grass clippings
Streets
   
150.025   Permit required to excavate in street or alley; fee and deposit or
bond
   
150.026   Use of deposit
   
150.027   Manner of refilling and resurfacing
   
150.028   Excavations in state highways
   
150.029   Display of red lights required
   
150.030   Removal of excess material
Sidewalk and Curb Construction and Repair
   
150.045   Property owners to construct or reconstruct sidewalk and/or curb on
notice
   
150.046   Property owners to repair sidewalk and/or curb on notice
   
150.047   Material for sidewalks and curbs
   
150.048   Sidewalks and curbs to conform to grade and line
   
150.049   Sidewalk width; depth of curbs
   
150.050   Determination of necessity for work; inspections; notification of
completion
   
150.051   Authority for property owner to do work on own initiative
   
150.052   Authority for borough to do work and collect cost
   
150.053   Inspection prior to transfer
   
150.054   Inspection prior to issuance of building permit
Municipal Trees
   
150.065   Short title
   
150.066   Definitions
   
150.067   General considerations
   
150.068   Planting
   
150.069   Maintenance of property owner’s request
   
150.070   Removal, replanting, and replacement
   
150.071   Hazardous, dangerous, obstructing, and/or diseased trees
   
150.072   Abuse or mutilation of public trees
   
150.073   Protection of trees
   
150.074   Placing materials on public property
   
150.075   Interference with the office of the borough
 
   
150.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 150.001 DEFINITION AND INTERPRETATIONS.
   As used in this subchapter, the term PERSON shall include any individual,
corporation, partnership, association, firm, or other legal entity. The
singular shall include the plural, the plural shall include the singular, and
the masculine shall include the feminine and the neuter.
(Prior Code, § 6, 501) (Ord. 221, passed 4-7-1969; Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992)
§ 150.002 TAMPERING WITH PUBLIC PROPERTY ON STREETS, ALLEYS, OR PUBLIC GROUNDS
PROHIBITED.
   No person shall destroy, injure, tamper with, or deface any public property
of the borough, or any grass, walk, lamp, ornamental work, building, or street
light on or in any of the streets, alleys, sidewalks, or public grounds in the
borough.
(Prior Code, § 6, 502) (Ord. 221, passed 4-7-1969; Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992)
Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.003 TAMPERING WITH STAKES, POSTS, AND MONUMENTS PROHIBITED.
   No person shall, in any manner, interfere or meddle with, or pull, drive,
change, alter, or destroy any stake, post, monument, or other marking made,
placed, or set, or hereafter made, placed, or set, or caused to be done by the
authorities of the borough, to evidence the location, elevation, line, grade,
corner, or angle of any public street, alley, sidewalk, curb, gutter, drain, or
other public work, or thing.
(Prior Code, § 6, 503) (Ord. 221, passed 4-7-1969; Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992)
Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.004 TAMPERING WITH WARNING LAMPS, SIGNS, OR BARRICADES PROHIBITED.
   No person shall destroy, remove, deface, obliterate, or cover up any lamp,
sign, or barricade erected as a warning of danger by the authorities of the
borough or by any person doing work by permission of the authorities of the
borough on any of the streets, alleys, sidewalks, or bridges in the borough or
on any public grounds of the borough, within or without the borough.
(Prior Code, § 6, 504) (Ord. 221, passed 4-7-1969; Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992)
Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.005 REMOVAL OF MATERIAL FROM STREETS, ALLEYS, OR PUBLIC GROUNDS.
   No person shall take any earth, stone, or other material from any street,
alley, or public grounds in the borough.
(Prior Code, § 6, 505) (Ord. 221, passed 4-7-1969; Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992)
Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.006 DEPOSIT OF HARMFUL SUBSTANCES ON STREETS, ALLEYS, SIDEWALKS, OR
PUBLIC GROUNDS PROHIBITED.
   No person shall pour, throw, or deposit any harmful or destructive substance
or matter on any street, alley, sidewalk, or public grounds in the borough.
(Prior Code, § 6, 506) (Ord. 221, passed 4-7-1969; Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992)
Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.007 EXCEPTIONS.
   Sections
150.001 through
150.006 shall not apply to normal activities in connection with construction,
maintenance, and repair of streets, alleys, sidewalks, and public grounds and
the structures and fixtures located thereon or therein, or to incidental
results of work done thereon or therein upon permit from or by authority of the
borough.
(Prior Code, § 6, 507) (Ord. 221, passed 4-7-1969; Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992)
§ 150.008 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL FROM SIDEWALKS.
   (A)   Responsibility; time limit.
      (1)   The owner, occupant, or tenant of every property in the borough
fronting upon or alongside any of the streets in the borough is hereby required
to remove or cause to be removed from all of the sidewalks in front of or
alongside such property all snow and ice thereon fallen or formed, within 24
hours after the same shall have ceased to fall or to be formed. Provided, the
owner of a property shall be responsible for conforming to the requirements of
this section where such property is occupied by such owner or is vacant or
unoccupied, or where the property is a multiple-unit property, occupied by more
than one tenant or occupier. The tenant or occupier of a property shall be so
responsible where such property comprises a single unit, occupied by such
tenant or occupier only.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful and shall constitute a public nuisance for
anyone to throw, shovel, plow, or use a snow blower to deposit snow into or
upon any street or highway in the borough with the intent of allowing such snow
to remain on such streets and highways.
      (3)   It shall be required of all homes and businesses along Main Street
between N. Hopewell traffic light and N. Spring Street traffic light, to push
snow onto the brick pad for street crew’s cleanup.
      (4)   It shall be required of all homes and businesses on borough streets
to park to one side of the street when snow removal begins. The movement of
your car to cleared side once plowed to make a plowing of opposite side easier
to clear. On even-numbered days, park north side or west side. On odd-numbered
days, park south side or east side.
(Prior Code, § 21, 301)
   (B)   Authority for borough to remove at expense of defaulting owner,
occupant, or tenant. In any case where the owner, occupant, or tenant, as
aforesaid in division (A) above, shall fail, neglect, or refuse to comply with
any of the provisions of division (A) above within the time limit prescribed
therein, the borough authorities may proceed immediately to clear all snow and/
or ice from the sidewalk of such delinquent, and to collect the expenses
thereof, with any additional amount allowed by law, from such owner, occupant
or tenant, as the case may be, which may be in addition to any fine or penalty
imposed under §
150.999.
(Prior Code, § 21, 302)
(Ord. 232, passed 4-7-1969; Ord. 2021-06-02, passed 6-14-2021) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.009 SIDEWALK OBSTRUCTIONS AND USES.
   (A)   Definitions and interpretations. The word PERSON, as used in this
section, shall mean and include any natural person, association, firm, or
corporation. The singular shall include the plural, the plural shall include
the singular, and the masculine shall include the feminine and the neuter.
(Prior Code, § 21, 401)
   (B)   Prohibited acts.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to:
         (a)   Place or maintain on any sidewalk in the borough any display of
merchandise except so as to allow a clear unobstructed width of five feet on
Main Street, four feet on every other street in the borough, for the use of
pedestrian traffic;
         (b)   Place or allow to remain on any sidewalk in the borough, except
temporarily during loading or unloading and pending immediate removal
therefrom, any goods, wares, merchandise, or any bulky substance or material
whatsoever; or
         (c)   To place or permit to remain any grass clippings upon any
sidewalk located in the borough.
      (2)   Provided, nothing herein shall prevent the holding by the merchants
of the borough for special “sidewalk sales,” when the same shall be
specifically authorized by the Mayor, and then when conducted subject to the
conditions prescribed by the Mayor for use and occupancy of the sidewalks.
(Prior Code, § 21, 402)
(Ord. 231, passed 4-7-1969; Ord. 2022-07-02, passed 7-11-2022; Ord. 2025-05-13,
passed 5-12-2025) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.010 GRASS CLIPPINGS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to place or permit to be placed or
remain any grass clippings upon any street or highway located within the
borough.
(Ord. 2022-07-01, passed 7-11-2022) Penalty, see §
150.999
STREETS
§ 150.025 PERMIT REQUIRED TO EXCAVATE IN STREET OR ALLEY; FEE AND DEPOSIT OR
BOND.
   (A)   No person or persons, partnership, or corporation shall go upon the
streets, alleys, or highways within the borough to make ditches, trenches, or
any manner of excavation for the purpose of laying or repairing any manner of
water pipes, sewer pipes, electric, telegraph, or telephone lines or other
purposes, unless such person or persons, partnership, or corporation shall
first have procured from the Borough Council a permit, by paying a fee
established from time to time by resolution and shall also have deposited with
the Borough Secretary a sum equal to the prevailing price for replacement of
the street surface to be disturbed, as security for refilling such ditch,
trench, or other excavation, and placing the street, alley, or highway in as
good condition as it was prior to the digging or excavation herein referred to.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of the Borough Secretary to pay such deposit over
to the Borough Treasurer to be held by him or her until the Street Commissioner
or Street Committee shall first have approved in writing the refilling of such
ditch, trench or other excavation, when, if approved, such deposit, by proper
order of the Borough Council, shall be refunded to the party making the same.
Provided, in lieu of making such individual deposits, utilities may file a bond
with the borough in the amount fixed by the Borough Council.
(Prior Code, § 21, 101) (Ord. passed 4-5-1937; Ord. 202, passed 4-7-1969; Ord.
271, passed 6-8-1992) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.026 USE OF DEPOSIT.
   In the event that the refilling of said ditches, trenches, or excavation is
not approved by the Street Commissioner or Committee, then all or such part of
said sum as may be necessary for placing said street, alley, or highway in as
good condition as before shall be forfeited for said purpose, and the balance,
if any, refunded to the depositor.
(Prior Code, § 21, 102) (Ord. passed 4-5-1937)
§ 150.027 MANNER OF REFILLING AND RESURFACING.
   (A)   When a trench is opened across any street or alley, all precautions
must be taken that may be necessary in the matter of refilling the trench so as
to prevent future settling. The refilling to be done in six-inch layers well
tamped, and when such work is done on a paved street or macadamized street,
care must be taken in order to have the new paving over the trench the same
grade as originally existed.
   (B)   To accomplish this, the refilling of the trench shall be well tamped
in six-inch layers to a point about eighteen inches below surface of street or
alley; from this point upward to the bottom of material of improved street the
trench must be widened nine inches on each side, but the surface of the street
must not be disturbed for a width greater than the width of the trench below
the enlarged section. Into this enlarged section of trench shall be placed the
concrete of proper mixture, not less than six inches thick, and upon top of
same the roadway shall be replaced to correspond to the existing construction.
The width of such trenches not to exceed two feet or less if possible.
(Prior Code, § 21, 103) (Ord. passed 4-5-1937) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.028 EXCAVATIONS IN STATE HIGHWAYS.
   All work referred to in this subchapter done in any street in the borough
that is a state highway shall not be subject to this subchapter, but instead
shall be governed by the provisions of the law relating to openings in the
surface of highways maintained by the state in boroughs.
(Prior Code, § 21, 104) (Ord. passed 4-5-1937; Ord. 202, passed 4-7-1969)
§ 150.029 DISPLAY OF RED LIGHTS REQUIRED.
   Red lights must be displayed from sunset to sunrise at all points of work
where there may be danger to the traveling public.
(Prior Code, § 21, 105) (Ord. passed 4-5-1937) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.030 REMOVAL OF EXCESS MATERIAL.
   All excess materials from excavations, from trenches and pavement
construction, and other materials must be properly and completely removed from
streets and alleys.
(Prior Code, § 21, 106) (Ord. passed 4-5-1937) Penalty, see §
150.999
SIDEWALK AND CURB CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR
§ 150.045 PROPERTY OWNERS TO CONSTRUCT OR RECONSTRUCT SIDEWALK AND/OR CURB ON
NOTICE.
   Every owner of property in the borough shall, on 30 days’ notice from the
Borough Council, construct or reconstruct a sidewalk and/or curb, which shall
conform to all applicable requirements, in front of or alongside such property.
(Prior Code, § 21, 201) (Ord. 230, passed 4-7-1969) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.046 PROPERTY OWNERS TO REPAIR SIDEWALK AND/OR CURB ON NOTICE.
   Every owner of property in the borough shall, on ten days’ notice from the
Borough Council, repair the sidewalk and/or curb, in the manner stipulated in
such notice, in front of or alongside such property.
(Prior Code, § 21, 202) (Ord. 230, passed 4-7-1969) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.047 MATERIAL FOR SIDEWALKS AND CURBS.
   (A)   All sidewalks and curbs shall be constructed, reconstructed, or
repaired of concrete only, according to specifications adopted from time to
time by the Borough Council.
   (B)   Provided, where an existing sidewalk or curb is of a material other
than concrete, which was permissible for use at the time such sidewalk or curb
was constructed, such sidewalk or curb may be repaired with the same material
if at least two-thirds of such sidewalk or curb, as the case may be, in front
or along any property, is in good repair.
(Prior Code, § 21, 203) (Ord. 230, passed 4-7-1969) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.048 SIDEWALKS AND CURBS TO CONFORM TO GRADE AND LINE.
   (A)   All sidewalks and curbs shall conform to the established grade and
line thereof.
   (B)   Provided, where curb cuts shall be required for the purpose of
driveway entrances, such curb cuts and driveway entrance construction shall
conform to the requirements of the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
that shall apply to state highways, except that where such curb cuts an
driveway entrances shall be along streets other than state highways, the
Borough Council shall have authority to grant variances where it shall deem the
same necessary because of special conditions.
(Prior Code, § 21, 204) (Ord. 230, passed 4-7-1969) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.049 SIDEWALK WIDTH; DEPTH OF CURBS.
   (A)   The paved portion of the sidewalk shall be at least four feet wide on
every street in the borough except:
      (1)   Main Street, where the paved portion thereof shall be seven feet
wide;
      (2)   Spring Street from Main Street to Fifth Street, where the paved
portion thereof shall be six feet wide; and
      (3)   Third Street, where the paved portion thereof shall be six feet
wide.
   (B)   The curbing shall be at least 18 inches deep on all streets.
   (C)   The depth of the sidewalk must be at least four inches thick.
(Prior Code, § 21, 205) (Ord. 230, passed 4-7-1969) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.050 DETERMINATION OF NECESSITY FOR WORK; INSPECTIONS; NOTIFICATION OF
COMPLETION.
   (A)   (1)   It shall be the duty of the Street Commissioner to determine, in
the case of any individual property, whether or not the sidewalk and/or curb
shall be reconstructed or repaired, and, if so, the specific part or parts
thereof to be constructed or repaired.
      (2)   The Street Commissioner may, at any time during the course of work
of constructing, reconstructing, or repairing any sidewalk or curb, visit the
site of such work in order to ascertain whether such work is being done
according to requirements, and he or she, or one of his or her assistants,
shall visit any such site for such purpose whenever requested by the property
owner.
   (B)   Within two days after completion of the work of construction,
reconstruction, or repair of any sidewalk and/or curb, it shall be the duty of
the owner of the property where such work was done to notify the Street
Commissioner of that fact, so that he or she may inspect such sidewalk and/or
curb to determine whether the same shall have been constructed, reconstructed,
or repaired in conformity with all applicable requirements.
(Prior Code, § 21, 206) (Ord. 230, passed 4-7-1969) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.051 AUTHORITY FOR PROPERTY OWNER TO DO WORK ON OWN INITIATIVE.
   Any property owner, upon his or her own initiative, and without notice from
any borough authority, may construct, reconstruct, or repair a sidewalk and/or
curb in front of or alongside his or her property, provided that such owner
shall first make application to the Borough Engineer and shall conform to the
requirements of this subchapter as to line and grade and as to material used,
and that he or she shall also notify the Street Commissioner, as required by §
150.050, within two days after completion of the work.
(Prior Code, § 21, 207) (Ord. 230, passed 4-7-1969)
§ 150.052 AUTHORITY FOR BOROUGH TO DO WORK AND COLLECT COST.
   Upon the neglect of any property owner to comply with any notice given as
provided in this subchapter, within the time limit stated therein, the borough
may proceed to construct, reconstruct, or repair the sidewalk and/or curb, as
the case may be, and may thereupon collect the cost thereof, with an additional
amount of 10% from such owner, in the manner permitted by law.
(Prior Code, § 21, 208) (Ord. 230, passed 4-7-1969)
§ 150.053 INSPECTION PRIOR TO TRANSFER.
   (A)   The Borough Council shall be notified of any transfer of title or
interest in property which abuts any street, alley, public way, or state
highway within the borough. Upon receipt of such notice, the Borough Council or
its duly authorized representative shall inspect the property and any existing
sidewalks or curbs and either issue a written certification of compliance with
the terms of this subchapter or a notice to construct, repair, or reconstruct
in accordance with §§
150.046 through
150.050.
   (B)   Such notice to the Borough Council of transfer of title or interest
shall be given as follows.
      (1)   At least ten days prior to transfer by deed, the borough shall
receive written notice of the proposed transfer.
      (2)   Both the transferor and the transferee shall be responsible for
notifying the Borough Council of the proposed transfer of title. Notice may be
given by either the transferor, the transferee, or by the authorized agent of
either the transferor or the transferee.
      (3)   In the event that the owner of a property is a corporation, the
directors, officers, and shareholders of the corporation shall notify the
Borough Council within 30 days after any transfer of ownership of stock in the
corporation which, when added with any other transfers of stock within a 12-
month period, constitutes a transfer of 50% or more of the issued and
outstanding share of the corporation.
      (4)   In the event that the owner of a property is a partnership, whether
general or limited, the partners shall notify the Borough Council within 30
days after any change of partnership interest, which when added with any other
change of partnership interest within a 12-month period, constitutes a transfer
of 50% or more of the ownership of the partnership.
(Prior Code, § 21, 209) (Ord. 2001-02-01, passed 2-12-2001) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.054 INSPECTION PRIOR TO ISSUANCE OF BUILDING PERMIT.
   Upon application for a building permit for any property which abuts any
street, alley, public way, or state highway within the borough, the Borough
Council or its authorized representative shall inspect the property and any
existing sidewalks or curbs and either issue a written certification of
compliance or a notice to construct, repair, or reconstruct in accordance with
§§
150.046 through
150.050.
(Prior Code, § 21, 210) (Ord. 2001-02-01, passed 2-12-2001)
MUNICIPAL TREES
§ 150.065 SHORT TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Municipal Tree
Ordinance of the Borough of Everett, County of Bedford, Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.”
(Ord. 12-09-24, passed 12-9-2024)
§ 150.066 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words in the plural include the singular, and words in the singular
include the plural. The word SHALL is mandatory and not merely directory.
   LARGE TREES. Those expected to attain a height in excess of 45 feet at
maturity.
   MEDIUM TREES. Those expected to attain a height of 30 feet to 45 feet at
maturity.
   MUNICIPALITY. The Borough of Everett, County of Bedford, Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
   PARK. Public parks.
   PERSON. Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, or
organization of any kind.
   PROPERTY LINE. The outer edge of a street or highway right-of-way.
   PUBLIC AREAS. All streets and parks as well as all other property owned by
the borough which are located in the borough.
   PUBLIC TREES. All shade and ornamental trees now and hereafter growing on
any public areas or where otherwise indicated.
   SMALL TREES. Those expected to attain a height of 20 feet to 30 feet at
maturity.
   STREET or HIGHWAY. The entire width of every public way or right-of-way when
any part thereof is open to the use of the public, as a matter of right, for
purposes of vehicular and pedestrian traffic.
   STREET TREES. All shade and ornamental trees now or hereafter growing on any
public street.
   TREE LAWN. The part of a street or highway not covered by sidewalk or other
paving, lying between the property line and that portion of the street or
highway usually used for vehicular traffic.
   TREE TOPPING. The severe cutting back of limits to stubs larger than three
inches in diameter within the tree’s crown to such a degree so as to remove the
normal canopy and disfigure the tree.
(Ord. 12-09-24, passed 12-9-2024)
§ 150.067 GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS.
   (A)   A no-fee borough notification permit is required in a public right-of-
way.
   (B)   No person shall plant, spray, fertilize, preserve, prune, remove, cut,
or otherwise disturb any public tree without first filing an application and
procuring a permit from the office of the borough. The person receiving the
permit shall abide by the specifications contained in this subchapter.
   (C)   Application for notification permits must be made at the office of the
borough not less than 48 hours in advance of the time the work is to be done.
   (D)   The office of the borough shall issue the notification permit provided
for herein if, in its judgment, the proposed work is desirable and the proposed
method and workmanship thereof are of a satisfactory nature. Any permit granted
shall contain a definite date of expiration, and the work shall be completed in
the time allowed on the notification permit and in the manner as therein
described. Any notification permit shall be void if its terms are violated.
   (E)   Notice of completion shall be given within five days to the office of
the borough for its inspection.
(Ord. 12-09-24, passed 12-9-2024) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.068 PLANTING.
   (A)   The application required herein shall state:
      (1)   The number of trees to be set out;
      (2)   The location, grade, species, cultivar, or variety of each tree;
      (3)   The method of planting; and
      (4)   Such other information as the Council of the borough shall find
reasonably necessary to make a fair determination of whether a permit should be
issued.
   (B)   Whenever any tree shall be planted or set out in conflict with the
provisions of this section, the Council of the borough shall so notify the
property owner either personally or by certified mail and may direct the
property owner to remove the same. If the property owner shall fail to remove
the same within five days of the date of the notice, it shall be lawful for the
Council of the borough to remove or cause removal of the same, and the cost
thereof plus 10% shall be assessed to the owner as provided by law in the case
of special assessments or municipal claims.
(Ord. 12-09-24, passed 12-9-2024) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.069 MAINTENANCE OF PROPERTY OWNER’S REQUEST.
   (A)   The application required herein shall state:
      (1)   The number of trees to be sprayed, fertilized, pruned, or otherwise
preserved;
      (2)   The kind of treatment to be administered;
      (3)   The composition of the spray material to be applied; and
      (4)   Such other information as the Council shall find reasonably
necessary to make a fair determination of whether a permit should be issued.
   (B)   No concrete or other material which could create a hazard when cutting
or trimming a tree may be utilized to repair a wound in said tree.
(Ord. 12-09-24, passed 12-9-2024) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.070 REMOVAL, REPLANTING, AND REPLACEMENT.
   (A)   Wherever it is necessary to remove a tree or trees from a tree lawn in
connection with the paving of sidewalk or the paving or widening of the portion
of a street or highway used for vehicular traffic by the borough, the borough
shall replant such trees or replace them. Provided that conditions prevent
planting on tree lawns, this requirement will be satisfied if any equivalent
number of trees of the same size at maturity and species as provided for in
this subchapter are planted in an attractive manner on the adjoining property.
   (B)   (1)   No person or property owner shall remove a tree from the tree
lawn for the purpose of construction, or for any other reason, without first
filing an application and procuring a permit from the Council, and without
replacing the removed tree or trees.
      (2)   Such replacement shall meet the standards of size, species, and
placement as provided for in a permit. The person or property owner shall bear
the cost of removal and replacement of all trees removed.
(Ord. 12-09-24, passed 12-9-2024) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.071 HAZARDOUS, DANGEROUS, OBSTRUCTING, AND/OR DISEASED TREES.
   (A)   (1)   It shall be the duty of any person or persons owning or
occupying real property bordering on any street upon which property there may
be trees located within or projecting within said street, to prune such trees
in such manner that they will not contain hazardous limbs, obstruct, or shade
the street lights, obstruct the passage of pedestrians on sidewalks, obstruct
vision of traffic signs, or obstruct view of any street or alley intersection.
The minimum clearance of any overhanging portion thereof shall be ten feet over
sidewalks and 16 feet over all streets.
      (2)   It shall be the duty of any person or persons owning or occupying
real property bordering on any street upon which property there may be trees
located within or projecting within said street to remove such hazardous or
dangerous streets.
      (3)   It shall be the duty of any person or persons owning or occupying
real property in the borough upon which property there may be trees to remove
said trees or parts thereof should they, in the opinion of the Council,
constitute a potential threat to other trees within the borough due to their
harboring of insects or disease.
   (B)   Should any person or persons owning real property within the borough
fail to prune/remove trees as provided in division (A) above, the Council shall
order such person or persons, within 30 days after receipt of written notice,
to so prune/remove such trees.
   (C)   The order required herein shall be served by mailing a copy of the
order to the last known address of the property owner, by certified mail.
   (D)   When a person to whom an order is directed shall fail to comply within
the specified time, it shall be lawful for the borough to prune/remove such
trees, and the cost thereof plus 10% shall be assessed to the property owner
for each time that the borough or its agents must conduct the work.
(Ord. 12-09-24, passed 12-9-2024) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.072 ABUSE OR MUTILATION OF PUBLIC TREES.
   (A)   Unless specifically authorized by the office of the borough, no person
shall intentionally damage, cut, carve, transplant, or remove any tree; attach
any rope, wire, nails, advertising posters, or other contrivance to any tree;
allow any gaseous, liquid, or solid substance which is harmful to such trees to
come in contact with them; or set fire or permit any fire to burn when such
fire or the heat thereof will injure any portion of any tree.
   (B)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to top any public
tree.
      (2)   Trees severely damaged by storms or other causes, or certain trees
under utility wires or other obstructions where other pruning practices are
impractical, may be exempted from this division (B) at the determination of the
Council.
(Ord. 12-09-24, passed 12-9-2024) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.073 PROTECTION OF TREES.
   (A)   All public trees near any excavation or construction of any building,
structure, or street work shall be guarded with a good substantial fence,
frame, or box not less than four feet high and eight feet square, or at a
distance in feet from the tree equal to the diameter of the trunk in inches
D.B.H. (diameter at breast height), whichever is greater, and all building
material, dirt, or other debris shall be kept outside the barrier.
   (B)   No person shall excavate any ditches, tunnels, trenches, or lay any
drive within a radius of 15 feet from any public street without first obtaining
a written permit from the Commission.
(Ord. 12-09-24, passed 12-9-2024) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.074 PLACING MATERIALS ON PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   No person shall deposit, place, store, or maintain upon any public area of
the borough, any stone, brick, sand, concrete, or other materials which may
impede the free passage of water, air, and fertilizer to the roots of any tree
growing therein, except by written permit of the office of the borough.
(Ord. 12-09-24, passed 12-9-2024) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.075 INTERFERENCE WITH THE OFFICE OF THE BOROUGH.
   No person shall hinder, prevent, delay, or interfere with the Council or any
of its assistants while engaged in carrying out the execution or enforcement of
this subchapter, regulations, and the like; provided, however, that nothing
herein shall be construed as an attempt to prohibit the pursuit of any remedy,
legal or equitable, in any court of competent jurisdiction for the protection
of property rights by the owner of any property within the borough.
(Ord. 12-09-24, passed 12-92024) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person who shall violate any provision of §§
150.001 through
150.007 shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $600 and costs, or in default of payment thereof, shall be subject to
imprisonment for a term not to exceed 30 days. Every day that a violation of §§
150.001 through
150.007 shall constitute a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 5, 508)
   (C)   Any person who shall violate any provision of §
150.008 shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine not
exceeding $600 and costs, or in default of payment thereof, shall be subject to
imprisonment for a term not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation of §
150.008 continues shall constitute a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 21, 303)
   (D)   Any person who violates any provision of §
150.009(B)(1)(c) shall receive one written warning. At the second violation,
upon conviction, said person shall be sentenced to pay a fine of $50 and costs.
A third violation shall be $100 and costs and will increase in $50 increments
for further violations.
   (E)   Any person who shall violate any provision of §§
150.025 through
150.030 shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine not
exceeding $600 and costs, or in default of payment thereof, shall be subject to
imprisonment for a term not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation of §§
150.025 through
150.030 continues shall constitute a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 21, 107)
   (F)   Any person who shall violate any provision of §§
150.045 through
150.054 requiring notice to be given to the Borough Council shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding $600 and costs, or
in default of payment thereof, shall be subject to imprisonment for a term not
to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation of §§
150.045 through
150.054 shall constitute a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 21, 211)
   (G)   Any person who fails to comply with any or all of the requirements or
provisions of §§
150.065 through
150.075, or who fails or refuses to comply with any notice, order, or direction
of the Borough Council or the borough’s authorized agent shall be guilty of an
offense and, upon conviction, shall pay a fine to the borough of not less than
$25, nor more than $600, plus costs of prosecution.
(Ord. passed 4-5-1937; Ord. 202, passed 4-7-1969; Ord. 221, passed 4-7-1969;
Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992; Ord. 2001-02-01, passed 2-12-2001; Ord. 12-09-24,
passed 12-9-2024; Ord. 2025-05-12, passed 5-12-2025; Ord. 2025-05-13, passed 5-
12-2025)
CHAPTER 151: BUILDING REGULATIONS
Section
Code Enforcement
   
151.01   Purpose and authority
   
151.02   Building Code adopted
   
151.03   Code administration and enforcement
Numbering
   
151.15   Definitions and interpretation
   
151.16   System for numbering building
   
151.17   Property owners to affix and maintain correct numbers
Use, Building, and Demolition Permits
   
151.30   Statement of interest
   
151.31   Application procedure
   
151.32   Issuance of permits
   
151.33   Placards
   
151.34   Start of construction
   
151.35   Completion of construction or demolition
   
151.36   Inspection and revocation
   
151.37   Fees
Mobile Home Parks
   
151.50   Definitions
   
151.51   License; sale of mobile home lot
   
151.52   Fees
   
151.53   Application for license
   
151.54   Water supply
   
151.55   Sewage disposal
   
151.56   Electrical distribution system
   
151.57   Service buildings and other community service facilities
   
151.58   Refuse disposal   
   
151.59   Fire protection
   
151.60   Fuel
   
151.61   Supervision; responsibilities of the park management
   
151.62   Revocation of license
 
   
151.99   Penalty
CODE ENFORCEMENT
§ 151.01 PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY.
   (A)   The purpose of this subchapter is to promote the general health,
safety, and welfare of the citizens of the borough and to conform to the
requirements of the Commonwealth Construction Act and regulations and
requirements of the Act promulgated by the Commonwealth Department of Labor and
Industry (hereinafter sometimes collectively referred to as the “Code”).
   (B)   The Commonwealth Construction Code Act requires the enactment of the
appropriate ordinance by municipalities electing to administer and enforce the
Building Code provisions of the code.
   (C)   The borough hereby elects to administer and enforce the provisions of
the Commonwealth Construction Code Act, Act 45 of 1999, P.S. §§ 7210.101 to
7210.1103, as amended from time to time, and its regulations.
(Prior Code, § 5, 101) (Ord. 2004-06-01, passed 6-14-2004)
§ 151.02 BUILDING CODE ADOPTED.
   (A)   The Uniform Construction Code, contained in 34 PA. Code Chapters 401
to 405, as amended from time to time, is hereby adopted and incorporated herein
by reference as the Municipal Building Code of the borough.
   (B)   Hereafter, the term CODE as used herein shall collectively mean the
Commonwealth Construction Code Act, as amended, referenced in §
151.01, and the Uniform Construction Code, as amended, as referenced in
division (A) above.
(Prior Code, § 5, 102) (Ord. 2004-06-01, passed 6-14-2004)
§ 151.03 CODE ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Administration and enforcement of the code within the borough shall be
undertaken in any of the following ways as determined by the governing body of
the borough from time to time by resolution or ordinance:
      (1)   By the designation of an employee of the borough to serve as the
Municipal Code Official to act on behalf of the borough;
      (2)   By the retention of one or more construction code officials or
third-party agencies to act on behalf of the borough;
      (3)   By agreement with one or more other municipalities for the joint
administration and enforcement of this Act through an inter-municipal
agreement;
      (4)   By entering into a contract with another municipality for the
administration and enforcement of this Act on behalf of the borough; or
      (5)   By entering into an agreement with the Commonwealth Department of
Labor and Industry for plan review, inspections, and enforcement of structures
other than one-family or two-family dwelling units and utility and
miscellaneous use structures.
   (B)   A Board of Appeals shall be established by resolution of the governing
body of the borough in conformity with the requirements of the relevant
provisions of the code, as amended from time to time, and for the purposes set
forth therein. If at any time enforcement and administration is undertaken
jointly with one or more other municipalities, said Board of Appeals shall be
established by joint action of the participating municipalities.
   (C)   (1)   All building code ordinances or portions of ordinances which
were adopted by the borough on or before July 1, 1999, and which equal or
exceed the requirements of the code shall continue in full force and effect
until repealed, or until such time as such provisions fail to equal or exceed
the minimum requirements of the code, as amended from time to time.
      (2)   All building code ordinances, building permit ordinances, and/or
portions thereof and/or ordinances which are in effect as of the effective date
of this ordinance and whose requirements are less than the minimum requirements
of the code are hereby repealed to the extent inconsistent herewith.
      (3)   All relevant ordinances, regulations, and policies of the borough
not governed by the code shall remain in full force and effect.
   (D)   Fees assessable by the borough for the administration and enforcement
undertaken pursuant to this subchapter and the code shall be established by
ordinance, if required by law, and/or joint resolution of the participating
municipalities and amended from time to time thereafter, as needed, by
subsequent resolution.
   (E)   (1)   (a)   The remedies and penalties as set forth in the code, as
amended, for violations of the code are adopted hereby and incorporated herein
by reference as if set forth at length.
         (b)   Such remedies and penalties may be enforced and applied on the
borough’s behalf through joint administration with the participating
municipalities as mentioned above under the inter- municipal agreement,
including, but not limited to, prosecution by the Solicitor for the
participating municipalities (without need for prior consent of the District
Attorney to do so) before a District Justice in the same manner provided for
the enforcement of summary offenses under the State Rules of Criminal
Procedure.
      (2)   When any individual, firm, corporation, or other entity so
prosecuted and convicted defaults on payment of the applicable fine as
determined by the District Justice, such individual or the managing officers of
any firm or corporation shall be imprisoned in the county prison for a period
not to exceed ten days.
      (3)   (a)   Each day or portion thereof during which any violation of
this subchapter continues shall constitute a separate offense and/or violation,
and the person, firm, corporation, or other entity in violation thereof shall
be liable for the penalty imposed, plus court costs and reasonable attorney’s
fees incurred by the borough and/or by joint administration of the
participating municipalities in the enforcement proceedings.
         (b)   Likewise, each section of the subchapter which is violated shall
constitute a separate offense and/or violation, and the person in violation
thereof shall be liable for the penalty imposed, plus court costs and
reasonable attorney’s fees incurred by the borough and/or by joint
administration of the participating municipalities in the enforcement
proceedings.
      (4)   (a)   In addition to the penalties in divisions (E)(1) through (E)
(3) above, all other actions are hereby reserved, including an action in equity
for the proper enforcement of this subchapter, which may be prosecuted through
joint administration and enforcement by the participating municipalities
through their Solicitor.
         (b)   The imposition of a fine or penalty for any violation of, or
noncompliance with, this subchapter shall in no way be considered express or
implied permission for such violation to continue, and all such persons
violating this subchapter shall be required by correct or remedy such
violations and noncompliance immediately upon notification by the borough and/
or the agents, servants, employees, or authorized representatives of the
participating municipalities joining together as mentioned above to enforce and
administer the code.
(Prior Code, § 5, 103) (Ord. 2004-06-01, passed 6-14-2004)
NUMBERING
§ 151.15 DEFINITIONS AND INTERPRETATION.
   In this subchapter, the singular shall include the plural, and the masculine
shall include the feminine and the neuter. For the purpose of this subchapter,
the following definitions apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.
   BUILDING. Any structure used or intended to be used as a dwelling or place
of business or industry, but shall not include any public building or any
structure built as a place of worship, or any accessory building located upon a
lot where there is also a main building.
   PERSON. Any natural person, partnership, association, firm, or corporation.
(Prior Code, § 4, 101) (Ord. 217, passed 4-7-1969)
§ 151.16 SYSTEM FOR NUMBERING BUILDING.
   (A)   The Borough Surveyor shall draw up a numbering plan for the entire
borough and assign numbers to all lots and buildings located in the borough.
Such numbers shall be assigned according to the system prescribed by this
section.
   (B)   (1)   All even numbers shall be on the south and west sides of
streets, and all odd numbers shall be on the north and east sides. The
allotments of numbers shall be made, as nearly as practicable, one number for
each 20 feet.
      (2)   Upon all streets not running in a generally north-south or east-
west direction, or in any way not conforming to the prevalent pattern of street
arrangement in the boroughs, numbers shall be assigned by the Surveyor at
approximate 20-foot intervals, as closely as possible to the numbers used upon
neighboring streets running in an approximately parallel direction, or, if the
latter is not practicable, in the manner that the Surveyor considers will
provide a most logical means of locating a property.
(Prior Code, § 4, 102) (Ord. 217, passed 4-7-1969)
§ 151.17 PROPERTY OWNERS TO AFFIX AND MAINTAIN CORRECT NUMBERS.
   (A)   Every owner of a lot in the borough on which a building, as herein
defined, is now or shall thereafter be located, shall affix the number that
shall be assigned to such lot upon such building or upon a permanent standard,
base, or support between such building and the street upon which it faces.
   (B)   Each digit shall be at least three inches high, shall be of such color
and material as to be visible from the street, and shall be constantly
maintained by the owner of the property in complete and legible form.
(Prior Code, § 4, 103) (Ord. 217, passed 4-7-1969) Penalty, see §
151.99
USE, BUILDING, AND DEMOLITION PERMITS
§ 151.30 STATEMENT OF INTEREST.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, business, or
corporation to undertake or cause to be undertaken the construction,
reconstruction, enlargement, alteration, or relocation of any building or
structure unless an approved use permit has been obtained from the borough
office and an approved building permit, if applicable, has been obtained from
Borough Office and an approved building permit, if applicable, has been
obtained from the borough office or from the borough’s authorized agent.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, business, or
corporation to undertake or cause to be undertaken the demolition or removal of
any building, structure, or mobile home unless an approved demolition permit
has been obtained from the borough office.
(Prior Code, § 4, 201) (Ord. 2004-06-01, passed 6-14-2004) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.31 APPLICATION PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Applications for use permits or demolition permits shall be made in
writing to the Borough Manager on forms supplied by the borough. Such
applications shall contain at least the following:
      (1)   Name and address of applicant;
      (2)   Name and address of owner of land on which proposed construction is
to occur;
      (3)   Name and address of contractor;
      (4)   Site location;
      (5)   Brief description of proposed work and estimated costs; and
      (6)   A plan of the site showing the exact site and location of the
proposed construction as well as existing buildings and other structures.
   (B)   Applications for building permits shall be made in writing to the
Borough Manager on forms supplied by the borough, or from the borough’s
authorized agent.
(Prior Code, § 4, 202) (Ord. 2004-06-01, passed 6-14-2004)
§ 151.32 ISSUANCE OF PERMITS.
   (A)   Use permits. Use permits will be issued by the Borough Manager only
after it has been determined that the proposed construction will be conformance
with all applicable borough ordinances, requirements, and regulations.
   (B)   Demolition permits. Demolition permits will be issued by the Borough
Manager only after it has been determined that the proposed demolition will be
in conformance with all applicable borough ordinances, requirements, and
regulations.
   (C)   Building permits. Building permits will be issued by the Borough
Manager or the borough’s authorized agent only after it has been determined
that the proposed construction will be in conformance with all applicable
building codes, requirements, and regulations.
   (D)   Setbacks.
      (1)   For the purpose of this division (D), terms in this division (D)
shall be as defined in the Borough Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.
      (2)   After the effective date of this division (D), use permits for
construction of all new buildings, accessory buildings, building additions, or
other structures, where such construction does not fall under the provisions of
the Borough Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance, shall only be issued
when such construction will be no closer than four feet from sidewalks and
street rights-of-way, four feet from rear property lines, and six feet from
side property lines, except when a waiver has been granted by the Borough
Council.
      (3)   The Borough Council may grant a waiver of setback requirements in
situations where new construction is consistent with the alignment of adjacent
buildings. An applicant for a use permit seeking a waiver from setbacks shall
submit a written request to the Borough Council at a regular monthly meeting of
the Council. The Council may refer the waiver request to the Borough Planning
Commission for review and request a recommendation from the Planning
Commission. The Council shall approve or deny the waiver request before a use
permit may be issued.
      (4)   This division (D) shall be effective on March 13, 2006.
(Prior Code, § 4, 203) (Ord. 2004-06-01, passed 6-14-2004)
§ 151.33 PLACARDS.
   In addition to the building permit, the Borough Manager or the borough’s
authorized agent shall issue a placard which shall be displayed on the premises
during the time construction is in progress. The placard shall show the number
of the building permit, the date of its issuance, and be signed by the Borough
Manager or the borough’s authorized agent.
(Prior Code, § 4, 204) (Ord. 2004-06-01, passed 6-14-2004) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.34 START OF CONSTRUCTION.
   Work on the proposed construction or demolition shall begin within six
months after the date of issuance of the building permit or the permit shall
expire, unless a time extension is granted, in writing, by the Borough Manager
or the borough’s authorized agent. Construction shall be considered to have
started with the first placement of permanent construction at the site, such as
the pouring of slabs or footings or any work beyond the stage of excavation.
For a structure without a basement or poured footings, the START OF
CONSTRUCTION includes the first permanent framing or assembly of the structure
or any part thereof on its pilings or foundation, or the affixing of any
prefabricated structure or mobile home to its permanent site. PERMANENT
CONSTRUCTION does not include land preparation, land clearing, grading,
filling, excavation for basement, footings, piers, or foundations, or the
erection of temporary forms.
(Prior Code, § 4, 205) (Ord. 2004-06-01, passed 6-14-2004) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.35 COMPLETION OF CONSTRUCTION OR DEMOLITION.
   Work on the proposed construction or demolition shall be completed within
one year after the date of the start of construction.
(Prior Code, § 4, 206) (Ord. 2004-06-01, passed 6-14-2004) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.36 INSPECTION AND REVOCATION.
   (A)   During the construction period, the Borough Manager, Code Inspector,
or other authorized agent may inspect the premises to determine that the work
is progressing in compliance with the information provided on the permit
application and with all applicable state or municipal law and ordinances.
   (B)   In the event the Borough Manager, Code Inspector, or other authorized
agent discovers that the work does not comply with the permit application or
any applicable laws and ordinances, or that there has been a false statement or
misrepresentation by any applicant, the Borough Manager or the borough’s
authorized agent shall revoke the building permit and report such fact to the
Borough Council for whatever action the Council deems necessary.
(Prior Code, § 4, 207) (Ord. 2004-06-01, passed 6-14-2004)
§ 151.37 FEES.
   Application for a use permit or demolition permit shall be accompanied by a
fee, as established from time to time by resolution of the Borough Council,
payable to the borough. Application for a building permit, if issued by the
borough, shall be accompanied by a fee, as established from time to time by
resolution of the Borough Council, payable to the borough. Application for a
building permit, if issued by the borough’s authorized agent, shall be
accompanied by a fee, as established by and payable to the borough’s authorized
agent.
(Prior Code, § 4, 208) (Ord. 2004-06-01, passed 6-14-2004)
MOBILE HOME PARKS
§ 151.50 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   LICENSE. The written approval as issued by the Borough Council, authorizing
a person to operate and maintain a mobile home park under the provisions of
this subchapter.
   MOBILE HOME. A transportable, single-family dwelling intended for permanent
occupancy, contained in one unit or in two or more units designed to be joined
into one integral unit capable of again being separated for repeated towing,
which arrives at a site complete and ready for occupancy except for minor and
incidental unpacking and assembly operations, and constructed so that it may be
used without a permanent foundation.
   MOBILE HOME LOT. A parcel of land in a mobile home park, improved with the
necessary utility connections and other appurtenances necessary for the
erection thereon of a single mobile home.
   MOBILE HOME PARK. A parcel or contiguous parcels of land which has been so
designated and improved that it contains two or more mobile home lots for the
placement thereon of mobile homes.
   OWNER. Any individual, firm, trust, partnership, corporation, company,
association, or other legal entity which rents or leases spaces in a mobile
home park.
   SERVICE BUILDING. A structure which contains operational, office,
recreational, sanitary, maintenance, or other facilities built for the use of
the mobile home park residents or owner.
   SEWER CONNECTION. All pipes, fittings, and appurtenances from the drain
outlet of the mobile home to the inlet of the corresponding sewer riser pipe.
   SEWER RISER PIPE. The portion of the sewer lateral which extends vertically
to the ground elevation and terminates at each mobile home space.
   WATER CONNECTION. All pipes, fittings, and appurtenances from the water
riser pipe to the water inlet pipe of the distribution system within the mobile
home.
   WATER RISER PIPE. The portion of the water service pipe which extends
vertically to the ground elevation and terminates at a designated point on each
mobile home lot.
   WATER SERVICE PIPE. All pipes, fittings, valves, and appurtenances from the
water main of the park distribution system to the water outlet of the
distribution system within the mobile home.
(Prior Code, § 14, 101) (Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992)
§ 151.51 LICENSE; SALE OF MOBILE HOME LOT.
   (A)   License required. It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain,
construct, alter, or extend any mobile home park within the limits of the
borough unless he holds a license issued by the Borough Council in the name of
such person for the specific maintenance, construction, alteration, or
extension proposed. The borough license shall be conspicuously posted in the
office or on the premises of the mobile home park at all times.
   (B)   Application to borough. The applicant shall also submit an application
to the Borough Council using a form furnished by the Borough Council for a
license to operate a mobile home park in the borough.
   (C)   License renewal. The license shall be renewed by the Borough Council
upon furnishing of proof by the applicant that his or her park continues to
meet the standards prescribed by this subchapter.
   (D)   Inspection of mobile home parks. The Borough Council may inspect a
mobile home park at reasonable intervals, and at reasonable times, to determine
compliance with this subchapter.
   (E)   Compliance of existing mobile home parks. 
      (1)   Mobile home parks in existence at the date of adoption of this
subchapter may be continued so long as they otherwise remain lawful.
      (2)   Any subsequent new construction, alteration, or extension of an
existing mobile home park shall comply with the provisions of the Borough
Subdivision and Zoning Ordinance.
      (3)   Any existing mobile home park which, in the opinion of the Borough
Council, creates a safety hazard shall be required to comply with this
subchapter within a reasonable period of time as determined by the Borough
Council.
   (F)   Individual mobile homes.
      (1)   Individual mobile homes permitted in areas as set forth in the
Zoning Ordinance and not located in a mobile home park shall not be required to
obtain a mobile home park license; however, they shall be required to obtain
zoning and building permits as prescribed by the borough ordinances.
      (2)   Individual mobile homes shall comply with all other applicable
borough ordinances and regulations governing single-family homes.
   (G)   Inspection; revocation of license; appeals. Whenever, upon inspection
of any mobile home park, it is determined that conditions or practices exist
which are in violation of any provision of this subchapter, or of any
regulations adopted pursuant hereto, the Borough Council shall give notice in
writing in accordance with the provisions of this subchapter to the person to
whom the license was issued, advising him or her that unless such conditions or
practices are corrected within a reasonable period of time specified in the
notice, the license to operate in the borough shall be suspended. At the end of
such period, such mobile home park shall be inspected and, if such conditions
or practices have not been corrected, such suspension to the person to whom the
license is issued. The licensee or applicant may appeal the decision of the
Borough Council by petitioning for a hearing within ten days of the decision.
Within 30 days of the petition, the Borough Council shall hold a hearing and
render its decision.
(Prior Code, § 14, 102) (Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992)
§ 151.52 FEES.
   A schedule of fees for applications, licenses, and/or inspections shall be
established by the Borough Council pursuant to resolution.
(Prior Code, § 14, 103) (Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992)
§ 151.53 APPLICATION FOR LICENSES.
   (A)   Application for the mobile home park license shall be filed in
triplicate with the Borough Council.
   (B)   The application shall be in writing, signed by the owner, and shall
include the following:
      (1)   Name and address of the owner;
      (2)   Location and legal description of the mobile home park;
      (3)   Plans and specifications of all buildings, improvements, and
facilities constructed or to be constructed within the mobile home park; and
      (4)   Such further information as may be requested by the various borough
agencies to enable them to determine if the proposed park will comply with
legal requirements.
(Prior Code, § 14, 104) (Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992)
§ 151.54 WATER SUPPLY.
   (A)   General requirements.
      (1)   An adequate supply of water shall be provided for mobile homes,
service buildings, and other accessory facilities as required by this
subchapter. Where a public water supply system of satisfactory quantity,
quality, and pressure is available, connection shall be made thereto and its
supply shall be used exclusively.
      (2)   Where a satisfactory public water supply system is not available,
the development of a private water supply system shall be approved by the
Commonwealth Department of Environmental Resources or other authorities having
jurisdiction over water supply systems.
   (B)   Fire hydrants. Where a public supply of water is provided, fire
hydrants shall be installed as agreed upon by the Borough Council and the
agency responsible for supplying water.
   (C)   Individual water riser pipes and connections.
      (1)   Individual water riser pipes shall be located within the confined
area of the mobile home stand at a point where the water connection will
approximate a vertical position, thereby ensuring the shortest water connection
possible and decreasing susceptibility to water pipe freezing.
      (2)   The water riser pipe shall have a minimum inside diameter of three-
quarter inch and terminate at least four inches above the ground surface. The
water outlet shall be provided with a cap when a mobile home does not occupy
the lot.
      (3)   Adequate provisions shall be made to prevent freezing of service
lines, valves, and riser pipe and to protect risers from heaving and shoving
actions of ground during freezing weather. Surface drainage shall be diverted
from the location of the riser pipe.
      (4)   A shutoff water valve below the frost line shall be provided near
the water riser pipe in each mobile home lot. Underground stop-and-waste valves
are prohibited unless their types of manufacture and their method of
installation are approved by the Borough Council.
(Prior Code, § 14, 105) (Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.55 SEWAGE DISPOSAL.
   (A)   General requirements. An adequate and safe sewerage system shall be
provided in all parks for conveying and disposing of sewage from mobile homes,
service buildings, and other accessory facilities.
   (B)   Individual sewer connections.
      (1)   Each mobile home stand shall be provided with at least a four-inch
diameter sewer riser pipe. This sewer riser pipe shall be embedded in poured
concrete, minimum 12-inch diameter and minimum 18-inch depth. The rim of the
riser pipe shall extend at least one-half inch above ground elevation. The
sewer riser pipe shall be so located on each stand that the sewer connection to
the mobile home drain outlet will approximate a vertical position.
      (2)   The sewer connection shall have a nominal inside diameter of not
less than three inches, and the slope of any portion thereof shall be at least
one-quarter inch per foot. All joints shall be watertight.
      (3)   All materials used for a sewer connection shall be semi-rigid,
corrosive resistant, nonabsorbent, and durable. The inner surface shall be
smooth.
      (4)   Provisions shall be made for plugging the sewer riser pipe when a
mobile home does not occupy the lot. Surface drainage shall be diverted away
from the river.
(Prior Code, § 14, 106) (Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.56 ELECTRICAL DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM.
   (A)   General requirements. Every park shall contain an electrical wiring
system consisting of wiring, fixtures, equipment, and appurtenances which shall
be installed and maintained in accordance with the borough ordinances
regulating such systems.
   (B)   Power distribution lines. Main power lines not located underground
shall be suspended at least 18 feet above the ground, and shall have a minimum
vertical clearance of eight feet above any mobile home, service building, or
other structure.
(Prior Code, § 14, 107) (Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.57 SERVICE BUILDINGS AND OTHER COMMUNITY SERVICE FACILITIES.
   (A)   The requirements of this section shall apply to service buildings,
recreation buildings, and other community service facilities when constructed,
such as management offices, repair shops, and storage areas, laundry
facilities, and indoor recreation areas.
   (B)   All structural requirements shall be in accordance with the borough
ordinances regulating same.
(Prior Code, § 14, 108) (Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.58 REFUSE DISPOSAL.
   The storage, collection, and disposal of refuse in the mobile home park
shall be so managed as to not create health hazards, rodent harborages, insect-
breeding areas, accident or fire hazards, or air pollution, and shall be in
accordance with the borough ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 14, 109) (Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.59 FIRE PROTECTION.
   Fire protection provisions shall be in accordance with the borough
ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 14, 110) (Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.60 FUEL.
   (A)   All piping from outside fuel storage tanks or cylinders to mobile
homes shall be copper or other acceptable metallic tubing and shall be
permanently installed and securely fastened in place.
   (B)   All fuel storage tanks or cylinders shall be securely fastened in
place and shall not be located inside or beneath the mobile home or less than
five feet from any mobile home exit.
(Prior Code, § 14, 111) (Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.61 SUPERVISION; RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE PARK MANAGEMENT.
   (A)   The person to whom a license for a mobile home park is issued shall
operate the park in compliance with this subchapter and shall provide adequate
supervision to maintain the park, its facilities, and equipment in good repair
and in a clean and sanitary condition.
   (B)   The park management shall supervise the placement of each mobile home
on its mobile home stand which includes securing its stability and installing
all utility connections.
   (C)   The park management shall give the Borough Council free access to all
mobile home lots, service buildings, and other community service facilities for
the purpose of inspection.
   (D)   The management shall maintain a register containing the names and
addresses of all park occupants. Such register shall be available to any
authorized person inspecting the park.
   (E)   The management shall notify the local Commonwealth Department of
Health immediately of any suspected communicable or contagious disease within
the park.
(Prior Code, § 14, 112) (Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.62 REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   Whenever, upon inspection of any mobile home park, it is determined that
conditions or practices exist which are in violation of any provision of this
subchapter, or of any regulations adopted pursuant hereto, the Borough Council
shall give notice in writing to the person to whom the license was issued,
advising them that unless such conditions or practices are corrected within the
period of time specified in the notice, the license to operate shall be
suspended. At the end of such period, such mobile home park shall be
reinspected and, if such conditions or practices have not been corrected, the
Borough Council shall suspend the license and give notice in writing of such
suspension to the person to whom the license is issued, An aggrieved party may
file an appeal to the Borough Council in accordance with the Local Agency Law,
being 2 Pa.C.S. § 105.
(Prior Code, § 14, 113) (Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992)
§ 151.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person who shall violate any provision of §§
151.15 through
151.17 shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding
$600 and costs, or in default of payment thereof, shall be subject to
imprisonment for a term not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation of §§
151.15 through
151.17 continues shall constitute a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 4, 104)
   (C)   Any person who fails to comply with any or all of the requirements or
provisions of §§
151.30 through
151.37 or who fails or refuses to comply with any notice, order, or direction
of the Borough Manager or the borough’s authorized agent shall be guilty of an
offense and, upon conviction, shall pay a fine to the borough of not less than
$25, nor more than $600, plus costs of prosecution. In default of such payment,
such person shall be imprisoned in the county prison for a period not to exceed
ten days. Each day during which any violation of §§
151.30 through
151.37 continues shall constitute a separate offense. In addition to the above
penalties, all other actions are hereby reserved, including an action in equity
for the proper enforcement of §§
151.30 through
151.37. The imposition of a fine or penalty for any violation of, or
noncompliance with, §§
151.30 through
151.37 shall not excuse the violation or noncompliance, or permit it to
continue, and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such
violations and noncompliance within a reasonable time. Any structure or
building constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, altered, or relocated in
noncompliance with §§
151.30 through
151.37 may be declared by the Borough Council to be a public nuisance and
abatable as such.
(Prior Code, § 4, 208)
   (D)   Any person, firm, or corporation who shall violate any provision of §§
151.50 through
151.62 shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding
$600 plus costs and, in default of payment, to imprisonment for a term not to
exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation of §§
151.50 through
151.62 continues shall constitute a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 14, 114)
(Ord. 217, passed 4-7-1969; Ord. 271, passed 6-8-1992; Ord. 2004-06-01, passed
6-14-2004)
CHAPTER 152: FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
Section
General Provisions
   
152.01   Statutory authorization
   
152.02   Intent
   
152.03   Applicability
   
152.04   Abrogation and greater restrictions
   
152.05   Warning and disclaimer of liability
   
152.06   Definitions
Administration
   
152.20   Designation of the Floodplain Administrator
   
152.21   Permits required
   
152.22   Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator
   
152.23   Application procedures and requirements
   
152.24   Review of application by others
   
152.25   Changes
   
152.26   Placards
   
152.27   Start of construction
   
152.28   Enforcement
   
152.29   Appeals
Identification of Floodplain Areas
   
152.40   Identification
   
152.41   Description and special requirements of identified floodplain areas
   
152.42   Changes in identification of area
   
151.43   Boundary disputes
Technical Provisions
   
152.55   General
   
152.56   Elevation and floodproofing requirements
   
152.57   Design and construction standards
   
152.58   Development which may endanger human life
   
152.59   Special requirements for subdivisions
   
152.60   Special requirements for manufactured homes
   
152.61   Special requirements for recreational vehicles
   
152.62   Prohibited activities
   
152.63   Existing structures in identified floodplain areas
   
152.64   Variances
   
152.65   Effective date
 
   
152.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 152.01 STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.
   The Legislature of the commonwealth has, by the passage of the Commonwealth
Floodplain Management Act of 1978, being 32 P.S. §§ 679.101 et seq., delegated
the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt floodplain management
regulations to promote public health, safety, and the general welfare of its
citizenry. Therefore, the Borough Council does hereby order as follows.
(Ord. 2012-02-01, passed 2-28-2012)
§ 152.02 INTENT.
   The intent of this chapter is to:
   (A)   Promote the general health, welfare, and safety of the community;
   (B)   Encourage the utilization of appropriate construction practices in
order to prevent or minimize flood damage in the future;
   (C)   Minimize danger to public health by protecting water supply and
natural drainage;
   (D)   Reduce financial burdens imposed on the community, its governmental
units, and its residents, by preventing excessive development in areas subject
to flooding; and
   (E)   Comply with federal and state floodplain management requirements.
(Ord. 2012-02-01, passed 2-28-2012)
§ 152.03 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, business, or
corporation to undertake, or cause to be undertaken, any construction or
development anywhere within the borough unless a permit has been obtained from
the Floodplain Administrator.
   (B)   A permit shall not be required for minor repairs to existing buildings
or structures.
(Ord. 2012-02-01, passed 2-28-2012) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.04 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
   This chapter supersedes any other conflicting provisions which may be in
effect in identified floodplain areas. However, any other ordinance provisions
shall remain in full force and effect to the extent that those provisions are
more restrictive. If there is any conflict between any of the provisions of
this chapter, the more restrictive shall apply.
(Ord. 2012-02-01, passed 2-28-2012)
§ 152.05 WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   (A)   The degree of flood protection sought by the provisions of this
chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on
accepted engineering methods of study. Larger floods may occur or flood heights
may be increased by human-made or natural causes, such as ice jams and bridge
openings restricted by debris. This chapter does not imply that areas outside
any identified floodplain areas, or that land uses permitted within such areas
will be free from flooding or flood damages.
   (B)   This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the borough or
any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance
on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
(Ord. 2012-02-01, passed 2-28-2012)
§ 152.06 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE. A use or structure on the same lot with, and of
a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the principal use or
structure.
   BASE FLOOD. A flood that has a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any
given year. (Also called the 100-YEAR FLOOD.)
   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE). The elevation shown on the flood insurance rate
map (FIRM) for Zones AE, AH, A1-30 that indicates the water surface elevation
resulting from a flood that has a 1% or greater chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
   BASEMENT. Any area of the building having its floor below ground level on
all sides.
   BUILDING. A combination of materials to form a permanent structure having
walls and a roof. Included shall be all manufactured homes and trailers to be
used for human habitation.
   DEVELOPMENT. Any human-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, the construction, reconstruction, renovation,
repair, expansion, or alteration of buildings or other structures; the
placement of manufactured homes; streets and other paving; utilities; filling,
grading, and excavation; mining; dredging; drilling operations; storage of
equipment or materials; and the subdivision of land.
   EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date
of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
   EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. The
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
   FLOOD. A temporary inundation of normally dry land areas.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). The official map on which the Federal
Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated
both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable
to the community.
   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS). The official report provided by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency that includes flood profiles, the flood insurance
rate map, the flood boundary and floodway map, and the water surface elevation
of the base flood.
   FLOODPLAIN AREA. A relatively flat or low land area which is subject to
partial or complete inundation from an adjoining or nearby stream, river, or
watercourse; and/or any area subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation of
surface waters from any source.
   FLOODPROOFING. Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions,
changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities,
structures, and their contents.
   FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land
areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot.
   HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface
prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
   HISTORIC STRUCTURES. Any structure that is:
      (1)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual
listing on the National Register;
      (2)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to
qualify as a registered historic district;
      (3)   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in
states which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
      (4)   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation that have been certified either:
         (a)   By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
         (b)   Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without
approved programs.
   LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest floor of the lowest fully enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished, flood resistant partially enclosed area, used solely
for parking of vehicles, building access, and incidental storage, in an area
other than a basement area is not considered the LOWEST FLOOR of a building,
provided that such space is not designed and built so that the structure is in
violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of this chapter.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which
is built on
a permanent chassis, and is designed for use with or without a permanent
foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term includes park
trailers, travel trailers, recreational and other similar vehicles that are
placed on a site for more than 180 consecutive days.
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of
land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
   MINOR REPAIR. The replacement of existing work with equivalent materials for
the purpose of its routine maintenance and upkeep, but not including the
cutting away of any wall, partition, or portion thereof, the removal or cutting
of any structural beam or bearing support, or the removal or change of any
required means of egress, or rearrangement of parts of a structure affecting
the exitway requirements; nor shall MINOR REPAIRS include addition to,
alteration of, replacement, or relocation of any standpipe, water supply,
sewer, drainage, drain leader, gas, oil, waste, vent, or similar piping,
electric wiring or mechanical or other work affecting public health or general
safety.
   NEW CONSTRUCTION. Structures for which the start of construction commenced
on or after November 16, 1990, and includes any subsequent improvements to such
structures. Any construction started after November 16, 1990, and before March
2, 2012, is subject to the ordinance in effect at the time the permit was
issued, provided the start of construction was within 180 days of permit
issuance.
   NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective
date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
   PERSON. An individual, partnership, public or private association or
corporation, firm, trust, estate, municipality, governmental unit, public
utility, or any other legal entity whatsoever, which is recognized by law as
the subject of rights and duties.
   POST-FIRM STRUCTURE. A structure for which construction or substantial
improvement occurred after December 31, 1974, or on or after the community’s
initial flood insurance rate map (FIRM) dated November 16, 1990, whichever is
later and, as such, would be required to be compliant with the regulations of
the National Flood Insurance Program.
   PRE-FIRM STRUCTURE. A structure for which construction or substantial
improvement occurred on or before December 31, 1974, or before the community’s
initial flood insurance rate map (FIRM) dated November 16, 1990, whichever is
later, and, as such, would not be required to be compliant with the regulations
of the National Flood Insurance Program.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle which is:
      (1)   Built on a single chassis;
      (2)   Not more than 400 square feet, measured at the largest horizontal
projections;
      (3)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-
duty truck; and
      (4)   Not designed for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary
living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
   REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION. The base flood elevation (BFE) plus a freeboard
safety factor of one and one-half feet.
   REPETITIVE LOSS. Flood-related damages sustained by a structure on two
separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of repairs at
the time of each such flood event, on average, equals or exceeds 25% of the
market value of the structure before the damages occurred.
   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA). An area in the floodplain subject to a 1%
or greater chance of flooding in any given year. It is shown on the FIRM as
Zone A, AO, A1-30, AE, A99, or AH.
   SPECIAL PERMIT. A special approval which is required for hospitals, nursing
homes, jails, and new manufactured home parks and subdivisions and substantial
improvements to such existing parks, when such development is located in all,
or a designated portion, of a floodplain.
   START OF CONSTRUCTION. Includes substantial improvement and other proposed
new development and means the date the permit was issued, provided the actual
start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition,
placement, or other improvement was within 180 days from the date of the permit
and shall be completed within 12 months after the date of issuance of the
permit unless a time extension is granted, in writing, by the Floodplain
Administrator.
      (1)   The ACTUAL START means either the first placement of permanent
construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings,
the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the
stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufacture home on a foundation.
      (2)   PERMANENT CONSTRUCTION does not include land preparation, such as
clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets
and walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers,
or foundations, or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the
installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds
not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a
substantial improvement, the ACTUAL START OF CONSTRUCTION means the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building,
whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
   STRUCTURE. A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage
tank that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home.
   SUBDIVISION. The division or redivision of a lot, tract, or parcel of land
by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels, or other divisions of land
including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether immediate or
future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs, or
devisees, transfer of ownership, or building or lot development; provided,
however, that the SUBDIVISION by lease of land for agricultural purposes into
parcels of more than ten acres, not involving any new street or easement of
access or any residential dwelling, shall be exempted.
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage from any cause sustained by a structure whereby
the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal
or exceed 50% or more of the market value of the structure before the damage
occurred.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or
other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of
the market value of the structure before the start of construction of the
improvement. This term includes structures that have incurred substantial
damage or repetitive loss, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The
term does not, however, include either:
      (1)   Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications
which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are
the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
      (2)   Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the
alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a
historic structure.
   THIRD-PARTY CODE ADMINISTRATOR. The person or entity appointed by the
borough to administer and enforce the commonwealth’s Uniform Construction Code
(UCC), being 32 P.S. §§ 7210.301 et seq., and its supporting rules and
regulations, as amended, as adopted by the borough.
   UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE (UCC). The statewide building code adopted by the
state’s General Assembly in 1999 applicable to new construction in all
municipalities, whether administered by the municipality, a third party, or the
Department of Labor and Industry. Applicable to residential and commercial
buildings, the code adopted the International Residential Code (IRC) and the
International Building Code (IBC) by reference, as the construction standard
applicable with the state floodplain construction. For coordination purposes,
references to the above are made specifically to various sections of the IRC
and the IBC.
   VIOLATION. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community’s floodplain management regulations. A structure
or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications,
or other evidence of compliance required in 44 C.F.R. § 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)
(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to be in VIOLATION until
such time as that documentation is provided.
(Ord. 2012-02-01, passed 2-28-2012)
ADMINISTRATION
§ 152.20 DESIGNATION OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.
   (A)    The Borough Secretary is hereby appointed to administer and implement
these regulations and is referred to herein as the Floodplain Administrator.
   (B)   The Floodplain Administrator may:
      (1)   Fulfill the duties and responsibilities set forth in these
regulations;
      (2)   Delegate duties and responsibilities set forth in these regulations
to qualified technical personnel, plan examiners, inspectors, and other
employees; and
      (3)   Enter into a written agreement or written contract with another
agency or private sector entity to administer specific provisions of these
regulations. Administration of any part of these regulations by another entity
shall not relieve the community of its responsibilities pursuant to the
participation requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program as set forth
in the Code of Federal Regulations at 44 C.F.R. § 59.22.
   (C)   In the absence of a designated Floodplain Administrator, the
Floodplain Administrator duties are to be fulfilled by the Borough Chief
Executive Officer.
(Ord. 2012-02-01, passed 2-28-2012)
§ 152.21 PERMITS REQUIRED.
   A permit shall be required before any construction or development is
undertaken within any area of the borough.
(Ord. 2012-02-01, passed 2-28-2012) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.22 DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.
   (A)   The Floodplain Administrator shall issue a permit only after it has
been determined that the proposed work to be undertaken will be in conformance
with the requirements of this and all other applicable codes and ordinances.
   (B)   Prior to the issuance of any permit, the Floodplain Administrator
shall review the application for the permit to determine if all other necessary
government permits required by state and federal laws have been obtained, such
as those required by the State Sewage Facilities Act (Act 1966-537, as
amended), being 35 P.S. §§ 750.1 et seq.; the State Dam Safety and
Encroachments Act (Act 1978-325, as amended), being 35 P.S. §§ 693.1 et seq.;
the State Clean Streams Act (Act 1937-394, as amended), being 35 P.S. §§ 691.1
et seq.; and the U.S. Clean Water Act, § 404, 33 U.S.C. § 1344. No permit shall
be issued until this determination has been made.
   (C)   In the case of existing structures, prior to the issuance of any
development/permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall review the history of
repairs to the subject building, so that any repetitive loss issues can be
addressed before the permit is issued.
   (D)   During the construction period, the Floodplain Administrator or other
authorized official shall inspect the premises to determine that the work is
progressing in compliance with the information provided on the permit
application and with all applicable municipal laws and ordinances. He or she
shall make as many inspections during and upon completion of the work as are
necessary.
   (E)   In the discharge of his or her duties, the Floodplain Administrator
shall have the authority to enter any building, structure, premises, or
development in the identified floodplain area, upon presentation of proper
credentials, at any reasonable hour to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
   (F)   In the event the Floodplain Administrator discovers that the work does
not comply with the permit application or any applicable laws and ordinances,
or that there has been a false statement or misrepresentation by any applicant,
the Floodplain Administrator shall revoke the permit and report such fact to
the Borough Council for whatever action it considers necessary.
   (G)   The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain all records associated
with the requirements of this chapter, including, but not limited to,
permitting, inspection, and enforcement.
   (H)   The Floodplain Administrator shall consider the requirements of the 34
PA. Code and the most recent edition of the IBC and IRC or latest revisions
thereof.
(Ord. 2012-02-01, passed 2-28-2012)
§ 152.23 APPLICATION PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Application for such a permit shall be made, in writing, to the
Floodplain Administrator on forms supplied by the borough. Such application
shall contain the following:
      (1)   Name and address of applicant;
      (2)   Name and address of owner of land on which proposed construction is
to occur;
      (3)   Name and address of contractor;
      (4)   Site location, including address;
      (5)   Listing of other permits required;
      (6)   Brief description of proposed work and estimated cost, including a
breakout of flood-related cost and the market value of the building before the
flood damage occurred where appropriate; and
      (7)   A plan of the site showing the exact size and location of the
proposed construction as well as any existing buildings or structures.
   (B)   If any proposed construction or development is located entirely or
partially within any identified floodplain area, applicants for permits shall
provide all the necessary information in sufficient detail and clarity to
enable the Floodplain Administrator to determine that:
      (1)   All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage and conform with the requirements of this and all other applicable codes
and ordinances;
      (2)   All utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical, and
water systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood
damage;
      (3)   Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood
hazards;
      (4)   Structures will be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or
lateral movement;
      (5)   Building materials are flood-resistant;
      (6)   Appropriate practices that minimize flood damage have been used;
and
      (7)   Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning
equipment, and other service facilities have been designed and/or located to
prevent water entry or accumulation.
   (C)   Applicants shall file the following minimum information plus any other
pertinent information as may be required by the Floodplain Administrator to
make the determination in division (B) above:
      (1)   A completed permit application form;
      (2)   A plan of the entire site, clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of
one inch being equal to 100 feet or less, showing the following:
         (a)   North arrow, scale, and date;
         (b)   Topographic contour lines, if available;
         (c)   The location of all existing and proposed buildings, structures,
and other improvements, including the location of any existing or proposed
subdivision and development;
         (d)   The location of all existing streets, drives, and other access
ways; and
         (e)   The location of any existing bodies of water or watercourses,
identified floodplain areas, and, if available, information pertaining to the
floodway, and the flow of water, including direction and velocities.
      (3)   Plans of all proposed buildings, structures, and other
improvements, drawn as suitable scale showing the following:
         (a)   The proposed lowest floor elevation of any proposed building
based upon North American Vertical Datum of 1988;
         (b)   The elevation of the base flood; and
         (c)   Supplemental information as may be necessary under 34 PA. Code,
the most recent edition of the IBC and IRC Code.
      (4)   The following data and documentation:
         (a)   If available, information concerning flood depths, pressures,
velocities, impact and uplift forces, and other factors associated with a base
flood;
         (b)   Detailed information concerning any proposed floodproofing
measures and corresponding elevations;
         (c)   Documentation, certified by a registered professional engineer
or architect, to show that the cumulative effect of any proposed development
within an AE Area/Zone when combined with all other existing and anticipated
development, will not increase the base flood elevation more than one foot at
any point;
         (d)   A document, certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect, which states that the proposed construction or development has been
adequately designed to withstand the pressures, velocities, impact and uplift
forces associated with the base flood elevation. Such statement shall include a
description of the type and extent of floodproofing measures that have been
incorporated into the design of the structure and/or development;
         (e)   Detailed information needed to determine compliance with §§
152.57(F) and
152.58, including:
            (1)   The amount, location, and purpose of any materials or
substances referred to in §§
152.57(F) and
152.58 which are intended to be used, produced, stored, or otherwise maintained
onsite; and
            (2)   A description of the safeguards incorporated into the design
of the proposed structure to prevent leaks or spills of the dangerous materials
or substances listed in §
152.58 during a base flood.
         (f)   The appropriate component of the Department of Environmental
Protection’s “Planning Module for Land Development;” and
         (g)   Where any excavation or grading is proposed, a plan meeting the
requirements of the Department of Environmental Protection, to implement and
maintain erosion and sedimentation control.
   (D)   Applications for permits shall be accompanied by a fee, payable to the
borough, based upon the estimated cost of the proposed construction as
determined by the Floodplain Administrator.
(Ord. 2012-02-01, passed 2-28-2012)
§ 152.24 REVIEW OF APPLICATION BY OTHERS.
   A copy of all plans and applications for any proposed construction or
development in any identified floodplain area to be considered for approval may
be submitted by the Floodplain Administrator to any other appropriate agencies
and/or individuals (e.g., Planning Commission, Municipal Engineer, and the
like) for review and comment.
(Ord. 2012-02-01, passed 2-28-2012)
§ 152.25 CHANGES.
   (A)   After the issuance of a permit by the Floodplain Administrator, no
changes of any kind shall be made to the application, permit, or any of the
plans, specifications, or other documents submitted with the application
without the written consent or approval of the Floodplain Administrator.
   (B)   Requests for any such change shall be in writing, and shall be
submitted by the applicant to Floodplain Administrator for consideration.
(Ord. 2012-02-01, passed 2-28-2012) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.26 PLACARDS.
   (A)   In addition to the permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall issue a
placard that shall be displayed on the premises during the time construction is
in progress.
   (B)   This placard shall show the number of the permit, the date of its
issuance, and be signed by the Floodplain Administrator.
(Ord. 2012-02-01, passed 2-28-2012) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.27 START OF CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   Work on the proposed construction or development shall begin within
180 days after the date of issuance and shall be completed within 12 months
after the date of issuance of the permit or the permit shall expire unless a
time extension is granted, in writing, by the Floodplain Administrator. The
ACTUAL START OF CONSTRUCTION means either the first placement of permanent
construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings,
the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the
stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufacture home on a foundation.
PERMANENT CONSTRUCTION does not include land preparation, such as clearing,
grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or
walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or
foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the
installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds
not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a
substantial improvement, the ACTUAL START OF CONSTRUCTION means the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building,
whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
   (B)   Time extensions shall be granted only if a written request is
submitted by the applicant, which sets forth sufficient and reasonable cause
for the Floodplain Administrator to approve such a request.
(Ord. 2012-02-01, passed 2-28-2012)
§ 152.28 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Whenever the Floodplain Administrator or other authorized municipal
representative determines that there are reasonable grounds to believe that
there has been a violation of any provisions of this chapter, or of any
regulations adopted pursuant thereto, the Floodplain Administrator shall give
notice of such alleged violation as hereinafter provided.
   (B)   Such notice shall:
      (1)   Be in writing;
      (2)   Include a statement of the reasons for its issuance;
      (3)   Allow a reasonable time not to exceed a period of 30 days for the
performance of any act it requires;
      (4)   Be served upon the property owner or his or her agent as the case
may require; provided, however, that such notice or order shall be deemed to
have been properly served upon such owner or agent when a copy thereof has been
served with such notice by any other method authorized or required by the laws
of this state; and
      (5)   Contain an outline of remedial action which, if taken, will effect
compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 2012-02-01, passed 2-28-2012)
§ 152.29 APPEALS.
   (A)   Any person aggrieved by any action or decision of the Floodplain
Administrator concerning the administration of the provisions of this chapter,
may appeal to the Borough Council. Such appeal must be filed, in writing,
within 30 days after the decision, determination, or action of the Floodplain
Administrator.
   (B)   Upon receipt of such appeal, the Borough Council shall set a time and
place, within not less than ten or not more than 30 days, for the purpose of
considering the appeal. Notice of the time and place at which the appeal will
be considered shall be given to all parties.
   (C)   Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Borough Council may seek
relief therefrom by appeal to court, as provided by the laws of this state,
including the State Floodplain Management Act, being 32 P.S. §§ 679.101 et seq.
(Ord. 2012-02-01, passed 2-28-2012)
IDENTIFICATION OF FLOODPLAIN AREAS
§ 152.40 IDENTIFICATION.
   (A)   The identified floodplain area shall be any areas of the borough
classified as special flood hazard areas (SFHAs) in the flood insurance study
(FIS) and the accompanying flood insurance rate maps (FIRMs) dated March 2,
2012, and issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), or the most
recent revision thereof, including all digital data developed as part of the
flood insurance study.
   (B)   The FIS and FIRMs referenced in division (A) above, and any subsequent
revisions and amendments are hereby adopted by the borough and declared to be a
part of this chapter.
(Ord. 2012-02-01, passed 2-28-2012)
§ 152.41 DESCRIPTION AND SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS OF IDENTIFIED FLOODPLAIN AREAS.
   The identified floodplain area shall consist of the following specific
areas/districts.
   (A)   (1)   The AE Area/District without floodway shall be those areas
identified as a Zone A1-30 or AE Zone on the FIRM included in the FIS prepared
by FEMA and for which base flood elevations have been provided in the FIS but
no floodway has been delineated.
      (2)   No permit shall be granted for any construction, development, use,
or activity within any AE Area/District without floodway unless it is
demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development would not,
together with all other existing and anticipated development, increase the BFE
more than one foot at any point.
   (B)   (1)   The A Area/District shall be those areas identified as an A Zone
on the FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA and for which no 1% annual
chance flood elevations have been provided. For these areas, elevation and
floodway information from other federal, state, or other acceptable source
shall be used when available. Where other acceptable information is not
available, the elevation shall be determined by using the elevation of a point
on the boundary of the identified floodplain area which is nearest the
construction site.
      (2)   In lieu of division (B)(1) above, the municipality may require the
applicant to determine the elevation with hydrologic and hydraulic engineering
techniques. Hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be undertaken only by
professional engineers or others of demonstrated qualifications, who shall
certify that the technical methods used correctly reflect currently accepted
technical concepts. Studies, analyses, computations, and the like shall be
submitted in sufficient detail to allow a thorough technical review by the
municipality.
(Ord. 2012-02-01, passed 2-28-2012)
§ 152.42 CHANGES IN IDENTIFICATION OF AREA.
   (A)   The identified floodplain area may be revised or modified by the
Borough Council where studies or information provided by a qualified agency or
person documents the need for such revision. However, prior to any such change,
approval must be obtained from the FEMA.
   (B)   Additionally, as soon as practicable, but not later than six months
after the date such information becomes available, a community shall notify the
FEMA of the changes by submitting technical or scientific data.
(Ord. 2012-02-01, passed 2-28-2012)
§ 152.43 BOUNDARY DISPUTES.
   Should a dispute concerning any identified floodplain boundary arise, an
initial determination shall be made by the Floodplain Administrator, and any
party aggrieved by this decision or determination may appeal to the Board of
Supervisors. The burden of proof shall be on the appellant.
(Ord. 2012-02-01, passed 2-28-2012)
TECHNICAL PROVISIONS
§ 152.55 GENERAL.
   (A)   (1)   No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be
made to any watercourse until all adjacent municipalities which may be affected
by such action have been notified by the municipality, and until all required
permits or approvals have been first obtained from the Department of
Environmental Protection Regional Office.
      (2)   No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be
made to any watercourse unless it can be shown that the activity will not
reduce or impede the flood-carrying capacity of the watercourse in any way.
      (3)   In addition, the FEMA and Commonwealth Department of Community and
Economic Development shall be notified prior to any alteration or relocation of
any watercourse.
   (B)   Technical or scientific data shall be submitted by the applicant to
FEMA for a letter of map revision (LOMR) as soon as practicable but within six
months of any new construction, development, or other activity resulting in
changes in the BFE. The situations when a LOMR or a conditional letter of map
revision (CLOMR) are required are:
      (1)   Any development occurring in Zones A1-30 and Zone AE without a
floodway, which will cause a rise of more than one foot in the base flood
elevation; or
      (2)   Alteration or relocation of a stream (including, but not limited
to, installing culverts and bridges).
   (C)   Any new construction, development, uses or activities allowed within
any identified floodplain area shall be undertaken in strict compliance with
the provisions contained in this chapter and any other applicable codes,
ordinances, and regulations.
   (D)   Within any identified floodplain area, no new construction or
development shall be located within the area measured 50 feet landward from the
top-of-bank of any watercourse.
(Ord. 2012-02-01, passed 2-28-2012) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.56 ELEVATION AND FLOODPROOFING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Residential structures.
      (1)   In AE without floodway A1-30 and AH Zones, any new construction or
substantial improvement shall have the lowest floor (including basement)
elevated up to, or above, the regulatory flood elevation.
      (2)   In A Zones, where there are no base flood elevations specified on
the FIRM, any new construction or substantial improvement shall have the lowest
floor (including basement) elevated up to, or above, the regulatory flood
elevation determined in accordance with §
152.41(B).
      (3)   The design and construction standards and specifications contained
in the most recent edition of the International Building Code (IBC) and in the
most recent edition of the International Residential Code (IRC) or the most
recent revisions thereof and ASCE 24 and 34 PA. Code (Chapters 401 to 405, as
amended) shall be utilized.
   (B)   Nonresidential structures.
      (1)   In AE without floodway A1-30 and AH Zones, any new construction or
substantial improvement of a nonresidential structure shall have the lowest
floor (including basement) elevated up to, or above, the regulatory flood
elevation, or be designed and constructed so that the space enclosed below the
regulatory flood elevation:
         (a)   Is floodproofed so that the structure is watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water; and
         (b)   Has structural components with the capability of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy.
      (2)   In A Zones, where there are no base flood elevations specified on
the FIRM, any new construction or substantial improvement shall have the lowest
floor (including basement) elevated or completely floodproofed up to, or above,
the regulatory flood elevation determined in accordance with §
152.41(B).
      (3)   Any nonresidential structure, or part thereof, made watertight
below the regulatory flood elevation shall be floodproofed in accordance with
the W1 or W2 space classification standards contained in the publication
entitled “Floodproofing Regulations” published by the U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers (June 1972, as amended December 15, 1995) or with some other
equivalent standard. All plans and specifications for such floodproofing shall
be accompanied by a statement certified by a registered professional engineer
or architect which states that the proposed design and methods of construction
are in conformance with the above referenced standards.
      (4)   The design and construction standards and specifications contained
in the 2009 International Building Code (IBC) and in the 2009 International
Residential Code (IRC) or the most recent revisions thereof and ASCE 24 and 34
PA. Code (Chapters 401 to 405, as amended) shall be utilized.
   (C)   Space below the lowest floor.
      (1)   Fully enclosed space below the lowest floor (excluding basements)
which will be used solely for the parking of a vehicle, building access, or
incidental storage in an area other than a basement, shall be designed and
constructed to allow for the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters for the
purpose of equalizing hydrostatic forces on exterior walls. The term FULLY
ENCLOSED SPACE also includes crawl spaces.
      (2)   Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a
registered professional engineer or architect, or meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria:
         (a)   A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed space;
         (b)   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade; and
         (c)   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, and the like, or
coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters.
(Ord. 2012-02-01, passed 2-28-2012) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.57 DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.
   The following minimum standards shall apply for all construction and
development proposed within any identified floodplain area.
   (A)   Fill. If fill is used, it shall:
      (1)   Extend laterally at least 15 feet beyond the building line from all
points;
      (2)   Consist of soil or small rock materials only. Sanitary landfills
shall not be permitted;
      (3)   Be compacted to provide the necessary permeability and resistance
to erosion, scouring, or settling;
      (4)   Be no steeper than one foot vertical to two feet horizontal, unless
substantiated data, justifying steeper slopes, are submitted to and approved by
the Floodplain Administrator; and
      (5)   Be used to the extent to which it does not adversely affect
adjacent properties.
   (B)   Drainage facilities. Storm drainage facilities shall be designed to
convey the flow of stormwater runoff in a safe and efficient manner. The system
shall ensure proper drainage along streets, and provide positive drainage away
from buildings. The system shall also be designed to prevent the discharge of
excess runoff onto adjacent properties.
   (C)   Water and sanitary sewer facilities and systems.
      (1)   All new or replacement water supply and sanitary sewer facilities
and systems shall be located, designed, and constructed to minimize or
eliminate flood damages and the infiltration of floodwaters.
      (2)   Sanitary sewer facilities and systems shall be designed to prevent
the discharge of untreated sewage into floodwaters.
      (3)   No part of any onsite sewage system shall be located within any
identified floodplain area except in strict compliance with all state and local
regulations for such systems. If any such system is permitted, it shall be
located so as to avoid impairment to it, or contamination from it, during a
flood.
      (4)   The design and construction provisions of the UCC and FEMA #348,
“Protecting Building Utilities from Flood Damages,” and the International
Private Sewage Disposal Code shall be utilized.
   (D)   Other utilities. All other utilities, such as gas lines, electrical,
and telephone systems shall be located, elevated (where possible) and
constructed to minimize the chance of impairment during a flood.
   (E)   Streets. The finished elevation of all new streets shall be no more
than one foot below the regulatory flood elevation.
   (F)   Storage. All materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive, or, in
times of flooding, could be injurious to human, animal, or plant life, and not
listed in §
152.58, shall be stored at or above the regulatory flood elevation and/or
floodproofed to the maximum extent possible.
   (G)   Placement of buildings and structures. All buildings and structures
shall be designed, located, and constructed so as to offer the minimum
obstruction to the flow of water and shall be designed to have a minimum effect
upon the flow and height of floodwater.
   (H)   Anchoring.
      (1)   All buildings and structures shall be firmly anchored in accordance
with accepted engineering practices to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral
movement.
      (2)   All air ducts, large pipes, storage tanks, and other similar
objects or components located below the regulatory flood elevation shall be
securely anchored or affixed to prevent flotation.
   (I)   Floors, walls, and ceilings.
      (1)   Wood flooring used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be installed to accommodate a lateral expansion of the flooring, perpendicular
to the flooring grain without causing structural damage to the building.
      (2)   Plywood used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be of
a marine or water-resistant variety.
      (3)   Walls and ceilings at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be designed and constructed of materials that are water-resistant and will
withstand inundation.
      (4)   Windows, doors, and other components at or below the regulatory
flood elevation shall be made of metal or other water-resistant material.
   (J)   Paints and adhesives.
      (1)   Paints and other finishes used at or below the regulatory flood
elevation shall be of marine or water-resistant quality.
      (2)   Adhesives used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be
of a marine or water-resistant variety.
      (3)   All wooden components (doors, trim, cabinets, and the like) used at
or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be finished with a marine or
water-resistant paint or other finishing material.
   (K)   Electrical components.
      (1)   Electrical distribution panels shall be at least three feet above
the base flood elevation.
      (2)   Separate electrical circuits shall serve lower levels and shall be
dropped from above.
   (L)   Equipment. Water heaters, furnaces, air conditioning, and ventilating
units, and other electrical, mechanical, or utility equipment or apparatus
shall not be located below the regulatory flood elevation.
   (M)   Fuel supply systems. All gas and oil supply systems shall be designed
to prevent the infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharges from
the system into floodwaters. Additional provisions shall be made for the
drainage of these systems in the event that floodwater infiltration occurs.
   (N)   Uniform Construction Code coordination. The standards and
specifications contained in 34 PA Code (Chapters 401 to 405), as amended, and
not limited to the following provisions, shall apply to the above and other
sections and divisions of this chapter, to the extent that they are more
restrictive and/or supplement the requirements of this chapter:
      (1)   The most recent edition of the International Building Code (IBC):
§§ 801, 1202, 1403, 1603, 1605, 1612, 3402, and Appendix G; and
      (2)   The most recent edition of the International Residential Building
Code (IRC): §§ R104, R105, R109, R323, Appendix AE101, Appendix E, and Appendix
J.
(Ord. 2012-02-01, passed 2-28-2012)
§ 152.58 DEVELOPMENT WHICH MAY ENDANGER HUMAN LIFE.
   (A)   (1)   In accordance with the State Floodplain Management Act, being 32
P.S. §§ 679.101 et seq., and the regulations adopted by the Department of
Community and Economic Development as required by the Act, any new or
substantially improved structure which meets any of the following shall be
subject to the provisions of this section, in addition to all other applicable
provisions:
         (a)   Will be used for the production or storage of any of the
following dangerous materials or substances;
         (b)   Will be used for any activity requiring the maintenance of a
supply of more than 550 gallons, or other comparable volume, of any of the
following dangerous materials or substances on the premises; or
         (c)   Will involve the production, storage, or use of any amount of
radioactive substances.
      (2)   The following list of materials and substances are considered
dangerous to human life:
         (a)   Acetone;
         (b)   Ammonia;
         (c)   Benzene;
         (d)   Calcium carbide;
         (e)   Carbon disulfide;
         (f)   Celluloid;
         (g)   Chlorine;
         (h)   Hydrochloric acid;
         (i)   Hydrocyanic acid;
         (j)   Magnesium;
         (k)   Nitric acid and oxides of nitrogen;
         (l)   Petroleum products (gasoline, fuel oil, and the like);
         (m)   Phosphorus;
         (n)   Potassium;
         (o)   Sodium;
         (p)   Sulphur and sulphur products;
         (q)   Pesticides (including insecticides, fungicides, and
rodenticides); and
         (r)   Radioactive substances, insofar as such substances are not
otherwise regulated.
   (B)   Within any identified floodplain area, any new or substantially
improved structure of the kind described in division (A) above shall be
prohibited.
(Ord. 2012-02-01, passed 2-28-2012) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.59 SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS FOR SUBDIVISIONS.
   All subdivision proposals and development proposals containing at least 50
lots or at least five acres, whichever is the lesser, in flood hazard areas
where base flood elevation data are not available, shall be supported by
hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses that determine base flood
elevations and floodway information. The analyses shall be prepared by a
licensed professional engineer in a format required by FEMA for a conditional
letter of map revision or letter of map revision. Submittal requirements and
processing fees shall be the responsibility of the applicant.
(Ord. 2012-02-01, passed 2-28-2012) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.60 SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS FOR MANUFACTURED HOMES.
   (A)   Within any floodplain area, manufactured homes shall be prohibited
within the area measured 50 feet landward from the top-of-bank of any
watercourse.
   (B)   Where permitted within any floodplain area, all manufactured homes,
and any improvements thereto, shall be:
      (1)   Placed on a permanent foundation;
      (2)   Elevated so that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is at
least one and one-half feet above the base flood elevation; and
      (3)   Anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement.
   (C)   Installation of manufactured homes shall be done in accordance with
the manufacturers’ installation instructions as provided by the manufacturer.
Where the applicant cannot provide the above information, the requirements of
Appendix E of the 2009 International Residential Building Code or the U.S.
Department of Housing and Urban Development’s “Permanent Foundations for
Manufactured Housing,” 1984 Edition, draft or latest revision thereto shall
apply and 34 PA. Code Chapters 401 to 405.
   (D)   Consideration shall be given to the installation requirements of the
2009 IBC, and the 2009 IRC or the most recent revisions thereto and 34 PA.
Code, as amended where appropriate and/or applicable to units where the
manufacturers’ standards for anchoring cannot be provided or were not
established for the unit(s) proposed installation.
(Ord. 2012-02-01, passed 2-28-2012)
§ 152.61 SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS FOR RECREATIONAL VEHICLES.
   Recreational vehicles in Zones A, A1-30, AH, and AE must either:
   (A)   Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days;
   (B)   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
   (C)   Meet the permit requirements for manufactured homes in §
152.60.
(Ord. 2012-02-01, passed 2-28-2012) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.62 PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES.
   In accordance with the administrative regulations promulgated by the
Department of Community and Economic Development to implement the State
Floodplain Management Act, being 32 P.S. §§ 679.101 et seq., the following
activities shall be prohibited within any identified floodplain area: the
commencement of any of the following activities, or the construction,
enlargement, or expansion of any structure used, or intended to be used, for
any of the following activities:
   (A)   Hospitals;
   (B)   Nursing homes;
   (C)   Jails or prisons; or
   (D)   The commencement of, or any construction of, a new manufactured home
park or manufactured home subdivision, or substantial improvement to an
existing manufactured home park or manufactured home subdivision.
(Ord. 2012-02-01, passed 2-28-2012) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.63 EXISTING STRUCTURES IN IDENTIFIED FLOODPLAIN AREAS.
   (A)   Existing structures. The provisions of this chapter do not require any
changes or improvements to be made to lawfully existing structures. However,
when an improvement is made to any existing structure, the provisions of
division (B) below shall apply.
   (B)   Improvements. The following provisions shall apply whenever any
improvement is made to an existing structure located within any identified
floodplain area.
      (1)   No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be
allowed within any floodplain area that would cause any increase in the BFE.
      (2)   Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any
kind to an existing structure, to an extent or amount of 50% or more of its
market value, shall constitute a substantial improvement and shall be
undertaken only in full compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
      (3)   The above activity shall also address the requirements of the 34
PA. Code, as amended, and the most recent editions of the IBC and IRC.
      (4)   Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any
kind to an existing structure, to an extent or amount of less than 50% of its
market value, shall be elevated and/or floodproofed to the greatest extent
possible.
      (5)   Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any
kind that meets the definition of “repetitive loss” shall be undertaken only in
full compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 2012-02-01, passed 2-28-2012)
§ 152.64 VARIANCES.
   (A)   General. If compliance with any of the requirements of this chapter
would result in an exceptional hardship to a prospective builder, developer, or
landowner, the borough may, upon request, grant relief from the strict
application of the requirements.
   (B)   Variance procedure and conditions. Requests for variances shall be
considered by the borough in advance with the procedures contained in §
152.29 and the following.
      (1)   No variance shall be granted for any construction, development,
use, or activity within any floodplain area that would cause any increase in
the BFE.
      (2)   Except for a possible modification of the regulatory flood
elevation requirement involved, no variance shall be granted for any of the
other requirements pertaining specifically to development regulated by §
152.62 or to §
152.58.
      (3)   If granted, a variance shall involve only the least modification
necessary to provide relief.
      (4)   In granting any variance, the borough shall attach whatever
reasonable conditions and safeguards it considers necessary in order to protect
the public health, safety, and welfare, and to achieve the objectives of this
chapter.
      (5)   In reviewing any request for a variance, the borough shall
consider, at a minimum, the following:
         (a)   There is good and sufficient cause; and
         (b)   Failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional
hardship to the applicant.
      (6)   The granting of the variance will neither:
         (a)   Result in an unacceptable or prohibited increase in flood
heights, additional threats to public safety, or extraordinary public expense;
or
         (b)   Create nuisances, cause fraud on, or victimize the public, or
conflict with any other applicable state or local ordinances and regulations.
      (7)   Whenever a variance is granted, the borough shall notify the
applicant in writing that:
         (a)   The granting of the variance may result in increased premium
rates for flood insurance; and
         (b)   Such variances may increase the risks to life and property.
      (8)   A complete record of all variance requests and related actions
shall be maintained by the borough. In addition, a report of all variances
granted during the year shall be included in the annual report to FEMA.
   (C)   One-hundred year flood. Notwithstanding any of division (B) above,
however, all structures shall be designed and constructed so as to have the
capability of resisting the 100-year flood.
(Ord. 2012-02-01, passed 2-28-2012)
§ 152.65 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This chapter shall be effective March 2, 2012, and shall remain in force
until modified, amended, or rescinded by the borough.
(Ord. 2012-02-01, passed 2-28-2012)
§ 152.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who fails to comply with any or all of the requirements or
provisions of this chapter or who fails or refuses to comply with any notice,
order of direction of the Floodplain Administrator, or any other authorized
employee of the municipality shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction, shall pay a fine to the borough of not less than $100 nor more than
$600 plus costs of prosecution and attorney’s fees incurred by the borough in
connection therewith.
   (B)   In addition to the penalties in division (A) above, all other actions
are hereby reserved including an action in equity for the proper enforcement of
this chapter. To the extent that a civil action is instituted by the borough to
enforce this chapter, any person found violating this chapter shall be
responsible for all attorney’s fees, expenses, and costs of suit incurred by
the borough in connection therewith. The imposition of a fine or penalty for
any violation of, or noncompliance with, this chapter shall not excuse the
violation or noncompliance or permit it to continue and all such persons shall
be required to correct or remedy such violations and noncompliance within a
reasonable time.
   (C)   Any development initiated or any structure or building constructed,
reconstructed, enlarged, altered, or relocated, in noncompliance with this
chapter may be declared by the Borough Council to be a public nuisance and
abatable as such.
(Ord. 2012-02-01, passed 2-28-2012)
CHAPTER 153: SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT
Section
   
153.01   Subdivision and land development ordinance adopted by reference
§ 153.01 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The borough’s subdivision and land development ordinance is hereby adopted
by reference as if laid out fully herein.
(Ord. 2005-05-01, passed 5-9-2005)
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
   Table
      
I.   ANNEXATIONS
      
II.   PUBLIC PROPERTY
      
III.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
      
IV.   WATER
      
V.   SEWERS
      
VI.   FRANCHISES AND SERVICES
      
VII.   PLAN APPROVAL
      
VIII.   GOVERNMENTAL AND INTERGOVERNMENTAL AFFAIRS
TABLE I: ANNEXATIONS
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No.              Date Passed Description
3/2/31                3-2-1931    Declaring the admission of a certain section
                                  of West Providence Township to the borough.
(Prior Code, Appx. A)
11/2/31               11-2-1931   Declaring the admission of a certain section
                                  of West Providence Township to the borough.
(Prior Code, Appx. A)
                                  Approving the petition for annexing to the
                                  borough a section of West Providence Township
                                  adjacent to and east of said borough and
2/6/67A               2-6-1967    hereinafter fully described, and providing
                                  that the said territory shall be annexed to
                                  and become a part of the said borough upon
                                  the filing of a certified copy of the
                                  petition.
(Prior Code, Appx. A)
 
 
TABLE II: PUBLIC PROPERTY
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No.              Date Passed Description
                                  Authorizing the purchase of the Pond Lot from
R. 2/2/1883           2-2-1883    Jacob Barndollar, provided that a street be
                                  opened from the alley as far as the lot
                                  extends.
(Prior Code, Appx. F)
                                  Accepting the proposition of Mr. J.P. Caro
                                  that he would donate a tract of land to the
                                  borough for use as a public park on condition
3/2/59                3-2-1959    that the borough be responsible for the
                                  maintenance of the park area after it has
                                  been established by the interested civic and
                                  service clubs.
(Prior Code, Appx. F)
                                  Taking and appropriating for the purpose of a
8/3/64                8-3-1964    flood control project an easement for
                                  contractor s work area, both lying and being
                                  situate in West Providence Township.
(Prior Code, Appx. F)
                                  Taking, acquiring, and appropriating for the
                                  purpose of a flood control project an
                                  easement for contractor s work area and a
                                  perpetual easement to the private property of
8/10/64               8-10-1964   the E. Mae Morris Estate in the borough; and,
                                  taking, acquiring, and appropriating for the
                                  purpose of a flood control project that the
                                  fee simple title to land lying and being
                                  situate in the borough.
(Prior Code, Appx. F)
                                  Taking, acquiring, and appropriating for the
                                  purpose of a flood control project a
                                  perpetual easement and an easement for
                                  contractors to park on the private property
                                  of Albert Barkman in the borough; and,
                                  taking, acquiring, and appropriating for the
                                  purpose of a flood control project the fee
8/17/64               8-17-1964   simple to Part I and a perpetual easement to
                                  Part II of the private property of Helen
                                  Waverling in the borough; and, taking,
                                  acquiring, and appropriating for the purpose
                                  of a flood control project the fee simple
                                  title to a piece or parcel of the private
                                  property of the John W. Morris Estate in the
                                  borough.
(Prior Code, Appx. F)
                                  Acquiring by eminent domain a parcel of land
                                  in the northeast corner of lands owned by
R. 89/03/01           3-1-1989    Thomas and Sandra Grance on E. South Street,
                                  or to accept deed for said parcel in lieu of
                                  eminent domain.
(Prior Code, Appx. F)
R. 4/89/1             4-10-1989   Purchasing the Everett Railroad Station
                                  located on W. Third Street.
(Prior Code, Appx. F)
                                  Taking by bill of sale or deed, in lieu of
R. 4/89/2             4-10-1989   eminent domain the Everett Railroad Station
                                  located on W. Third Street.
(Prior Code, Appx. F)
 
 
TABLE III: STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No.              Date Passed Description
                                  Laying out and paving Water Street from Main
5/7/1878              5-7-1878    Street to Second Street and from Second
                                  Street to Third Street.
(Prior Code, Appx. H)
                                  Opening Spring Street from Main Street to the
6/26/1878             6-26-1878   river and Tate Street, to connect with Spring
                                  Street.
(Prior Code, Appx. H)
                                  Opening an unnamed street from north of E.
                                  Main Street between the properties of F.M.
3/2/1894              3-2-1894    Masters and William Masters on the west and
                                  James Hershberger and the Karns heirs on the
                                  east.
(Prior Code, Appx. H)
3/1/1895              3-1-1895    Renaming South Street, formerly known as Tate
                                  Street.
(Prior Code, Appx. H)
                                  Performing sewer work on Spring Street from
6/10/1896             6-10-1896   the south corner of Fourth Street to alley
                                  adjoining Richard Brothers Livery Stable.
(Prior Code, Appx. H)
7/12/1897             7-12-1897   Extending Fifth Street from Spring Street to
                                  Water Street.
(Prior Code, Appx. H)
7/12/1897             7-12-1897   Vacating Short Street.
(Prior Code, Appx. H)
                                  Performing sewer work on Ridge Avenue from
12/2/1898             12-2-1898   north corner of First Street to alley
                                  adjoining Bruce and Fisher s property.
(Prior Code, Appx. H)
12/3/1899             12-3-1899   Installing sidewalks on Spring Street from
                                  South Street to Fifth Street.
(Prior Code, Appx. H)
7/3/09                7-3-1909    Improving/opening Water Street from Main
                                  Street to First Street.
(Prior Code, Appx. H)
                                  Opening an unnamed alley from Water Street
7/3/09                7-3-1909    east to the alley in the rear of the Everett
                                  Supply Company.
(Prior Code, Appx. H)
7/3/09                7-3-1909    Opening an unnamed alley from Hopewell Street
                                  to alley running eastward from South Street.
(Prior Code, Appx. H)
                                  Performing sewer work on Water Street from
                                  Main Street to Fourth Street and from bridge
6/4/25                6-4-1925    on street near Eighth Street via Spring
                                  Street to Eighth Street, then on Eighth
                                  Street to the H. and B.T.M. Railroad right-
                                  of-way.
(Prior Code, Appx. H)
7/1/27                7-1-1927    Improving Water Street from E. Main Street to
                                  Third Street.
(Prior Code, Appx. H)
7/1/27                7-1-1927    Opening an unnamed alley from Water Street to
                                  N. Hopewell Street.
(Prior Code, Appx. H)
10/7/27               10-7-1927   Improving E. Third Street from Spring Street
                                  to Water Street.
(Prior Code, Appx. H)
7/6/28                7-6-1928    Improving Water Street from E. Main Street to
                                  Third Street.
(Prior Code, Appx. H)
                                  Improving S. Hopewell Street from South
12/11/28              12-11-1928  Street Extended to County Bridge on S.
                                  Hopewell Street.
(Prior Code, Appx. H)
12/11/28              12-11-1928  Improving S. Spring Street from South Street
                                  to Main Street.
(Prior Code, Appx. H)
12/11/28              12-11-1928  Improving South Street from Main Street to
                                  S.R. 286.
(Prior Code, Appx. H)
8/20/29               8-20-1929   Extending South Street from S. Hopewell
                                  Street to Main Street.
(Prior Code, Appx. H)
8/20/29               8-20-1929   Improving an unnamed street from South Street
                                  east to Main Street.
(Prior Code, Appx. H)
R. 4/25/33            4-25-1933   Improving the entire length of S. Hopewell
                                  Street.
(Prior Code, Appx. H)
9/5/33                9-5-1933    Opening South Street from S. Spring Street to
                                  S. Hopewell Street.
(Prior Code, Appx. H)
3/5/34                3-5-1934    Improving Hopewell Street from Station 0+20
                                  to Station 5+73.
(Prior Code, Appx. H)
9/18/36               9-18-1936   Improving Furnace Road from south borough
                                  line to Main Street.
(Prior Code, Appx. H)
2/1/37                2-1-1937    Improving the entire length of Furnace
                                  Street.
(Prior Code, Appx. H)
8/3/37                8-3-1937    Improving the entire length of E. Main
                                  Street.
(Prior Code, Appx. H)
                                  Improving W. Main Street from west borough
4/21/41               4-21-1941   line to a point 100 feet west of Gogley
                                  Street.
(Prior Code, Appx. H)
3/3/47                3-3-1947    Improving W. Main Street at the west end of
                                  town.
(Prior Code, Appx. H)
                                  Improving E. Second Street from a point 70
6/6/49                6-6-1949    feet east of Water Street and extending to
                                  the intersection of N. Hopewell Street.
(Prior Code, Appx. H)
10/3/55               10-3-1955   Vacating the portion of Foundry Street
                                  adjoining the lands of L. Grief Company, Inc.
(Prior Code, Appx. H)
5/-/56                5- -1956    Improving Asa Street from S. Spring Street to
                                  a point northwest.
(Prior Code, Appx. H)
9/11/56               9-11-1956   Performing sewer work north of Lots 7, 8, and
                                  in the Karns Plan on E. Foundry Street.
(Prior Code, Appx. H)
3/3/58                3-3-1958    Grade/sewer work on E. Foundry Street.
(Prior Code, Appx. H)
5/5/58                5-5-1958    Improving Tussey Street from W. Main Street
                                  north to a 16-foot alley.
(Prior Code, Appx. H)
11/6/61               11-6-1961   Amending right-of-way line of N. Hopewell
                                  Street from Hill Street to E. Second Street.
(Prior Code, Appx. H)
8/5/68                8-5-1968    Opening entire length of River s Bend Drive.
(Prior Code, Appx. H)
R. 10/18/72           10-18-1972  Improving the entire length of Dishong
                                  Street.
(Prior Code, Appx. H)
R. 10/18/72           10-18-1972  Improving the entire length of Gorsuch
                                  Street.
(Prior Code, Appx. H)
R. 10/18/72           10-18-1972  Improving S. Spring Street from Main Street
                                  to flood control dike.
(Prior Code, Appx. H)
(Prior Code, Appx. H)
R. 2/2/83             2-2-1983    Opening an unnamed street from an alley as
                                  far as Pond Lot extends.
(Prior Code, Appx. H)
                                  Vacating the portion of Asa Street serving
2/14/83               2-14-1983   the property owned by Charles G. Appleby and
                                  Ray S. Koontz.
(Prior Code, Appx. H)
R. 10/88/5-1          10-28-1988  Improving Masters Avenue from First Street
                                  north to borough line.
(Prior Code, Appx. H)
(Prior Code, Appx. H)
(Prior Code, Appx. H)
6/25/01               6-25-2001   Performing sewer work on First Avenue from
                                  Ridge Avenue to the corner of Spring Street.
(Prior Code, Appx. H)
6/-/07                6- -2007    Vacating the entire length of Fifth Street.
(Prior Code, Appx. H)
 
 
TABLE IV: WATER
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No.              Date Passed Description
                                  Granting permission to the Everett Water
2/20/1893             2-20-1893   Company to erect and maintain the waterworks
                                  system.
(Prior Code, Appx. I)
                                  Approving a certain purchase agreement
                                  between Northeastern Water Company and
R. 9/11/50            9-11-1950   Everett Municipal Authority for purchase by
                                  the Authority of all common stock and
                                  indebtedness of Everett Water Company.
(Prior Code, Appx. I)
                                  Approving certain changes to purchase an
                                  agreement between Northeastern Water Company
R. 11/6/50            11-6-1950   and Everett Municipal Authority for the
                                  purchase by the Authority of all the common
                                  stock and certain indebtedness of Everett
                                  Water Company.
(Prior Code, Appx. I)
                                  Regarding the purchase agreement between
                                  Everett Municipal Authority and Northeastern
R. 2/5/51             2-5-1951    Water Company by amending and extending the
                                  date before which a certificate of public
                                  convenience was to be issued by the
                                  Commonwealth Public Utility Commission.
(Prior Code, Appx. I)
(Prior Code, Appx. I)
(Prior Code, Appx. I)
                                  Authorizing an agreement between the borough
R. 1482               12-22-1981  and the Everett Municipal Authority regarding
                                  the management of the water system.
(Prior Code, Appx. I)
                                  Authorizing an agreement between the borough
R. 12/22/81           12-22-1981  and the Everett Municipal Authority regarding
                                  the management of the water system.
(Prior Code, Appx. I)
                                  Expressing the desire that the Authority
R. 12/22/81-1         12-22-1981  acquire certain existing waterworks and
                                  distribution facilities, together with all
                                  property and interests in the water system.
(Prior Code, Appx. I)
                                  Authorizing an agreement between the borough
                                  and the Everett Area Municipal Authority
R. 12/22/81-3         12-22-1981  whereby the Authority will acquire,
                                  construct, and operate certain water system
                                  facilities.
(Prior Code, Appx. I)
(Prior Code, Appx. I)
(Prior Code, Appx. I)
(Prior Code, Appx. I)
                                  Establishing rules and regulations governing
R. 3A                 8-25-1982   the water system owned and operated by the
                                  Authority.
(Prior Code, Appx. I)
                                  Planning to construct and to acquire certain
R. 14                 8-25-1982   alterations and improvements to the existing
                                  water facilities in the borough.
(Prior Code, Appx. I)
 
 
TABLE V: SEWERS
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No.              Date Passed Description
                                  Submitting for approval to the Commonwealth
R. 10/7/74            10-7-1974   Department of Environmental Resources an
                                  officially adopted plan for sewage facilities
                                  serving areas within its jurisdiction.
(Prior Code, Appx. G)
                                  Relocating and adjusting certain sanitary
R. 8/29/79            8-24-1979   sewer facilities owned by the Borough
                                  Council.
(Prior Code, Appx. G)
                                  Requesting the Department of Transportation
R. 2/8/82             2-8-1982    share in the costs in the relocation and
                                  adjustment of highway improvement project of
                                  L.R. 39.
(Prior Code, Appx. G)
R. 4/8/83             4-8-1982    Relocating and adjusting certain sanitary
                                  sewer facilities located in the borough.
(Prior Code, Appx. G)
                                  Requesting and making application for an
R. 1/14/85            1-14-1985   Environmental Protection Agency to be used to
                                  partially finance a project for adequate
                                  wastewater treatment facilities.
(Prior Code, Appx. G)
                                  Providing for the participation in the
R. 2                  6-9-1986    creation and contract of a central committee
                                  to be known as the County Sanitary
                                  Administrative Committee.
(Prior Code, Appx. G)
R. 3                  6-9-1986    Providing for the creation of an Appeal Board
                                  by the County Sanitary Corporation Committee.
(Prior Code, Appx. G)
                                  Proposing the development of a parcel of land
R. 1/7/86             7-14-1986   identified as just one single-family dwelling
                                  be served by the borough sewer systems.
(Prior Code, Appx. G)
                                  Proposing the development of a parcel of land
                                  identified as Down River Golf Course to be
R. 86/10/1            10-1-1986   served by the interim use of a holding tank
                                  to be replaced in the spring of 1987 with a
                                  small flow treatment facility.
(Prior Code, Appx. G)
                                  Granting to the Authority the right to occupy
R. 5/88/1             4-11-1988   the right-of-way streets of the borough to
                                  construct, operate, and maintain wastewater
                                  collection systems within the borough.
(Prior Code, Appx. G)
                                  Being awarded from the United States
R. 6/88/2             6-13-1988   Environmental Protection Agency a Step 1
                                  federal grant for the preparation of a
                                  wastewater facility planning study.
(Prior Code, Appx. G)
                                  Acquiring and constructing certain sanitary
R. 88/11/1            11-14-1988  sewage system facilities within the borough,
                                  to be known as the Project.
(Prior Code, Appx. G)
                                  Acquiring and constructing certain sanitary
R. 88/11/4            11-23-1988  sewage system facilities within the borough,
                                  to be known as the Project.
(Prior Code, Appx. G)
(Prior Code, Appx. G)
(Prior Code, Appx. G)
                                  A resolution as required by Commonwealth
                                  Department of Environmental Protection for
R. 95-11-1            11-13-1995  plan revision ( Commonwealth Sewage
                                  Facilities Act 537 ), being part of DEP
                                  Sewerage Facilities Planning Module (Everett
                                  Happy Senior Citizens, Inc.).
(Prior Code, Appx. G)
 
 
TABLE VI: FRANCHISES AND SERVICES
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No.              Date Passed Description
R. 9/16/1892          9-16-1892   Authorizing a contract with the Everett Water
                                  Company.
(Prior Code, Appx. C)
                                  Granting to the Everett Light, Heat, and
2/20/1893             2-20-1893   Power Company the right to operate within the
                                  borough.
(Prior Code, Appx. C)
                                  Granting the American Telegraph and Telephone
                                  Company of Pennsylvania the privilege to
3/1/01                3-1-1901    construct, operate, and maintain its lines of
                                  poles, wires, and fixtures in the road
                                  systems of the borough.
(Prior Code, Appx. C)
                                  Permitting space in the conduits constructed
10/6/47               10-6-1947   under the provisions of this ordinance to be
                                  used free of charge.
(Prior Code, Appx. C)
11/2/59               11-2-1959   Granting to the Penn Fuel Gas Company the
                                  right to furnish, supply, and sell gas.
(Prior Code, Appx. C)
(Prior Code, Appx. C)
(Prior Code, Appx. C)
(Prior Code, Appx. C)
                                  Consenting to the assignment to Tele-Media
11/12/84              11-12-1984  Company of Bedford the community antenna
                                  television franchise granted by a memorandum
                                  of understanding dated 8-7- 1978.
(Prior Code, Appx. C)
 
 
TABLE VII: PLAN APPROVAL
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No.              Date Passed Description
                                  Approving the adopting of plans of the
                                  Everett Flood Control Project and the
R. 1/4/60             1-4-1960    articles of agreement between the
                                  Commonwealth Department of Forests and Waters
                                  and the borough relating to the flood control
                                  project.
(Prior Code, Appx. E)
                                  Approving the plan for a pumping station to
                                  be located on flood control project lands
R. 8/29/66            8-29-1966   recently acquired on the west bank of Bloody
                                  Run south of E. South Street and adopting the
                                  plan as the official plan of the station.
(Prior Code, Appx. E)
R. 8/5/74             8-5-1974    Adopting the County Air Industrial Park
                                  Authority plans.
(Prior Code, Appx. E)
 
 
TABLE VIII: GOVERNMENTAL AND INTERGOVERNMENTAL AFFAIRS
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No.              Date Passed Description
4/9/26                4-9-1926    Providing for a new ordinance book to replace
                                  the lost ordinance book.
(Prior Code, Appx. D)
(Prior Code, Appx. D)
                                  Authorizing and directing President of
7/11/49               7-11-1949   Council to execute Articles of Incorporation
                                  incorporating the Everett Municipal
                                  Authority.
(Prior Code, Appx. D)
9/1/53                9-1-1953    Extending the Social Security system to the
                                  employees and officers of the borough.
(Prior Code, Appx. D)
                                  Giving the State Department of Health control
R. 5/7/56             5-7-1956    over the administration of the health laws in
                                  the borough.
(Prior Code, Appx. D)
(Prior Code, Appx. D)
(Prior Code, Appx. D)
(Prior Code, Appx. D)
(Prior Code, Appx. D)
(Prior Code, Appx. D)
(Prior Code, Appx. D)
                                  Joining together with other municipalities of
R. 5/7/73             5-7-1973    the county in a voluntary organization to be
                                  known as the Council of Governments.
(Prior Code, Appx. D)
3/1/74                3-1-1974    Establishing the compensation of the Council
                                  members and the Mayor.
(Prior Code, Appx. D)
(Prior Code, Appx. D)
(Prior Code, Appx. D)
                                  Designating the County Planning Commission to
                                  undertake a community development program in
R. 3375               3-3-1975    accordance with the rules and regulations for
                                  administering the Housing and Community
                                  Development Act of 1974, P.L. 93-383, United
                                  States of America.
(Prior Code, Appx. D)
(Prior Code, Appx. D)
(Prior Code, Appx. D)
                                  Establishing the retirement pension plan for
1/1/87                1-1-1987    borough non-uniformed employees into a
                                  retirement pension plan.
(Prior Code, Appx. D)
(Prior Code, Appx. D)
6/8/87                6-8-1987    Upgrading the retirement pension plan for the
                                  borough.
(Prior Code, Appx. D)
                                  Awarding to H.J. Beamer Ford Sales an order
R. 4-89-3             4-10-1989   for one 1989 Ford truck at a cost not to
                                  exceed $18,540.
(Prior Code, Appx. D)
R. 4-89-4             4-10-1989   Resolving to purchase one Sweepster model
                                  #HB-60 at a cost not to exceed $3,645.
(Prior Code, Appx. D)
                                  Requesting a community facilities grant of
R. A-4-89-1           4-17-1989   $75,000 from the Commonwealth Department of
                                  Commerce to be used for water system
                                  improvements.
(Prior Code, Appx. D)
                                  Authorizing the President of Council to enter
                                  into a grant agreement in the amount of
R. 5-89-1             5-8-1989    $12,000 with the Department of Community
                                  Affairs for rehabilitation purposes of the
                                  Old Everett Railroad Station.
(Prior Code, Appx. D)
                                  Supporting the naming (or renaming) of the
R. 6-89-1             6-12-1989   bridge located at the west end of the borough
                                  across the Juniata River to The Ellis R.
                                  Weicht Memorial Bridge.
(Prior Code, Appx. D)
R. 89-07-1            7-10-1989   Approving the Emergency Operations Plan of
                                  the borough.
(Prior Code, Appx. D)
R. 10-89-S-1          10-9-1989   Bid acceptance for 1989 paving.
                                  Granting of right-of-way by the borough to
                                  the Everett Area Municipal Authority for
R. 91-12-1            12-1-1991   construction of sewer in vicinity of south
                                  end of West Street and west end of W. Third
                                  Street.
(Prior Code, Appx. D)
R. 93-3-1             3-8-1993    Street sweeping agreement with Penn DOT.
(Prior Code, Appx. D)
(Prior Code, Appx. D)
                                  Adopting and ratifying an intergovernmental
                                  cooperation agreement with the State Bureau
2019-12-01            12-9-2019   of Narcotics Investigation and Drug Control
                                  for participation in the Municipal Drug Task
                                  Force.
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Pennsylvania Statutes
References to Pennsylvania Consolidated Statutes
References to Pennsylvania Consolidated Statutes Annotated
References to Prior Code
References to Resolutions
References to Ordinances
 
REFERENCES TO PENNSYLVANIA STATUTES
P.S. Cite Code Section
P.S. Cite                        Code Section
2 Pa.C.S. § 105                 151.62
3 P.S. Chapter 8, Articles I XII 92.04;
                                 92.05
10 P.S. §§ 162.1 et seq.       110.03
16 P.S. § 11011-6               32.031
                                 152.01;
32 P.S. §§ 679.101 et seq.     152.29;
                                 152.58;
                                 152.62
32 P.S. §§ 7210.301 et seq.    152.06
35 P.S. §§ 691.1 et seq.       152.22
35 P.S. §§ 693.1 et seq.       152.22
35 P.S. §§ 750.1 et seq.       152.22
35 P.S. §§ 7210.301 et seq.    31.61
40 P.S. § 638                   95.35
53 P.S. §§ 481 et seq.         31.17
53 P.S. §§ 881.101 et seq.     31.18
                                 31.18;
53 P.S. §§ 895.101 et seq.     32.023;
                                 32.095
53 P.S. §§ 895.701 et seq.     31.32
53 P.S. §§ 6901 et seq.        32.001
                                 32.001;
                                 32.005;
                                 32.007;
                                 32.008;
53 P.S. §§ 6924.101 et seq.    32.023;
                                 32.051;
                                 32.060;
                                 32.061;
                                 32.095;
                                 32.097
53 P.S. §§ 7101 et seq.        32.034
53 P.S. §§ 10101 et seq.       31.45
60 P.S. § 61                    110.03
72 P.S. §§ 4722 et seq.        32.075
72 P.S. §§ 8101 et seq.        32.021
72 P.S. §§ 8101-C et seq.      32.036
                                 
 
 
REFERENCES TO PENNSYLVANIA CONSOLIDATED STATUTES
Pa.C.S. Cite Code Section
Pa.C.S. Cite               Code Section
8 Pa.C.S. §§ 101 et seq. 10.02;
                           31.01
8 Pa.C.S. § 3301.5        10.01
8 Pa.C.S. §§ 3321 3324   10.99
17 Pa.C.S. §§ 3111 et seq31.47
53 Pa.C.S. §§ 2301 et seq31.17
53 Pa.C.S. §§ 5601 et seq30.01 
                           30.03
                           70.01;
75 Pa.C.S. §§ 101 et seq.70.36;
                           70.41
75 Pa.C.S. § 102          Ch. 73, Schd. X
75 Pa.C.S. § 3323(b)      Ch. 73, Schd. VII
75 Pa.C.S. § 3323(c)      Ch. 73, Schd. VII
75 Pa.C.S. § 6109(a)(22)  70.35
75 Pa.C.S. §§ 7301 et seq70.99
                           
 
 
REFERENCES TO PENNSYLVANIA CONSOLIDATED STATUTES ANNOTATED
Pa.C.S.A. Cite Code Section
Pa.C.S.A. Cite               Code Section
1 Pa.C.S.A. § 1937          32.002
18 Pa.C.S.A. § 5503         130.02
42 Pa.C.S.A. §§ 8951 et seq31.17
42 Pa.C.S.A. § 8953         31.17
53 Pa.C.S.A. §§ 2301 et seq31.60;
                             31.66
75 Pa.C.S.A. §§ 101 et seq.70.42;
                             Ch. 73, Schd. X
75 Pa.C.S.A. § 3368         70.09
75 Pa.C.S.A. § 4902         Ch. 73, Schd. X
75 Pa.C.S.A. § 4902(g)      Ch. 73, Schd. X
75 Pa.C.S.A. §§ 6101 et seq70.09
                             
 
 
REFERENCES TO PRIOR CODE
Prior Code Section 2025 Code Section
Prior Code Section 2025 Code Section
1, 101             31.32
1, 102             31.32
1, 103             31.32
1, 201             31.15
1, 202             31.16
1, 203             31.17
1, 301             31.30
1, 302             31.31
1, 501             30.01
1, 502             30.02
1, 503             30.03
1, 504             30.04
1, 601             31.60
1, 602             31.61
1, 603             31.62
1, 604             31.63
1, 605             31.64
1, 606             31.65
1, 607             31.66
1, 608             31.67
1, 609             31.68
2, 101             92.01
2, 102             92.02
2, 103             92.03
2, 104             92.04
2, 105             92.05
2, 106             92.06
2, 107             92.99
2, 201             92.20
2, 202             92.21
2, 203             92.22
2, 204             92.24
2, 205             92.24
2, 206             92.99
2, 207             95.20
4, 101             151.15
4, 102             151.16
4, 103             151.17
4, 104             151.99
4, 201             151.30
4, 202             151.31
4, 203             151.32
4, 204             151.33
4, 205             151.34
4, 206             151.35
4, 207             151.36
4, 208             151.37;
                   151.99
5, 101             151.01
5, 102             151.02
5, 103             151.03
5, 508             150.075
6, 101             130.01
6, 102             130.01
6, 103             130.01
6, 104             130.99
6, 201             130.02
6, 202             130.99
6, 301             130.15
6, 302             130.16
6, 303             130.17
6, 304             130.99
6, 401             130.03
6, 402             130.99
6, 501             150.001
6, 502             150.002
6, 503             150.003
6, 504             150.004
6, 505             150.005
6, 506             150.006
6, 507             150.007
6, 601             130.30
6, 602             130.31
6, 603             130.32
6, 604             130.33
6, 605             130.34
6, 606             130.99
6, 607             130.35
6, 608             130.36
7, 101             95.01
7, 102             95.02
7, 103             95.03
7, 104             95.99
7, 201             95.15
7, 202             95.16
7, 203             95.17
7, 204             95.18
7, 205             95.99
7, 206             95.19
7, 301             95.35
7, 302             95.36
7, 303             95.37
7, 304             95.38
7, 305             95.39
7, 306             95.40
7, 307             95.99
7, 308             95.41
7, 310             95.42
10, 101            93.001
10, 102            93.002
10, 103            93.003
10, 104            93.004
10, 105            93.005
10, 106            93.006
10, 107            93.007
10, 108            93.008
10, 109            93.009
10, 110            93.010
10, 111            93.011
10, 112            93.012
10, 113            93.013
10, 114            93.014
10, 115            93.015
10, 116            93.999
10, 117            93.016
10, 118            93.017
10, 201            94.01
10, 202            94.02
10, 203            94.99
10, 301            93.030
10, 302            93.031
10, 303            93.032
10, 304            93.033
10, 305            93.034
10, 306            93.035
10, 307            93.036
10, 308            93.037
10, 309            93.038
10, 310            93.039
10, 311            93.999
10, 401            93.050
10, 402            93.051
10, 403            93.052
10, 404            93.053
10, 405            93.054
10, 406            93.055
10, 407            93.999
10, 408            93.056
10, 501            93.070
10, 502            93.071
10, 503            93.072
10, 504            93.073
10, 505            93.074
10, 506            93.075
10, 507            93.999
10, 508            93.076
11, 101            91.01
11, 102            91.02
11, 103            91.03
11, 104            91.04
11, 105            91.05
11, 106            91.06
11, 107            91.99
13, 101            110.01
13, 102            110.02
13, 103            110.03
13, 104            110.04
13, 105            110.05
13, 106            110.06
13, 107            110.07
13, 108            110.08
13, 109            110.99
14, 101            151.50
14, 102            151.51
14, 103            151.52
14, 104            151.53
14, 105            151.54
14, 106            151.55
14, 107            151.56
14, 108            151.57
14, 109            151.58
14, 110            151.59
14, 111            151.60
14, 112            151.61
14, 113            151.62
14, 114            151.99
15, 101            70.01
15, 102            70.02
15, 103            70.03
15, 104            70.04;
                   70.99
15, 105            70.05;
                   70.99
15, 106            70.06;
                   70.99
15, 107            70.07;
                   70.99
15, 108            70.08
15, 109            70.09
15, 201            Ch. 73, Sched. I
15, 204            71.01;
                   71.99
15, 205            Ch. 73, Sched. II
15, 207            Ch. 73, Sched. III
15, 209            Ch. 73, Sched. IV
15, 210            Ch. 73, Sched. V
15, 212            Ch. 73, Sched. VI
15, 213            Ch. 73, Sched. VII
15, 214            Ch. 73, Sched. VIII
15, 216            71.02
15, 217            71.03;
                   71.99
15, 219            Ch. 73, Sched. IX
15, 220            71.05
15, 304            71.06;
                   71.99
15, 401            72.01;
                   72.99
15, 402            72.02
15, 403            Ch. 74, Sched. I
15, 404            Ch. 74, Sched. II
15, 406            Ch. 74, Sched. III
15, 407            Ch. 74, Sched. IV
15, 408            Ch. 74, Sched. V
15, 409            Ch. 74, Sched. VI
15, 501            Ch. 74, Sched. VII
15, 502            72.15
15, 503            72.16
15, 504            72.17
15, 505            72.18
15, 506            72.19
15, 507            72.20
15, 508            72.21
15, 509            72.22
15, 510            72.23
15, 511            72.99
15, 512            72.24
15, 701            70.20
15, 702            70.21
15, 703            Ch. 73, Sched. XI
15, 704            70.22
15, 705            70.99
15, 801            70.35
15, 802            70.36
15, 804            70.37
15, 805            70.38
15, 806            70.39
15, 807            70.40
15, 808            70.41
15, 809            70.99
15, 810            70.42
16, 101            90.01
16, 102            90.02
16, 103            90.03
16, 104            90.04
16, 105            90.05
16, 106            90.06
16, 107            90.07
16, 108            90.99
18, 101            51.01
18, 102            51.02
18, 103            51.03
18, 104            51.04
18, 105            51.99
18, 106            51.05
18, 201            51.20
18, 202            51.21
18, 203            51.22
18, 204            51.99
18, 301            51.35
18, 302            51.36
18, 303            51.37
18, 304            51.38
18, 305            51.39
18, 306            51.40
18, 307            51.41
18, 308            51.42
18, 309            51.43
18, 310            51.44
18, 311            51.99
18, 312            51.45
20, 101            52.01
20, 102            52.02
20, 103            52.03
20, 104            52.04
20, 105            52.99
21, 101            150.025
21, 102            150.026
21, 103            150.027
21, 104            150.028
21, 105            150.029
21, 106            150.030
21, 107            150.999
21, 201            150.045
21, 202            150.046
21, 203            150.047
21, 204            150.048
21, 205            150.049
21, 206            150.050
21, 207            150.051
21, 208            150.052
21, 209            150.053
21, 210            150.054
21, 211            150.999
21, 301            150.008
21, 302            150.008
21, 303            150.075
21, 401            150.009
21, 402            150.009
24, 201            32.020
24, 202            32.021
24, 203            32.022
24, 204            32.023
24, 205            32.024
24, 206            32.025
24, 207            32.026
24, 208            32.027
24, 209            32.028
24, 210            32.029
24, 211            32.030
24, 212            32.031
24, 213            32.032
24, 214            32.033
24, 215            32.034
24, 216            32.035
24, 217            32.036
24, 218            32.037
24, 301            32.050
24, 302            32.051
24, 303            32.052
24, 304            32.053
24, 305            32.054
24, 306            32.055
24, 307            32.056
24, 308            32.057
24, 309            32.058
24, 310            32.059
24, 311            32.103
24, 312            32.060
24, 313            32.061
24, 401            32.075
24, 402            32.076
24, 403            32.077
24, 404            32.078
24, 405            32.079
24, 406            32.080
24, 501            32.095
24, 502            32.096
24, 503            32.097
24, 504            32.098
24, 505            32.099
24, 506            32.100
24, 507            32.101
24, 508            32.102
24, 509            32.103
24, 511            32.103
26, 101            50.01
26, 102            50.02
26, 103            50.03
26, 104            50.04
26, 105            50.99
26, 106            50.05
26, 201            50.20
26, 202            50.21
26, 203            50.22
26, 204            50.23
26, 205            50.24
26, 206            50.25
26, 207            50.26
26, 208            50.27
26, 209            50.28
26, 210            50.29
26, 211            50.30
26, 212            50.31;
                   50.99
Appx. A            TSO Table I
Appx. C            TSO Table VI
Appx. D            TSO Table VIII
Appx. E            TSO Table VII
Appx. F            TSO Table II
Appx. G            TSO Table V
Appx. H            TSO Table III
Appx. I            TSO Table IV
                   
 
 
REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No.   Date Passed Description
2/2/1883   2-2-1883    TSO Table II
9/16/1892  9-16-1892   TSO Table VI
4/25/33    4-25-1933   TSO Table III
9/11/50    9-11-1950   TSO Table IV
11/6/50    11-6-1950   TSO Table IV
2/5/51     2-5-1951    TSO Table IV
5/7/56     5-7-1956    TSO Table VIII
1/4/60     1-4-1960    TSO Table VII
8/29/66    8-29-1966   TSO Table VII
-          5-1-1967    32.020 
                       32.037
10/18/72   10-18-1972  TSO Table III
10/18/72   10-18-1972  TSO Table III
10/18/72   10-18-1972  TSO Table III
5/7/73     5-7-1973    TSO Table VIII
8/5/74     8-5-1974    TSO Table VII
10/7/74    10-7-1974   TSO Table V
3375       3-3-1975    TSO Table VIII
8/29/79    8-24-1979   TSO Table V
1482       12-22-1981  TSO Table IV
12/22/81   12-22-1981  TSO Table IV
12/22/81-1 12-22-1981  TSO Table IV
12/22/81-3 12-22-1981  TSO Table IV
2/8/82     2-8-1982    TSO Table V
4/8/83     4-8-1982    TSO Table V
3A         8-25-1982   TSO Table IV
14         8-25-1982   TSO Table IV
2/2/83     2-2-1983    TSO Table III
1/14/85    1-14-1985   TSO Table V
2          6-9-1986    TSO Table V
3          6-9-1986    TSO Table V
1/7/86     7-14-1986   TSO Table V
86/10/1    10-1-1986   TSO Table V
5/88/1     4-11-1988   TSO Table V
6/88/2     6-13-1988   TSO Table V
10/88/5-1  10-28-1988  TSO Table III
88/11/1    11-14-1988  TSO Table V
88/11/4    11-23-1988  TSO Table V
89/03/01   3-1-1989    TSO Table II
4/89/1     4-10-1989   TSO Table II
4/89/2     4-10-1989   TSO Table II
4-89-3     4-10-1989   TSO Table VIII
4-89-4     4-10-1989   TSO Table VIII
A-4-89-1   4-10-1989   TSO Table VIII
5-89-1     5-8-1989    TSO Table VIII
6-89-1     6-12-1989   TSO Table VIII
89-07-1    7-10-1989   TSO Table VIII
10-89-S-1  10-9-1989   TSO Table VIII
91-12-1    12-1-1991   TSO Table VIII
93-3-1     3-8-1993    TSO Table VIII
95-3-1     3-13-1995   110.02
95-11-1    11-13-1995  TSO Table V
                      
 
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No.        Date Passed Description
2004-11-01      - -         72.24;
                            Ch. 73, Sched. III
5/7/1878        5-7-1878    TSO Table III
6/26/1878       6-26-1878   TSO Table III
2/20/1893       2-20-1893   TSO Table IV
2/20/1893       2-20-1893   TSO Table VI
3/2/1894        3-2-1894    TSO Table III
3/1/1895        3-1-1895    TSO Table III
6/10/1896       6-10-1896   TSO Table III
7/12/1897       7-12-1897   TSO Table III
7/12/1897       7-12-1897   TSO Table III
12/2/1898       12-2-1898   TSO Table III
12/3/1899       12-3-1899   TSO Table III
3/1/01          3-1-1901    TSO Table VI
7/3/09          7-3-1909    TSO Table III
7/3/09          7-3-1909    TSO Table III
6/4/25          6-4-1925    TSO Table III
4/9/26          4-9-1926    TSO Table VIII
7/1/27          7-1-1927    TSO Table III
7/1/27          7-1-1927    TSO Table III
10/7/27         10-7-1927   TSO Table III
7/6/28          7-6-1928    TSO Table III
12/11/28        12-11-1928  TSO Table III
12/11/28        12-11-1928  TSO Table III
12/11/28        12-11-1928  TSO Table III
8/20/29         8-20-1929   TSO Table III
8/20/29         8-20-1929   TSO Table III
                            95.01 
-               5-6-1930    95.03;
                            95.99
-               2-2-1931    31.32
3/2/31          3-2-1931    TSO Table I
11/2/31         11-2-1931   TSO Table I
9/5/33          9-5-1933    TSO Table III
3/5/34          3-5-1934    TSO Table III
9/18/36         9-18-1936   TSO Table III
2/1/37          2-1-1937    TSO Table III
                            150.025 
-               4-5-1937    150.030;
                            150.999
8/3/37          8-3-1937    TSO Table III
4/21/41         4-21-1941   TSO Table III
3/3/47          3-3-1947    TSO Table III
10/6/47         10-6-1947   TSO Table VI
204             4-7-1949    TSO Table VIII
6/6/49          6-6-1949    TSO Table III
7/11/49         7-11-1949   TSO Table VIII
9/1/53          9-1-1953    TSO Table VIII
10/3/55         10-3-1955   TSO Table III
5/-/56          5- -1956    TSO Table III
9/11/56         9-11-1956   TSO Table III
3/3/58          3-3-1958    TSO Table III
5/5/58          5-5-1958    TSO Table III
3/2/59          3-2-1959    TSO Table II
11/2/59         11-2-1959   TSO Table VI
11/6/61         11-6-1961   TSO Table III
                            92.20 
-               7-2-1962    92.24;
                            92.99
8/3/64          8-3-1964    TSO Table II
8/10/64         8-10-1964   TSO Table II
8/17/64         8-17-1964   TSO Table II
-               6-14-1965   51.20 
                            51.22
2/6/67A         2-6-1967    TSO Table I
8/5/68          8-5-1968    TSO Table III
                            150.025;
202             4-7-1969    150.028;
                            150.999
203             4-7-1969    TSO Table VI
206A            4-7-1969    TSO Table VIII
207             4-7-1969    TSO Table VIII
209             4-7-1969    TSO Table VI
212             4-7-1969    TSO Table VIII
213             4-7-1969    TSO Table VIII
215             4-7-1969    31.15;
                            31.16
                            151.15 
217             4-7-1969    151.17;
                            151.99
218             4-7-1969    130.02;
                            130.99
                            130.15 
219             4-7-1969    130.17;
                            130.99
220             4-7-1969    130.03;
                            130.36
                            150.001 
221             4-7-1969    150.007;
                            150.999
                            130.30 
222             4-7-1969    130.36;
                            130.99
223             4-7-1969    31.30;
                            31.31
                            52.01 
224             4-7-1969    52.04;
                            52.99
226             4-7-1969    93.030 
                            93.039
                            110.01 
227             4-7-1969    110.08;
                            110.99
230             4-7-1969    150.045 
                            150.052
231             4-7-1969    150.009
232             4-7-1969    150.008
                            91.01 
235             3-2-1970    91.06;
                            91.99
237             10-5-1970   TSO Table VIII
238             8-2-1971    TSO Table VIII
                            32.050 
-               9-1-1973    32.061;
                            32.999
3/1/74          3-1-1974    TSO Table VIII
243             3-4-1974    TSO Table VIII
245             2-3-1975    TSO Table VIII
247             8-2-1976    TSO Table III
                            92.01 
248             1-22-1977   92.06;
                            92.99
249             9-22-1977   TSO Table VI
259A            - -1981     TSO Table IV
260A            - -1981     TSO Table IV
-               8-17-1981   30.01 
                            30.04
262A            - -1982     TSO Table IV
259             1-4-1982    TSO Table IV
258             2-4-1982    TSO Table IV
250             1-10-1983   TSO Table VIII
2/14/83         2-14-1983   TSO Table III
11/12/84        11-12-1984  TSO Table VI
                            94.01;
260             3-11-1985   94.02;
                            94.99
                            51.21;
261A            3-24-1986   51.22;
                            51.99
                            51.35 
263             8-27-1986   51.44;
                            51.99
262             9-8-1986    TSO Table VIII
1/1/87          1-1-1987    TSO Table VIII
264             6-8-1987    TSO Table VIII
6/8/87          6-8-1987    TSO Table VIII
265             8-10-1987   130.01;
                            130.99
267             1-9-1989    TSO Table V
268             1-9-1989    TSO Table V
                            51.01 
269             1-9-1989    51.05;
                            51.99
                            31.32;
                            32.020 -
                            32.037;
                            32.999;
                            50.01 -
                            50.05;
                            50.99;
                            51.99;
                            52.99;
                            70.01 -
                            70.09;
                            70.20 -
                            70.22;
                            70.35 
                            70.42;
                            70.99;
                            71.01 -
                            71.03;
                            71.06;
                            71.99;
                            72.01;
                            72.15 -
                            72.24;
                            72.99;
                            Ch. 73, Sched. I;
                            Ch. 73, Sched. II;
                            Ch. 73, Sched. III;
                            Ch. 73, Sched. IV;
                            Ch. 73, Sched. V;
                            Ch. 73, Sched. VI;
                            Ch. 73, Sched. VII;
                            Ch. 73, Sched. VIII;
                            Ch. 73, Sched. XI;
                            Ch. 74, Sched. II;
                            Ch. 74, Sched. III;
                            Ch. 74, Sched. IV;
                            Ch. 74, Sched. V;
                            Ch. 74, Sched. VI;
                            Ch. 74, Sched. VII;
271             6-8-1992    90.01 -
                            90.07;
                            90.99;
                            91.01 -
                            91.06;
                            91.99;
                            92.01 -
                            92.06;
                            92.20 -
                            92.24;
                            92.99;
                            93.001 -
                            93.017;
                            93.030 -
                            93.039;
                            93.050 -
                            93.055;
                            93.070 -
                            93.076;
                            93.999;
                            94.99;
                            95.01 -
                            95.03;
                            95.99;
                            110.01 -
                            110.08;
                            110.99;
                            130.02;
                            130.03;
                            130.15 -
                            130.17;
                            130.30 -
                            130.36;
                            130.99;
                            150.001 -
                            150.007;
                            150.025;
                            150.999;
                            151.50 -
                            151.62;
                            151.99
-               9-14-1992   Ch. 73, Sched. IX
273             2-8-1993    32.075 
                            32.080
275             12-18-1993  TSO Table III
275             12-18-1993  TSO Table III
-               1-10-1994   71.05
277             3-11-1996   TSO Table VIII
                            72.02;
278             6-9-1997    72.99;
                            Ch. 74, Sched. I
98-06-01        6-8-1998    31.45 
                            31.48
99-09-01        9-13-1999   93.037
99-09-02        9-13-1999   93.007
2001-01-01      1-2-2001    Ch. 74, Sched. III;
                            Ch. 74, Sched. IV
                            150.053;
2001-02-01      2-12-2001   150.054;
                            150.999
6/25/01         6-25-2001   TSO Table III
2001-07-01      7-9-2001    72.24;
                            Ch. 73, Sched. I
                            50.20 
2001-12-01      12-10-2001  50.31;
                            50.99
2001-12-02      12-10-2001  Ch. 73, Sched. IX
2003-04-01      4-14-2003   Ch. 74, Sched. IV
2003-07-01      7-14-2003   Ch. 73, Sched. IX
2003-11-01      11-10-2003  31.68
2004-04-01      4-12-2004   Ch. 74, Sched. IV
2004-04-02      4-13-2004   Ch. 74, Sched. VII
2004-05-01      5-10-2004   31.17
                            151.01 
                            151.03;
2004-06-01      6-14-2004   151.30 
                            151.37;
                            151.99
                            93.004;
2004-07-01      7-12-2004   93.006;
                            93.007;
                            93.012
2004-11-01      11-8-2004   Ch. 73, Sched. VIII
2005-05-01      5-9-2005    153.01
                            95.35 
2006-07-01      7-10-2006   95.42;
                            95.99
2006-08-01      8-14-2006   Ch. 73, Sched. VIII
2006-10-01      10-10-2006  Ch. 73, Sched. VIII
2007-01-1       1-8-2007    31.01
6/-/07          6- -2007    TSO Table III
2007-12-02      12-10-2007  Ch. 73, Sched. VIII
                            95.15 
2008-11-01      11-10-2008  95.20;
                            95.99
2009-10-01      10-13-2009  Ch. 74, Sched. I
2010-09-01      9-13-2010   Ch. 73, Sched. VIII
2010-09-02      9-13-2010   Ch. 74, Sched. IV
2011-11-01      11-14-2011  90.01 
                            90.03
                            32.001 
2011-11-01      11-28-2011  32.008;
                            32.999
                            152.01 
                            152.06;
                            152.20 
                            152.29;
2012-02-01      2-28-2012   152.40 
                            152.43;
                            152.55 
                            152.65;
                            152.99
2013-02-01      2-11-2013   Ch. 74, Sched. IV
2014-08-01      8-11-2014   Ch. 74, Sched. VII
2016-12-1       12- -2016   Ch. 74, Sched. I;
                            Ch. 74, Sched. III
2018-01-01      1-8-2018    71.04;
                            71.99
2019-12-01      12-9-2019   TSO Table VIII
                            72.04;
2021-06-01      6-14-2021   72.24;
                            72.99
2021-06-02      6-14-2021   150.008
2022-07-01      7-11-2022   150.010
2022-07-02      7-11-2022   150.009
2022-07-03      7-11-2022   72.03
2022-11-01      12-12-2022  Ch. 73, Sched. X
                            95.55 
2023-06-01      6-12-2023   95.61;
                            95.99
2023-07-02      8-14-2023   Ch. 73, Sched. VIII
2023-07-03      8-14-2023   92.25;
                            92.99
2024-1-02       1-2-2024    31.18
2024-07-08      7-8-2024    Ch. 74, Sched. I
2023-07-01      11-8-2024   Ch. 73, Sched. IV
2024-11-11      11-11-2024  95.03;
                            95.99
                            92.01;
                            92.02;
2024-11-12      11-12-2024  92.20;
                            92.21;
                            92.25;
                            92.99
                            150.065 
12-09-24        12-9-2024   150.075;
                            150.999
2024-12-09      12-9-2024   130.32
2025-03-10      3-10-2025   Ch. 74, Sched. I
2025-05-12      5-12-2025   150.999
Ord. 2025-05-13 5-12-2025   150.009;
                            150.999
                           
 
 
