FORD CITY BOROUGH, PENNSYLVANIA
CODE OF ORDINANCES
Local legislation current through Ord. 763, passed 12-23-2024
 
Published by:
AMERICAN LEGAL PUBLISHING
525 Vine Street, Ste. 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-800-445-5588 www.amlegal.com
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
10.01   Approval, adoption and title of code
   
10.02   Rules of interpretation and definitions
   
10.03   Effect of code on previous provisions
   
10.04   Sections and ordinances repealed
   
10.05   Exemptions from repeal
   
10.06   Application to future ordinances
   
10.07   Changes and revisions in previously adopted ordinances
   
10.08   Interpretation of provisions
   
10.09   Headings, editor’s notes, statutory references
   
10.10   Filing copies of code
   
10.11   Amendments to the code; code books to be kept up-to-date
   
10.12   Severability
   
10.13   Reference to other sections
   
10.14   Errors and omissions
   
10.15   Sections histories; statutory references
   
10.16   Altering or tampering with the code; penalties for violation
 
   
10.99   General penalty
§ 10.01 APPROVAL, ADOPTION AND TITLE OF CODE.
   (A)   Pursuant to 8 Pa.C.S. § 3301.5, the codification of all ordinances of
a permanent and general nature for the Borough of Ford City, Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, as revised, codified, rearranged, renumbered, and consolidated
into component codes, titles, chapters, and sections, are approved, adopted,
ordained, and enacted as a single ordinance of the Borough of Ford City and
shall be known and designated as the Borough of Ford City Code, for which
designation “code of ordinances,” “codified ordinances,” or “code” may be
substituted.
   (B)   Code title, chapter, and section headings do not constitute any part
of the law as contained in the code.
§ 10.02 RULES OF INTERPRETATION AND DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   Rules of interpretation.
      (1)   Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain, ordinary, and
usual sense. Technical words and phrases having a peculiar and appropriate
meaning in law shall be understood according to their technical import.
      (2)   Words imputing joint authority to three or more persons shall be
construed as imputing authority to a majority of the persons unless otherwise
declared in the section giving the authority.
      (3)   Where a section requires an act to be done which, by law, an agent
or deputy may perform in addition to the principal, the performance of the act
by an authorized deputy or agent is valid.
      (4)   Words denoting the masculine gender shall be deemed to include the
feminine and neuter genders; words in the singular shall include the plural and
words in the plural shall include the singular; the use of a verb in the
present tense shall include the future, if applicable.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this code, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICE. All departments and the personnel thereof
established by the Borough Code or ordinance.
      ADOPTING ORDINANCE. The ordinance of the Borough of Ford City adopting
the Codified Ordinances of Ford City Borough, Pennsylvania, in accordance with
the Borough Code of Pennsylvania.
      AND. May be read OR, and OR may be read AND, if the sense requires it.
      AUTHORITY. Whenever in this code, authority is given to an officer or an
act is required to be performed, the authority may be exercised and the act may
be performed, at the instance of the officer, by a deputy or subordinate,
unless contrary to law or to the clear intent of any particular provision.
      BOROUGH and MUNICIPALITY. The Borough of Ford City, Pennsylvania.
      BOROUGH CODE. Public Law 432, of 2014, No. 37, effective June 17, 2014,
being 8 Pa.C.S. §§ 101 et seq., as amended.
      BUDGET. The annual budget of the borough.
      CALENDAR/COMPUTATION OF TIME. The terms MONTH and YEAR mean the CALENDAR
MONTH or YEAR. The time expressed in days within which an act is to be done or
a period is to expire shall be computed by excluding the first and including
the last day, unless the last day is a Sunday, in which case it shall be
excluded. If time is expressed in hours, the whole of Sunday shall be excluded.
      CONTRACT ADMINISTRATION. The management of the execution of contracts
between the borough and any individual, partnership, association, corporation,
or governmental body.
      COUNCIL. The Council of the Borough of Ford City, Pennsylvania.
      COUNTY. The County of Armstrong, Pennsylvania.
      ENGINEER. The Engineer of the borough.
      KEEPER and PROPRIETOR. Persons, firms, associations, corporations, clubs,
and copartnerships, whether acting by themselves or as a servant, agent, or
employee.
      LAND/REAL ESTATE. Includes rights and easements of an incorporeal nature.
      LAW. All applicable laws and ordinances of the United States of America,
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and the County of Armstrong.
      MANAGER and BOROUGH MANAGER. The chief administrative officer as
appointed by the Borough Council.
      OATH. Includes AFFIRMATION. When an oath is required or authorized by
law, an affirmation in lieu thereof may be taken by a person having
conscientious scruples about taking an OATH. An AFFIRMATION shall have the same
effect as an OATH.
      ORDINANCE. Any ordinance of the Borough of Ford City, including this
code.
      OWNER. When applied to property, includes a part owner, joint owner, or
tenant in common of the whole or any part of the property.
      PERSON. An individual, association, club, corporation, firm, partnership,
body politic, or any other legal entity.
      POLICE DEPARTMENT or BOROUGH POLICE. Whichever police agency is
officially authorized to serve the borough, including regional departments like
the Southern Armstrong Regional Police Department.
      PREMISES. When used as applicable to property, extends to and includes
land and buildings.
      PROPERTY. Includes real and personal property and any mixed and lesser
estates or interests therein. PERSONAL PROPERTY includes every kind of property
except REAL PROPERTY. REAL PROPERTY includes lands, tenements, and
hereditaments.
      REASONABLE TIME. In all cases where provision is made for and act to be
done or notice to be given within a REASONABLE TIME, it shall be deemed to mean
the time only as may be necessary for the prompt performance of the act or the
giving of the notice.
      SECRETARY and BOROUGH SECRETARY. An appointed position charged with the
responsibility for taking meeting minutes; recording and certifying ordinances;
attesting to the execution of documents; and is the custodian of borough
records and the borough seal. The BOROUGH SECRETARY shall not be a member of
the Borough Council and serves an indefinite term at the pleasure of the
Borough Council.
      SIDEWALK. Any portion of a street between the curb line and the adjacent
property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding parkways.
      SOLICITOR. The Solicitor of the borough.
      STATE and COMMONWEALTH. The Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
      STREET. Alleys, avenues, boulevards, lanes, roads, streets, state
highways, and other public ways in the borough.
      TENANT and OCCUPANT. As applied to buildings or land, shall extend and be
applied to any person holding a written or oral lease of, or who occupies the
whole or any part of, a building or land, alone or with others.
      TIME. Whenever any time established in the codified ordinances for the
taking of any action expires on a Sunday or legal holiday, the time shall not
expire on the day but shall expire on the next week day.
§ 10.03 EFFECT OF CODE ON PREVIOUS PROVISIONS.
   The provisions of this code, insofar as they are substantially the same as
those of ordinances and resolutions in force immediately prior to the enactment
of this code, are intended as a continuation of the ordinances and resolutions,
and not as new enactments, and the effectiveness of the provisions shall date
from the date of adoption of the prior ordinance or resolution. All the
provisions are hereby continued in full force and effect and are hereby
reaffirmed as to their adoption by the Borough Council, and it is the intention
of the Borough Council that each provision contained within the code is hereby
reenacted and reaffirmed as it appears in the code.
§ 10.04 SECTIONS AND ORDINANCES REPEALED.
   All ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict with the provisions of
this code are hereby repealed.
§ 10.05 EXEMPTIONS FROM REPEAL.
   The repeal provided for in §
10.04 shall not affect the following ordinances, resolutions, rights, and
obligations which are hereby expressly saved from repeal; provided, however,
that the repeal of ordinances or parts thereof in §
10.04, or the saving from repeal of ordinances or parts thereof pursuant to
this section, shall not be construed so as to revive an ordinance or part
thereof previously repealed, superseded, or no longer of any effect:
   (A)   Any offense or act committed or done, or any penalty or forfeiture
incurred, or any contract or right established or accruing, before the adoption
of these codified ordinances;
   (B)   Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of
money by or to the borough, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the
borough, or any evidence of the borough’s indebtedness, or any contract or
obligation assumed by the borough;
   (C)   Any ordinance or resolution of Council not in conflict or inconsistent
with the provisions of these codified ordinances;
   (D)   Any right, license or franchise conferred by any ordinance or
resolution of Council or any other person or corporation;
   (E)   Any ordinance establishing, naming, relocating, or vacating any street
or other public way;
   (F)   Any ordinance or part thereof providing for the establishment of
positions for salaries or compensation;
   (G)   Any prosecution, suit or other proceeding pending, or any judgment
rendered, on or prior to the adoption of these codified ordinances;
   (H)   Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes or assessments;
   (I)   Any ordinance establishing or changing the boundaries of the borough;
or
   (J)   Any ordinance or resolution adopted by Council after the adoption of
the codified ordinances.
§ 10.06 APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.
   All provisions of Title I, compatible with future legislation, shall apply
to ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code unless
otherwise specifically provided.
§ 10.07 CHANGES AND REVISIONS IN PREVIOUSLY ADOPTED ORDINANCES.
   (A)   Nonsubstantive grammatical changes. In compiling and preparing the
ordinances and resolutions of the borough for adoption and revision as part of
the code, certain nonsubstantive grammatical and style changes were made in one
or more of the ordinances. It is the intention of the Borough Council that all
the changes be adopted as part of the code as if the ordinances and resolutions
so changed had been previously formally amended to read as such.
   (B)   Substantive changes and revisions. In addition to the changes and
revisions in division (A) above, changes and revisions of a substantive nature
are hereby made to various ordinances and resolutions included in the code.
These changes are enacted to bring provisions into conformity with the desired
policies of the Borough Council, and it is the intent of the Borough Council
that all the changes be adopted as part of the code as if the ordinances and
resolutions so changed have been previously formally amended to read as such.
All changes and revisions shall be deemed to be in effect as of the effective
date of this code.
§ 10.08 INTERPRETATION OF PROVISIONS.
   (A)   In interpreting and applying the provision of the code, they shall be
held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health,
safety, comfort, convenience, and general welfare.
   (B)   (1)   Where the provisions of the code impose greater restrictions or
requirements than those of any state statute, other ordinance, resolution, or
regulation, the provisions of the code shall control.
      (2)   Where the provisions of any statute, other ordinance, resolution,
or regulation impose greater restrictions or requirements, the provisions of
the statute, other ordinance, resolution, or regulation shall control.
§ 10.09 HEADINGS, EDITOR’S NOTES, STATUTORY REFERENCES.
   (A)   Headings of titles, chapters, sections, and divisions in the code, or
in supplements to the code, are inserted into the code, and may be inserted
into the supplements to the code, for the convenience of persons using the code
and are not part of the legislation.
   (B)   Editors’s notes and/or statutory references indicating sources of
sections, giving other information or referring the statutes or to other parts
of the code are inserted in the code, and may be inserted in supplements to the
code, for the convenience of persons using the code and are not part of the
legislation.
§ 10.10 FILING COPIES OF CODE.
   Three copies of the code in a bound volume shall be filed with the ordinance
books in the office of the Borough Manager and shall remain there for use and
examination by the public. Upon adoption, the copies shall be certified to by
the Borough Manager, as provided by law, and the certified copies shall remain
on file in the office of the Borough Manager, available to persons desiring to
examine the same during all times while the code is in effect.
§ 10.11 AMENDMENTS TO THE CODE; CODE BOOKS TO BE KEPT UP-TO-DATE.
   (A)   Any and all additions, deletions, amendments, or supplements to the
code, when passed and adopted so as to indicate the intention of Borough
Council to be a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated into the code
so that the references in the code shall be understood and intended to include
the changes. When any and all additions, deletions, amendments, or supplements
to the code shall be adopted, they shall be printed and inserted in the bound
code book as amendments and supplements to it.
   (B)   The Borough Manager or someone authorized or directed by him or her
shall keep the certified copies of the code book, which are required to be kept
in the Borough Manager’s office for public use, up-to-date. All changes in the
code, and all ordinances and resolutions adopted subsequent to the effective
date of this code, which the Borough Council specifically adopts as part of the
code, shall be included in the code book by reference until the changes or new
ordinances or resolutions are printed as supplements to the code book and
inserted into the code book.
§ 10.12 SEVERABILITY.
   (A)   If any title, chapter, section, division, or part thereof of this code
now enacted or subsequently amended or its application to any person or
circumstances is held to be illegal, invalid, or unconstitutional by a court of
competent jurisdiction, that determination shall not affect, impair, or
invalidate the remainder thereof, but is confined in its operation and
application to the title, chapter, section, division, or part thereof
determined illegal, invalid, or unconstitutional.
   (B)   It is the intent of the Borough Council to declare that this code
would have been adopted if the illegal, invalid or unconstitutional title,
chapter, section, division, or part thereof would not have been included.
§ 10.13 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
   Whenever in one section, reference is made to another section hereof, the
reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified, or renumbered unless the subject matter is
changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
§ 10.14 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any
words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention of
the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning can be
attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was clearly
intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be corrected and the word or
words supplied, omitted, or substituted as will conform with the manifest
intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though the correct
words were contained in the text as originally published. No alteration shall
be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or extent of
the error.
§ 10.15 SECTIONS HISTORIES; STATUTORY REFERENCES.
   (A)   (1)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and
passage date of the original ordinance, and amending ordinances, if any, are
listed following the text of the code section.
      (2)   Example: (Ord. 10, passed 5-13-1960; Ord. 15, passed 1-1-1970; Ord.
20, passed 1-1-1980; Ord. 25, passed 1-1-1985)
   (B)   (1)   If a statutory cite is included in the history, this indicates
that the text of the section reads substantially the same as the statute.
Example: (65 P.S. § 67.101) (Ord. 10, passed 1-17-1980; Ord. 20, passed 1-1-
1985)
      (2)   If a statutory cite is set forth as a “statutory reference”
following the text of the section, this indicates that the reader should refer
to that statute for further information. Example:
§ 39.01 PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.
   This code book consists of all ordinances and resolutions of the borough and
shall be known as the codified ordinances of the borough.
Statutory reference:
   Authority to codify ordinances, see 65 P.S. §§ 67.101 et seq.
   (C)   If a section of this code is derived from the previous code of
ordinances of the borough published in a previous year and subsequently
amended, the previous code section number shall be indicated in the history by
“(Prior Code, §      ).”
§ 10.16 ALTERING OR TAMPERING WITH THE CODE; PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION.
   It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, or to alter or tamper with the code or any part or portion
thereof, in any manner which will cause the law of the borough to be
misrepresented thereby. Anybody violating this section shall, upon conviction,
be punished by a fine not to exceed $600, plus costs of prosecution or
imprisonment not to exceed 90 days or both.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this code
of ordinances or fails to comply therewith or with any of the requirements
thereof, upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a Magisterial
District Judge in the manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses
under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a
fine of not less than $100, nor more than $1,000, plus costs, including
reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred by the borough and, in default of payment
of said fines and costs, to a term of imprisonment to the extent permitted by
law for the punishment of summary offenses. A separate offense shall arise for
each day or portion thereof in which a violation of this code of ordinances is
found to exist or for each section of this code of ordinances found to have
been violated. The borough may also commence appropriate actions in equity to
prevent, restrain, correct, enjoin or abate violations of this code of
ordinances. All fines and penalties collected for violation of this code of
ordinances shall be paid to the borough.
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   GOVERNING BODY
      
31.   BOROUGH OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES
      
32.   BOROUGH ORGANIZATIONS AND AUTHORITIES
      
33.   BOROUGH POLICIES
      
34.   FINANCE AND TAXATION
CHAPTER 30: GOVERNING BODY
Section
General Provisions
   
30.01   Articles of incorporation
   
30.02   Wards abolished; elections
Council
   
30.15   President of Council
   
30.16   Regular meetings
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 30.01 ARTICLES OF INCORPORATION.
   The articles of incorporation of the borough are hereby adopted by reference
as if set out in full herein. Copies of these articles of incorporation are
available through Borough Offices.
(Prior Code, § 105.01) (Ord. passed 9-21-1898)
§ 30.02 WARDS ABOLISHED; ELECTIONS.
   (A)   Abolishment of wards. All wards historically established and/or
currently exiting within the borough are hereby abolished.
   (B)   Election of seven Borough Council members at large. The number of
Borough Council members are hereby increased from six to seven, all of whom
shall serve and hereafter be elected at large. Such increase shall not
interfere with the terms of those Borough Council members previously elected.
Those Borough Council members holding office at the time of the enactment of
this section shall continue to hold office until the expiration of their
respective terms.
   (C)   Election schedule. In order to increase the number of Borough Council
members to seven and to ensure current Borough Council members continue to hold
office until their respective terms expire, and Borough Council members’ terms
remain staggered as required by applicable law, Borough Council members’ seats
shall be filled as follows.
      (1)   For the 2025 municipal election. Electors of the borough shall
elect four members of Borough Council at large, which shall bring the
membership of Borough Council to a complement of seven beginning calendar year
2026. Each elected member shall serve for a four-year term beginning the first
Monday of January following the 2025 municipal election.
      (2)   For 2027 municipal election. Electors of the borough shall elect
three members of Borough Council at large. Each elected member shall serve for
a four-year term beginning the first Monday of January following the 2027
municipal election.
   (D)   Vacancies. At any time following the effective date of this section,
when a vacancy occurs in the office of a Borough Council member originally
elected or appointed from a particular ward, the individual appointed to fill
the vacancy shall not be required to be a resident of the area formerly
comprising the ward, but shall otherwise be qualified for office as provided in
the Borough Code, being 8 Pa.C.S. §§ 101 et seq.
(Ord. 761, passed 8-26-2024)
COUNCIL
§ 30.15 PRESIDENT OF COUNCIL.
   The President of Council shall sign all orders drawn on the Treasurer, and
approved by Council.
(Prior Code, § 111.01) (Ord. 1, passed 12-29-1898)
§ 30.16 REGULAR MEETINGS.
   The regular meeting of the Borough Council shall be held on a date and time
established by Borough Council and may be changed from time to time by official
action of Council. Public notice of any change shall be provided as required by
law.
CHAPTER 31: BOROUGH OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES
Section
General Provisions
   
31.01   Building Official
   
31.02   Assistant Emergency Management Coordinator
   
31.03   Employee pension plan adopted by reference
Borough Manager
   
31.15   Office created
   
31.16   Appointment by Council
   
31.17   Bond
   
31.18   Compensation
   
31.19   Powers and duties
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 31.01 BUILDING OFFICIAL.
   There is hereby created the office of Building Official, who shall be
appointed by Council in the manner of the appointment of other officials and
employees of the borough. His or her duties, subject to the provisions of the
Borough Code, being 8 Pa.C.S. §§ 101 et seq., and subject to the rights and
duties of the Mayor, shall be to enforce all laws relating to the construction,
alteration, removal, and demolition of buildings and structures. The Building
Official, in the discharge of his or her official duties and upon proper
identification, shall have the authority to enter any building, structure, or
premises at any reasonable hour for the purpose of inspection or enforcement
and any purpose as provided for under the provisions of the PA UCC.
(Prior Code, § 127.01) (Ord. 425, passed 12-5-1963)
§ 31.02 ASSISTANT EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT COORDINATOR.
   (A)   The position of Assistant Emergency Management Coordinator is hereby
established, pursuant to the following.
      (1)   The Assistant Emergency Management Coordinator shall be appointed
by, and shall serve at the pleasure of, Borough Council.
      (2)   The Assistant Emergency Management Coordinator shall reside within
the borough.
      (3)   The Assistant Emergency Management Coordinator shall serve under
the guidance of the borough’s Emergency Management Coordinator and is subject
to all rules and regulations of the EMS Code, being 35 Pa.C.S. §§ 8101 et seq.
      (4)   The Assistant Emergency Management Coordinator is a volunteer
position, and thus is unpaid.
      (5)   The Assistant Emergency Management Coordinator may be reimbursed
for actual expenses incurred in the performance of his or her duties, subject
to the approval of Borough Council.
      (6)   In the absence of the borough’s Emergency Management Coordinator,
the duties of the borough’s Emergency Management Coordinator are to be assumed
by the Assistant Emergency Management Coordinator.
   (B)   (1)   The Assistant Emergency Management Coordinator shall complete,
within one year of the date of his or her appointment, the following courses
pursuant to the State Emergency Management Agency (“PEMA”) Directive D2011-02:
         (a)   IS–100.b Introduction to Incidental Command System;
         (b)   IS–200.b ICS for Single Resources and Initial Action Incidents;
         (c)   IS–700.a National Incident Management System: An Introduction;
         (d)   IS–775 EOC Management and Operations;
         (e)   IS–800.b National Response Framework: An Introduction;
         (f)   IS–230.a Fundamentals of Emergency Management;
         (g)   IS–235.a Emergency Planning Course; and
         (h)   IS–240.a Leadership and Influence Course.
      (2)   The Assistant Emergency Management Coordinator shall be solely
responsible for any and all costs associated with the completion of the courses
referenced in division (B)(1) above and must provide the borough with proof of
course completion within one year following the date of his or her appointment.
(Ord. 740, passed 4-8-2019)
§ 31.03 EMPLOYEE PENSION PLAN ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The borough’s General Employees’ Pension Plan is hereby adopted by reference
as if fully laid out herein. Copies are available through Borough Offices.
(Ord. 736, passed 1-9-2017; Ord. 737, passed 10-8-2018; Ord. 751, passed 1-11-
2021)
BOROUGH MANAGER
§ 31.15 OFFICE CREATED.
   The Office of the Borough Manager is hereby created, subject to the right of
the borough to abolish such office at any time by ordinance.
(Ord. 743, passed 11-25-2019)
§ 31.16 APPOINTMENT BY COUNCIL.
   Borough Council shall elect, by majority vote of all its members, one person
to fill the office of Borough Manager, which person shall serve at will and at
the pleasure of Borough Council and may be removed from office at any time by a
majority vote of Borough Council.
(Ord. 743, passed 11-25-2019)
§ 31.17 BOND.
   Before entering upon his or her duties, the Borough Manager shall give a
bond to the borough with a bonding company as surety, in the sum of 10% of the
currently budgeted revenues, conditioned for the faithful performance of his or
her duties. The premium for said bond shall be paid for by the borough.
(Ord. 743, passed 11-25-2019)
§ 31.18 COMPENSATION.
   The Borough Manager shall receive such compensation as shall be fixed from
time to time by Borough Council.
(Ord. 743, passed 11-25-2019)
§ 31.19 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   The Borough Manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the
borough, and he or she shall supervise and be responsible to Borough Council as
a whole for the proper and efficient administration of the affairs of the
borough. His or her powers and duties shall relate to the general management of
all borough business not expressly by ordinance imposed or conferred upon other
borough officers.
   (B)   Subject to recall by ordinance, the powers and duties of the Manager
shall include the following:
      (1)   Administer the day-to-day operations of the borough;
      (2)   Serve as liaison between the Borough Council and all borough
departments, boards, commissions, and committees;
      (3)   Provide Borough Council with strategic leadership, direction in the
development of, and recommendations for short- and long-term borough goals and
objectives; gather and interpret information and data and prepare necessary
studies, reports, and related documentation to support the same;
      (4)   Attend all Borough Council meetings and any other borough board,
commission, or committee meetings deemed necessary by Borough Council;
      (5)   Prepare Borough Council’s meeting agendas in coordination with the
Borough Council President;
      (6)   Assist Borough Council with communicating the borough’s official
plans, objectives, policies, and procedures to borough boards, commissions,
committees, staff, and the general public;
      (7)   Study and standardize written borough procedures to improve
efficiency and effectiveness of the borough’s operations;
      (8)   Manage, direct, and supervise all borough departments and staff,
except the Police Department, which is under the direct supervision of the
Mayor, to achieve goals established by Borough Council within established
budgetary parameters;
      (9)   Determine work procedures, prepare work schedules, and issue
written and oral instructions for borough staff;
      (10)   Oversee the computer technology operations of the borough and
ensure that the proper systems are maintained, upgraded, improved, and added as
necessary;
      (11)   Recommend to Borough Council personnel policies and procedures,
and administer those established and adopted by Borough Council;
      (12)   Provide recommendations to Borough Council on the staffing level,
hiring, advancement, promotion, discipline, and firing of borough staff;
      (13)   Develop and coordinate the advertisement of vacant borough
position notices;
      (14)   Recruit, interview, and evaluate applicants for vacant borough
positions; provide to Borough Council hiring recommendations based on
evaluation;
      (15)   Assign duties to and examine work of borough staff for exactness,
neatness, and conformance to borough policies and procedures;
      (16)   Conduct annual borough staff performance evaluations pursuant to
Borough Council’s policy;
      (17)   Plan and direct new employee orientation to foster positive
attitudes toward borough goals and objectives;
      (18)   Maintain harmony among borough staff and resolve staff complaints;
      (19)   Respect Borough Council in labor negotiations and in grievance and
interest arbitration in conjunction with the Borough Solicitor and/or special
labor counsel;
      (20)   Prepare, in conjunction with the Borough Solicitor and/or special
labor counsel, employee separation notices and related documentation, and
conducts exit interviews to determine reasons behind separations;
      (21)   Manage records of insurance coverage, pension plans, and personnel
transactions such as borough hires, promotions, transfers, performance reviews,
and terminations;
      (22)   Direct preparation and distribution of written and verbal
information to inform employees of benefits programs such as insurance plans,
pension plans, paid time off, and special employer sponsored activities;
      (23)   Draft, in conjunction with the Borough Solicitor and/or special
labor counsel, directives advising borough department heads about local, state,
and federal policies regarding equal employment opportunities, compensation,
and employee benefits;
      (24)   Consult and work collaboratively with the Borough Solicitor and/or
special labor counsel to ensure that the borough’s employment policies and
practices comply with federal and state law;
      (25)   Ensure that all borough staff possess the necessary training to
effectively perform the functions of their jobs within generally accepted
practices;
      (26)   Promote a work environment that is conducive to operational
collaboration and transparency;
      (27)   Prepare and submit for Borough Council’s review and approval an
annual budget and capital improvement plan;
      (28)   Administer the borough’s budget adopted by Borough Council and
ensure that each borough department performs its responsibility within the
parameters of the same;
      (29)   Monitor the borough’s revenues and expenditures generally and with
respect to specific projects to the borough’s financial integrity is not
compromised;
      (30)   Advise the Borough Council monthly of the borough’s financial
condition and projected future financial needs; when necessary, make
recommendations for actions to secure the financial integrity of the borough’s
finances;
      (31)   Review purchase orders, trial balances, budget reports, billing
procedures, and payroll information on a regular basis;
      (32)   Oversee the purchasing operations of the borough and enforce the
borough’s purchasing procedures;
      (33)   Prepare specifications and bid proposals in coordination with the
Borough Solicitor and Borough Engineer for all borough projects;
      (34)   Supervise performance and faithful execution of all contracts let
by the borough;
      (35)   Collaborate with borough staff and professional consultants for
preparation of grant applications to government agencies, foundations, and
businesses as appropriate in support of borough goals and objectives;
      (36)   Provide advice and assistance to the Police Department on
financial and personnel matters, and any other matters requested;
      (37)   Originate and maintain contacts with appropriate federal, state,
and county agencies and other organizations with whom the borough conducts
business;
      (38)   Maintain an awareness of relevant federal, state, and county
regulations and requirements;
      (39)   Complete all required reports in collaboration with department
managers for federal, state, and county agencies; and
      (40)   Perform other duties as assigned by Borough Council.
(Ord. 743, passed 11-25-2019)
CHAPTER 32: BOROUGH ORGANIZATIONS AND AUTHORITIES
Section
General Provisions
   
32.01   Planning and Zoning Commission
   
32.02   Codes Revision Committee
Municipal Authorities
   
32.20   Municipal Sewage Disposal Authority
   
32.21   Mid-County Transit Authority
   
32.22   Stormwater Authority
Police Department
   
32.35   Borough Police Department disbanded
   
32.36   Borough Police Department employees terminated
   
32.37   Civil Service Commission dissolved
   
32.38   Southern Armstrong Regional Police Department
   
32.39   Intergovernmental cooperation
   
32.40   Regional police pension plan adopted by reference
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 32.01 PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION.
   (A)   Creation; purpose and functions. In order that the borough may avail
itself of the powers conferred by Article XXXII of the Borough Code, being 8
Pa.C.S. §§ 101 et seq., there is hereby created a Zoning Commission to
recommend the boundaries of the various original districts and appropriate
regulations to be enforced therein. The Commission shall make a preliminary
report and hold public hearings thereon before submitting its final report.
(Prior Code, § 143.01)
   (B)   Successor to Planning Commission. The existing Planning Commission
created by Ordinance 329, passed March 7, 1955, shall assume the powers of the
Zoning Commission created in division (A) above and henceforth shall be known
as the Ford City Planning and Zoning Commission.
(Prior Code, § 143.02)
(Ord. 329, passed 3-7-1955; Ord. 438, passed 1-4-1965)
§ 32.02 CODES REVISION COMMITTEE.
   There is hereby created a Codes Revision Committee for the borough of such
membership and with such duties as Council shall from time to time determine.
(Prior Code, § 153.01)
MUNICIPAL AUTHORITIES
§ 32.20 MUNICIPAL SEWAGE DISPOSAL AUTHORITY.
    The Municipal Sewage Disposal Authority was created under the
Municipalities Act, being Pa.C.S. §§ 5601 et seq. The project undertaken by the
Authority was the construction and operation of a sewage disposal plant and the
acquisition or construction of the connecting sewers and sewage lines, together
with the power to do all acts necessary in connection therewith which are
authorized by law.
(Prior Code, § 157.01) (Ord. 372, passed 2-3-1958; Ord. 381, passed 8-22-1958)
§ 32.21 MID-COUNTY TRANSIT AUTHORITY.
   Ordinance 497, passed July 23, 1975, authorized formation of the Mid-County
Transit Authority in conjunction with East Franklin Township and the Boroughs
of Ford Cliff, West Kittanning, Kittanning and Manorville, under the provisions
of the Municipalities Act, being 53 Pa.C.S. §§ 5601 et seq., as amended.
(Prior Code, § 157.03) (Ord. 497, passed 7-23-1975)
§ 32.22 STORMWATER AUTHORITY.
   Ordinance 756, passed December 11, 2023, authorized formation of the
Municipal Stormwater Authority, under the Municipalities Act, being 53
Pa.C.S.A. §§ 5601 et seq., as amended.
(Ord. 756, passed 12-11-2023)
POLICE DEPARTMENT
§ 32.35 BOROUGH POLICE DEPARTMENT DISBANDED.
   The Borough Police Department is hereby dissolved, terminated, abolished,
and ended and shall cease to exist, effective as of 11:59 p.m. on December 31,
2022.
(Ord. 753, passed 12-28-2022)
§ 32.36 BOROUGH POLICE DEPARTMENT EMPLOYEES TERMINATED.
   In that the Borough Police Department will no longer exist as of January 1,
2023, all employees of the borough employed in the Police Department are hereby
terminated as employees of the borough, effective as of 11:59 p.m. on December
31, 2022.
(Ord. 753, passed 12-28-2022)
§ 32.37 CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION DISSOLVED.
   Pursuant to § 1172 of the State Borough Code, 8 Pa.C.S. § 1172, the Borough
Civil Service Commission was established by operation of law when Borough
Council established the Borough Police Department. Concurrent with the
dissolution, termination, and abolishment of the Borough Police Department, the
Borough Civil Service Commission is hereby dissolved, terminated, abolished,
and ended and shall cease to exist, effective as of 11:59 p.m. on December 31,
2022. All ordinances and resolutions related to the “Borough Civil Service
Commission Amended and Restated Rules and Regulations” approved and adopted by
the Civil Service Commission and Borough Council on November 8, 2021 and
November 22, 2021, respectively, are hereby repealed.
(Ord. 753, passed 12-28-2022)
§ 32.38 SOUTHERN ARMSTRONG REGIONAL POLICE DEPARTMENT.
   (A)   The Southern Armstrong Regional Police Department (SARPD) is hereby
appointed and accepted as the police force of the borough.
   (B)   The Southern Armstrong Regional Police Department Charter Agreement,
dated August 24, 2022, and most recently amended in November 2022, a true and
correct copy of which is attached to the ordinance which is codified herein as
Attachment A, and incorporated herein, is hereby approved, and, if the
borough’s execution of the Charter is required by the SARPD Commission, proper
borough officials are hereby authorized and directed on behalf of the borough
to execute or cause to be executed the same.
   (C)   The Participating Municipality Agreement between the borough and
SARPD, a true and correct copy of which is attached to the ordinance which is
codified herein as Attachment B and incorporated herein, is hereby approved,
and proper borough officials are hereby authorized and directed on behalf of
the borough to execute or cause to be executed the same.
   (D)   The lease agreement between the borough and SARPD for the SARPD’s use
of the Borough Police Department, located within the Borough Building, as a
SARPD substation is hereby approved, and proper borough officials are hereby
authorized and directed on behalf of the borough to execute or cause to be
executed the same, subject to and conditioned on the lease agreement being in a
form acceptable to the Borough Solicitor.
(Ord. 753, passed 12-28-2022)
§ 32.39 INTERGOVERNMENTAL COOPERATION.
   As required by the Intergovernmental Cooperation Act, 53 Pa.C.S. §§ 2301 to
2317, the following matters are specifically found and determined.
   (A)   The conditions of the borough’s agreement with SARPD are found in the
Charter and the Participating Municipality Agreement, attached to the ordinance
codified herein as Attachments A and B respectively.
   (B)   The initial term of the Charter began on August 24, 2022, and shall
end on December 31, 2037, with automatic renewals from year to year thereafter,
subject to the dissolution of the SARPD pursuant to Article XVII of the
Charter. The duration of the Participating Municipality Agreement shall begin
on the date of mutual execution by the parties and continue in conjunction
with, and until termination of, the Charter or the borough’s withdrawal from
the SARPD as a participating municipality in accordance with the withdrawal
procedures of the Charter, whichever occurs earlier.
   (C)   The purpose and objective of the Charter and Participating
Municipality Agreement, including the powers and scope of authority delegated
in each, are found in the Charter and the Participating Municipality Agreement,
attached to the ordinance codified herein as Attachments A and B respectively.
   (D)   The manner and extent of financing of the SARPD is addressed in
Articles VII and VIII of the Charter, with all participating municipalities, as
the term is defined in the Charter, contributing a percentage of the costs of
annual operation of SARPD based on a population apportionment formula.
Specifically with respect to borough’s cost contribution, which is addressed in
detail under § 3 of the Participating Municipality Agreement, the borough shall
contribute $333,360 annually, or $55,560 bi-monthly, pursuant to the above-
referenced formula, which said cost contribution shall be reevaluated every
three years pursuant to Article VII, § A of the Charter Agreement. Moreover,
the borough shall pay SARPD a one-time admission fee of $3,800 to cover the
costs associated with admission to SARPD.
   (E)   The SARPD shall be under the general supervision and control of the
SARPD Commission, which, as of January 1, 2023, will be compromised of two
members from Gilpin Township, two members from Freeport Borough, and two
members from Ford City Borough. The Commission will also have two alternate
members, one from Gilpin Township and Freeport Borough.
   (F)   Property, both real and personal, shall be acquired, managed,
licensed, and disposed of from time to time as the SARPD Commission may
determine to be necessary or appropriate to meet the purpose and objectives of
the SARPD, and at all times in a manner fully in compliance with applicable
federal and state laws, statutes, regulations, policies, and rules.
   (G)   The SARPD Commission shall be empowered to enter into contracts for
policies of group insurance and employee benefits, including Social Security,
for its employees.
(Ord. 753, passed 12-28-2022)
§ 32.40 REGIONAL POLICE PENSION PLAN ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   Resolution 1 of 2024 of the Southern Armstrong Regional Police Commission,
attached as Appendix A to the ordinance codified herein, is hereby adopted by
the borough, and, effective immediately, the borough agrees to amend the
Charter Agreement as follows:
 
   ARTICLE X
   PENSIONS
Section A. The Commission shall establish a pension plan for its uniformed
officers in accordance with the provisions of Act 600, as amended, 53 P.S. §§
767 et seq. On or before the effective date of this agreement, or as soon as
practicable thereafter, Freeport Borough shall, after complying with and
obtaining any necessary authorizations prescribed by applicable statutory and
regulatory law, transfer existing pension funds into the Regional Police
Pension Plan. Gilpin Township shall maintain its participation in the
Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement System for the benefit of its vested and
retired participants, and shall transfer only sufficient assets equal to its
liabilities for its active officers employed by the Southern Armstrong Regional
Police Department on or after October 15, 2022. Retired and vested members of
the Gilpin Township Police Department as of October 15, 2022, will not be
affected by the regionalization, this agreement, or the establishment of the
Regional Police Pension Plan.
 
(Ord. 758, passed 2-26-2024)
CHAPTER 33: BOROUGH POLICIES
Section
General Provisions
   
33.01   Tobacco-free zones
   
33.02   Emergency operations plan adopted by reference
Insurance Fire Losses
   
33.15   Designated officer
   
33.16   Claim limits
   
33.17   Transfer of funds
   
33.18   Amendments
 
   
33.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 33.01 TOBACCO-FREE ZONES.
   The areas of Boulder Park, Ford View Playground, and Joe Malec (Seventh
Avenue) Playground in the borough are designated as “Tobacco-Free Zones.”
Appropriate signage shall be posted, and any violators be immediately ejected
from borough property.
(Prior Code, § 193.01) (Res. 7-11-2011, passed 7-11-2011)
§ 33.02 EMERGENCY OPERATIONS PLAN ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The Council hereby approves, adopts, and places into immediate effect the
emergency operations plan of the borough. This plan shall be reviewed on an
annual basis to make certain that it conforms to appropriate guidelines.
(Res. 712R-1, passed 7-28-2014)
INSURANCE FIRE LOSSES
§ 33.15 DESIGNATED OFFICER.
   The Borough Secretary, or such official’s designee, is hereby appointed as
the designated officer who is authorized to carry out all responsibilities and
duties stated herein.
(Prior Code, § 191.01) (Ord. 661, passed 11-7-2005)
§ 33.16 CLAIM LIMITS.
   No insurance company, association, or exchange (hereinafter the “Insuring
Agent”) doing business in the commonwealth shall pay a claim of a named insured
for fire damage to a structure located within the borough (hereinafter
“municipality”) where the amount recoverable for the fire loss to the structure
under all policies exceeds $7,500, unless the Insuring Agent is furnished by
the Municipal Treasurer with a municipal certificate pursuant to § 508(B) of
Act 98 of 1992 as amended, and unless there is compliance with § 508(C) of Act
98 of 1992 as amended and the provisions of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 191.02) (Ord. 661, passed 11-7-2005)
§ 33.17 TRANSFER OF FUNDS.
   (A)   Where pursuant to § 508(B)(1)(I) of Act 98 of 1992, as amended, the
Municipal Treasurer issues a certificate indicating that there are delinquent
taxes, assessments, penalties or user charges against the real property, the
Insuring Agent shall pay an amount to the Borough Secretary from the insurance
proceeds necessary to pay the items shown on the certificate. The Borough shall
receive the amount and apply or credit it to payment of the items shown on the
certificate. Furthermore, when the certificate indicates that there are no
delinquent taxes, assessments, penalties, or user charges against the real
property, the Insuring Agent shall pay the claim of the named insured.
   (B)   Provided however, that in all cases where the loss agreed upon by the
named insured and the Insuring Agent equals or exceeds 60% of the aggregate
limits of liability on all fire policies covering the building or structure,
the following procedures must be followed.
      (1)   The Insuring Agent shall transfer from the insurance proceeds to
the designated officer of the municipality in the aggregate of $2,000 for each
$15,000 of a claim and for each fraction of that amount of a claim, this
section to be applied such that if the claim is $15,000 or less, the amount
transferred to the municipality shall be $2,000.
      (2)   If, at the time of a proof of loss agreed to between the named
insured and the Insuring Agent, the named insured has submitted a contractor’s
signed estimate of the costs of removing, repairing, or securing the building
or other structure, the Insuring Agent shall transfer to the municipality from
the insurance proceeds the amount specified in the estimate.
      (3)   The transfer of proceeds shall be on pro rata basis by all
companies, associations, or exchanges insuring the building or other structure.
      (4)   After the transfer, the named insured shall submit a contractor’s
signed estimate within 60 days of the costs of removing, repairing, or securing
the building or other structure, and the designated officer shall return the
amount of the funds transferred to the municipality in excess of the estimate
to the named insured, if the municipality has not commenced to remove, repair,
or secure the building or other structure.
      (5)   Upon receipt of proceeds under this section, the municipality shall
do the following:
         (a)   The designated officer shall place the proceeds in a separate
fund to be used solely as security against the total costs or removing,
repairing or securing the building or structure which are incurred by the
municipality. Such costs shall include all reasonable and customary
engineering, legal, or administrative costs incurred by the municipality in
connection with such removal, repair, or securing of the building or any
proceedings related thereto;
         (b)   It is the obligation of the Insuring Agent when transferring the
proceeds to provide the municipality with the name and address of the named
insured. Upon receipt of the transferred funds and the name and address of the
named insured, certify that the proceeds have been received by the municipality
and notify the named insured that the procedures under this subsection shall be
followed;
         (c)   When repairs, removal, or securing of the building or other
structure have been completed in accordance with all applicable regulations and
orders of the municipality and the required proof of such completion received
by the designated officer, and if the municipality has not incurred any costs
for repairs, removal, or securing, the fund shall be returned to the named
insured. If the municipality has incurred costs for repairs, removal, or
securing of the building or other structure, the costs shall be paid from the
fund and in excess funds remain, the municipality shall transfer the remaining
funds to the named insured; and
         (d)   To the extend that interest is earned on proceeds held by the
municipality pursuant to this section, and not returned to the named insured,
such interest shall belong to the municipality. To the extent that proceeds are
returned to the named insured, interest earned on such proceeds shall be
distributed to the named insured at the time that the proceeds are returned.
      (6)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the ability of
the municipality to recover any deficiency. Furthermore, nothing in this
division (B) shall be construed to prohibit the municipality and the named
insured from entering into an agreement that permits the transfer of fund to
the named insured if some other reasonable disposition of the damaged property
has been negotiated.
(Prior Code, § 191.03) (Ord. 661, passed 11-7-2005) Penalty, see §
33.99
§ 33.18 AMENDMENTS.
   The Council of the borough may by resolution adopt procedures and
regulations to implement Act 98 of 1992 as amended and this article may by
resolution fix reasonable fees to be charged for municipal activities or
services provided pursuant to Act 98 of 1992 as amended and this subchapter,
including, but not limited to, issuances of certificates and bills, performance
of inspections, and opening separate fund accounts.
(Prior Code, § 191.04) (Ord. 661, passed 11-7-2005)
§ 33.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any owner of property, any named insured or any Insuring Agent who
violates §§
33.15 through
33.18 shall be subject to any penalty of up to $1,000 per violation.
(Prior Code, § 191.99) (Ord. 661, passed 11-7-2005)
CHAPTER 34: FINANCE AND TAXATION
Section
Local Services Tax
   
34.001   Definitions
   
34.002   Levy
   
34.003   Amount of tax
   
34.004   Duty of employers
   
34.005   Returns
   
34.006   Dates for determining tax liability and payment
   
34.007   Individuals engaged in more that one location
   
34.008   Self-employed individuals
   
34.009   Employers and self-employed individuals residing beyond the limits of
the borough
   
34.010   Administration of tax
   
34.011   Suits for collection
   
34.012   Miscellaneous provisions
   
34.013   Effective date
Earned Income Tax
   
34.025   Definitions
   
34.026   Imposition of tax
   
34.027   Rules and regulations
   
34.028   Declaration and payment
   
34.029   Refund
   
34.030   Collection at source
   
34.031   Powers and duties of Tax Collector
   
34.032   Information to be confidential
   
34.033   Interest and penalties
   
34.034   Interest, penalties, costs recoverable
   
34.035   Expenses
   
34.036   Applicability
   
34.037   Term
Tax on Property Transfers
   
34.050   Short title
   
34.051   Authority
   
34.052   Definitions
   
34.053   Imposition of tax; interest
   
34.054   Exempt parties
   
34.055   Excluded transactions
   
34.056   Documents relating to associations or corporations and members,
partners, stockholders, or shareholders thereof
   
34.057   Acquired company
   
34.058   Credits against tax
   
34.059   Extension of lease
   
34.060   Proceeds of judicial sale
   
34.061   Duties of Record of Deeds
   
34.062   Statement of value
   
34.063   Civil penalties
   
34.064   Lien
   
34.065   Enforcement
   
34.066   Regulations
Real Estate Tax Abatement
   
34.080   Definitions
   
34.081   Purpose
   
34.082   Schedule of abatement
   
34.083   Application for abatement
   
34.084   Abatement runs with the land
   
34.085   Cost of improvements
   
34.086   Effective date
 
   
34.999   Penalty
LOCAL SERVICES TAX
§ 34.001 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACT. Act 7 of 2007, amending the Local Tax Enabling Act, Act 511 of 1965,
being 53 P.S. §§ 6924.101 et seq.
   EMPLOYER. An individual, partnership, association, corporation, governmental
body, agency, or other entity employing one or more persons on a salary, wage,
commission, or other compensation basis, including self-employed person.
   HE, HIS or HIM. Mean and indicate the singular and plural number, as well
as, male, female, and neuter gender.
   INDIVIDUAL. Any person, male or female, engaged in any occupation, trade, or
profession within the limits of the borough.
   LOCAL SERVICES TAX OFFICER or OFFICER or TAX COLLECTOR. The person, public
employee, or private agency designated by the borough to collect and administer
the local services tax hereby imposed.
   OCCUPATION. Any trade, profession, business, or undertaking of any type,
kind, or character, including services, domestic or other, carried on or
performed within the limits of the borough, for which compensation is charged
or received by means of salary, wages, commission, or fees for services
rendered.
   TAX. The local services tax in an amount of $52 levied by this subchapter.
   TAX YEAR or CALENDAR YEAR. The 12-month period beginning January 1 and
ending December 31.
   WITHIN THE BOROUGH. Within the corporate limits of the Borough of Ford City,
Armstrong County, Pennsylvania.
(Prior Code, § 345.01) (Ord. 674, passed 12-17-2007)
§ 34.002 LEVY.
   (A)   The Borough Council hereby levies and imposes on each individual
engaged in any occupation within the territorial of the borough during this
fiscal year and each fiscal year thereafter, a local services tax. This tax is
in addition to all other taxes of any kind or nature heretofore levied by the
borough, provided that all individuals deriving less than $12,000 per year from
earned income and net profits from all sources within the borough or who have
appropriate military service shall be exempt from the local services tax hereby
levied. APPROPRIATE MILITARY SERVICE is defined as any one of the following:
      (1)   Any person who served in any war or armed conflict in which the
United States was engaged and is honorably discharged or released under
honorable circumstances from active service if, as a result of military service
the person is blind, paraplegic, or a double or quadruple amputee or has a
service connected to disability declared by the United States Veterans’
Administration or its successor to be a total 100% permanent disability; or
      (2)   Any person who serves as a member of a reserve component of the
armed forces and is called to active duty at any time during the taxable year.
The term RESERVE COMPONENT OF THE ARMED FORCES shall mean the United States
Army Reserve, United States Navy Reserve, United States Marine Corps Reserve,
United States Coast Guard Reserve, United State Air Force Reserve, the State
Army National Guard, or the State Air National Guard.
   (B)   The local services tax in the amount as herein specified may be
subject to the sharing provisions as set forth in applicable law.
(Prior Code, § 345.02) (Ord. 674, passed 12-17-2007)
§ 34.003 AMOUNT OF TAX.
   Beginning with January 1, each person engaged in a occupation as herein
before defined, engaged in within the limits of the borough, shall be subject
to a local services tax in the amount of $52 per annum, the tax to be paid by
the individual so engaged.
(Prior Code, § 345.03) (Ord. 674, passed 12-17-2007)
§ 34.004 DUTY OF EMPLOYERS.
   (A)   Each employer within the borough, as well as those employers situate
outside the borough, is hereby charged with the duty of collecting from each of
his or her employees engaged by him or her, and performing for him or her
within the borough, the tax of $52 per annum, and making a return and payment
thereof to the Tax Officer.
   (B)   Further, each employer is hereby authorized to deduct this tax from
each employee in his or her employ, whether the employee is paid by salary,
wages, or commission and whether or not part or all such services are performed
within the borough.
   (C)   Each employer shall deduct the tax from such employee asset forth in §
34.006 unless the tax has previously been withheld from the employee in the
fiscal year and the employee provides verification to the employer that the tax
has previously been withheld.
(Prior Code, § 345.04) (Ord. 674, passed 12-17-2007)
§ 34.005 RETURNS.
   Each employer shall register with the Tax Officer within 30 days after first
becoming an employer in the borough. Each employer shall prepare and file a
return showing a computation of the tax on forms to be supplied by the Tax
Officer. On each occasion the tax is due, each employer shall provide to the
Tax Officer his or her name and complete mailing address. In addition, the
employer shall identify the name and address of each employee from whom the tax
was withheld or not withheld, as the case may be, and such other information as
the Tax Officer may require. It is further provided that if the employer fails
to file the return, and pay the tax, except as provided by the Act, whether or
not he or she make collection thereof from the salary, wages, or commissions
paid by him or her to the employee, the employer shall be responsible for the
payment of the tax in full as though the tax had originally been levied against
him or her. The failure to receive notice shall not relieve the employer or any
person subject to this subchapter from the withholding or payment of any taxes
imposed by the borough, and such employer or taxpayer as the case may be shall
be charged with the taxes as though he or she had received notice.
(Prior Code, § 345.05) (Ord. 674, passed 12-17-2007)
§ 34.006 DATES FOR DETERMINING TAX LIABILITY AND PAYMENT.
   Each employer shall deduct the tax from the compensation payable to the
employee, file a return or a form prescribed by the Tax Officer and pay the Tax
Officer a pro rata share of the tax for each payroll period in which the
employee is engaging in an occupation. The pro rata share of the tax assessed
on the employee for a payroll period shall be determined by dividing the
combined rate of the local services tax levied for the calendar year by the
number of payroll periods established by the employer for the calendar year.
For purpose of determining the pro rata share, an employer shall round down the
amount of the tax collected each payroll period to the nearest one-hundredth of
a dollar. Collection of the local services tax levied shall be made on a
payroll period basis for each payroll period in which the employee is engaging
in an occupation, except as provided for in the Act in the case of concurrent
employment or for employees who file an exemption who file an exemption
certificate with their employer based on income, but who actually earn $12,000
or more in the calendar year from earned income and net profits from all
sources within the borough. Further provided, that an employer shall remit the
local services taxes 30 days after the end of each quarter of a calendar year.
(Prior Code, § 345.06) (Ord. 674, passed 12-17-2007)
§ 34.007 INDIVIDUALS ENGAGED IN MORE THAN ONE OCCUPATION.
   Each individual who shall have more than one occupation with the borough
shall be subject to the payment of this tax on his or her principal occupation,
and his or her employer shall deduct this tax and deliver to him or her
evidence of deduction on a form to be furnished by the employer and acceptable
to the Tax Officer, which form shall be evidence of a deduction having been
made, and when presented to any other employer, shall authority for such other
employer to not deduct tax from the employee’s wages. However, the name of the
employee shall be included in the quarterly return of the employer to the Local
Services Tax Officer by setting forth the name and address of the employee, and
the name, address, and account number of the employer who actually deducted
this tax.
(Prior Code, § 345.07) (Ord. 674, passed 12-17-2007)
§ 34.008 SELF-EMPLOYED INDIVIDUALS.
   All self-employed individuals whose business is located in the borough or
who performs services of any kind or type, engaged in any occupation or
profession within the borough shall be required to comply with this subchapter
and pay the tax to the Tax Officer, in four equal installments, each
installment being due 30 days after the end of each calendar quarter.
(Prior Code, § 345.08) (Ord. 674, passed 12-17-2007)
§ 34.009 EMPLOYERS AND SELF-EMPLOYED INDIVIDUALS RESIDING BEYOND THE LIMITS OF
THE BOROUGH.
   All employers and self-employed individuals residing or having their place
of business outside of the borough, but who performs services of any type or
kind, or engage in any occupation or profession within the borough, are by
virtue thereof bound by and subject to the provisions, penalties, and
regulations promulgated under this subchapter. Further, any individual engaged
in an occupation within the borough, and an employee of a nonresident employer
may, for the purpose of this subchapter, be considered a self-employed person,
and in the event this tax is not paid, the borough shall have the option of
proceeding against either the employer or employee for the collection of this
tax as hereafter provided. Each such employer and individual, as the case may
be, shall be subject to the provision of this subchapter as it applies to
payment, reporting, and any other applicable provisions of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 345.09) (Ord. 674, passed 12-17-2007)
§ 34.010 ADMINISTRATION OF TAX.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the Local Services Tax Officer to accept and
receive payments of this tax and to keep a record thereof showing the amount
received from each employer or self-employed person, together with the date the
tax was received.
   (B)   The Local Services Tax Officer is hereby charged with the
administration and enforcement of this subchapter, and is hereby charged and
empowered to prescribe, adopt, and promulgate rules and regulations relating to
any matter pertaining to the administration and enforcement of this subchapter,
including provisions for the examination of the payroll records of any employer
subject to this subchapter, the examination and correction of any returns made
in compliance with this subchapter, and any payment alleged or found to be
incorrect or to which overpayment is claimed or found to have occurred. Any
person aggrieved by any decision of the Local Services Tax Officer shall have
the right to appeal in accordance with the provisions of the Local Taxpayers
Bill of Rights, being 53 Pa.C.S. §§ 8421 et seq., or the court of competent
jurisdiction, as in other cases provided.
   (C)   The Local Services Tax Officer is hereby authorized to examine the
books and payroll of any employer in order to verify the accuracy of any return
made by an employer, or if no return was made, to ascertain the tax due. Each
employer is hereby directed and required to give the Local Services Tax Officer
the means, facilities, and opportunity to examine such books and payroll of the
employer, and to ascertain the tax due, if any.
   (D)   The Local Services Tax Officer is directed and authorized to adopt
regulations concerning refund claims for person who overpay the local services
tax or who claim an exemption from the local services tax, consistent with the
Act.
(Prior Code, § 345.10) (Ord. 674, passed 12-17-2007) Penalty, see §
34.999
§ 34.011 SUITS FOR COLLECTION.
   (A)   In the event that any tax under this article remains due or unpaid for
30 days after the due date above set forth, the Local Services Tax Officer may
sue for the recovery of any such tax due or unpaid under this subchapter,
together with interest and penalty.
   (B)   If the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate of 6% per annum
shall be calculated, beginning with the due date of the tax, and a penalty of
10% shall be added to the flat rate of the tax for the non-payment thereof.
Where suit is brought for the recovery of this tax, the individual liable
therefor shall, in addition, be responsible and liable for the costs of
collection and reasonable attorney fees.
(Prior Code, § 345.11) (Ord. 674, passed 12-17-2007)
§ 34.012 MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Savings clause.
      (1)   Nothing contained in this subchapter shall be construed to empower
the borough to levy and collect the tax hereby imposed on any occupation not
within the taxing power of the borough under the Constitution of the United
States and the laws of the commonwealth.
      (2)   If the tax hereby imposed under the provisions of this subchapter
shall be held by any court of competent jurisdiction to be in violation of the
Constitution of the United States or the laws of the commonwealth, as to any
individual, the decision of the court shall not affect the right to impose or
collect the tax, or the validity of the tax so imposed on other person or
individual as herein provided.
   (B)   Authority. The tax herein imposed and the ordinance codified and
enacted herein is in pursuance of the authority granted by the provisions of
the Local Tax Enabling Act, approved by the General Assembly of the
commonwealth, December 31, 1965, Act 511 of 1965, being 53 P.S. §§ 6924.101 et
seq., as amended.
(Prior Code, § 345.12) (Ord. 674, passed 12-17-2007)
§ 34.013 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   The ordinance codified herein shall become effective on January 1, 2008.
(Prior Code, § 345.13) (Ord. 674, passed 12-17-2007)
EARNED INCOME TAX
§ 34.025 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. In the
definitions that follow, the singular includes the plural and the masculine
includes the feminine and the neuter.
   ASSOCIATION. A partnership, limited partnership, or any other form of
unincorporated enterprise, owned by two or more persons.
   BUSINESS. Includes any enterprise, activity, profession, or undertaking of
any nature conducted for profit or ordinarily conducted for profit, whether by
an individual, copartnership, association, or other entity.
   COMPENSATION EARNED, COMPENSATION PAID, or EARNINGS. All salaries, wages,
commissions, bonuses, incentive payments, and/or other forms of compensation or
remuneration, in cash or in property, received by an individual and paid
directly or through an agent, by an employer for services rendered.
   CORPORATION. Any corporation or joint stock association organized under the
laws of the United States of America, the commonwealth, or any other state,
territory, or foreign country or dependency.
   EMPLOYER. Any individual, copartnership, association, corporation,
governmental body or unit or agency, or any other entity, who or which employs
one or more persons on a salary, wage, commission, or other compensation basis.
   NET PROFITS. The net income from the operation of a business, profession, or
other activity, except corporations, after provision for all costs and expenses
incurred in the conduct thereof, determined either on a cash or accrual basis
in accordance with the accounting system used in such business, profession, or
other activity, but without deduction of taxes based on income.
   NONRESIDENT. An individual, copartnership, association, or other entity
domiciled outside the borough.
   PERSON. Natural person, copartnership, association, corporation, firm, or
fiduciary. Whenever used in any clause prescribing and imposing a penalty,
PERSON, as applied to associations, means the partners or members thereof, and
as applied to corporations, means the officers thereof.
   RESIDENT. An individual, copartnership, association, or other entity
domiciled in the borough.
   TAX COLLECTOR. The person appointed to collect the tax by resolution of the
Council of the borough.
   TAXPAYER. A person, whether an individual, copartnership, association or
other entity, required hereunder to file a return on earnings or net profits or
to pay a tax thereon.
(Prior Code, § 353.01) (Ord. 499, passed 12-9-1975; Ord. 514, passed 9-13-1977)
§ 34.026 IMPOSITION OF TAX.
   (A)   The following taxes are hereby imposed for general borough purposes,
under the authority of the act of December 31, 1965 (P.L. 1257, being 53 P.S.
§§ 6924.101 et seq.), known as the Local Tax Enabling Act:
      (1)   One percent of all compensation paid after March 1, 1976, to
residents;
      (2)   One percent of all compensation paid after March 1, 1976, to
nonresidents for work done or services rendered in the borough;
      (3)   One percent of the net profits earned after March 1, 1976, of
businesses, professions, and other activities conducted by residents; and
      (4)   One percent of the net profits earned after March 1, 1976, of
businesses, professions, and other activities conducted in the borough by
nonresidents.
   (B)   The taxes levied under divisions (A)(1) and (A)(2) above shall relate
to and be imposed upon compensation paid by an employer or on his or her behalf
to any person who is employed by or renders service to him or her. The taxes
levied under divisions (A)(3) and (A)(4) above shall relate to and be imposed
upon the net profits of any business, profession or enterprise carried on by
any person or owner or proprietor, either individually or in association with
any other person or persons.
   (C)   Such taxes shall be levied with respect to the compensation or net
profits levied during the calendar year for which such tax is levied; provided,
that where the fiscal year of a business, profession or other activity differs
from the calendar year, the tax shall be applicable to the net profits of the
fiscal year.
(Prior Code, § 353.02) (Ord. 499, passed 12-9-1975)
§ 34.027 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The Tax Collector shall collect the tax imposed by this subchapter. He or
she shall be bonded by a good and reliable bonding company at all times for all
money coming into his or her hands for borough purposes under this subchapter,
the costs of which bond shall be paid by the borough. He or she shall collect
and receive all such taxes, shall furnish a receipt for their payment when
requested so to do by any taxpayer, and shall keep a record showing the amount
received by him or her from each taxpayer under this subchapter and the date of
the receipt of such payment. The Borough Solicitor is hereby empowered to
prescribe rules and regulations relating to any matter or thing pertaining to
the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this subchapter. Such
rules and regulations shall be inscribed by the appointed Tax Collector into a
book kept for that purpose and open to the inspection of the public. Such rules
and regulations shall have the same force and effect as if they had been
incorporated into this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 353.03) (Ord. 499, passed 12-9-1975; Ord. 514, passed 9-13-1977)
§ 34.028 DECLARATION AND PAYMENT.
   (A)   Every person whose earnings or net profits are subject to any tax
imposed by this subchapter shall, on or before April 15 of each year, make and
file a return with the Tax Collector imposed by this article for the preceding
calendar year. Such return shall be filed on forms prescribed by the Tax
Collector, furnished at the expense of the borough, and obtainable from the Tax
Collector. The information on such return shall include the name and address of
the taxpayer; his or her place of employment or business; the aggregate amount
of compensation paid to him or her or net profits earned by him or her during
the preceding calendar year; the amount of tax due to the borough under this
subchapter; the amount of tax on salaries, wages, commissions, and other
compensation or net profits paid by such taxpayer for the period covered by
such return to any other political subdivision of the commonwealth, including
the Armstrong School District, together with such other pertinent information
as may be required; provided, however, that where a return is made for a fiscal
year or for any other period different from a calendar year, such return shall
be made within 75 days after the close of such fiscal year; also provided,
however, that a return may be made and filed after April 15 of each year or
after 75 days after the close of such fiscal year where the fiscal year differs
from a calendar year where satisfactory proof is furnished the Tax Collector
that the United States Internal Revenue Service has granted an extension of
time for making and for filing the annual federal income tax return. When
satisfactory proof is furnished in such a manner, a return must be made and
filed within the extended period of time allowed for the making and filing of
the annual federal income tax return.
   (B)   The person making such returns shall, at the time of filing thereof,
pay to the Tax Collector the amount of tax as shown thereon, less any credits
of tax withheld by any employer from compensation earned, less any credits and
deductions allowed pursuant to the Act of December 31, 1965, P.L. 1257, being
53 P.S. §§ 6924.101 et seq., known as the Local Tax Enabling Act, for payment
for any concurrent period of a like tax to any political subdivision of this
commonwealth by any resident of such political subdivision; provided, however,
that any taxpayer, other than those from whom the entire tax imposed by this
article shall have been withheld by his or her employers from compensation
earned, shall make and file with the Tax Collector, on forms prescribed by him
or her, a quarterly return on or before April 30 of the current calendar year,
July 31 of the current year, October 31 of the current year, and January 31 of
the succeeding calendar year, setting forth the aggregate amount of
compensation earned or net profits not subject to withholding by him or her
during the three-month periods ending March 31 of the current year, June 30 of
the current year, September 30 of the current year, and December 31 of the
current year, respectively, and subject to the tax, together with such other
information as the receiver of taxes may require. Every taxpayer making such
return shall, at the time of filing thereof, pay to the officer the amount of
taxes shown as due thereon for each quarter. Provided, further, that in any
case where the sole income of any person subject to any tax under this
subchapter is in the form of compensation paid by an employer and where the
entire tax due by any employer shall have withheld by his or her employer and
return thereof made to the Tax Collector, such employee shall not be required
to file a return thereof. However, if such an employee shall be a nonresident
of the borough and shall also be subject to a like tax imposed by any political
subdivision within this commonwealth of which he or she is a resident, such
employee shall file a return with the Tax Collector, who is hereby authorized
to refund to such employee any difference to which he or she shall be entitled
under the provisions of § 5 of the Act of December 31, 1965, P.L. 1257, being
53 P.S. §§ 6901 et seq., known as the Local Tax Enabling Act.
(Prior Code, § 353.04) (Ord. 499, passed 12-9-1975; Ord. 514, passed 9-13-1977)
§ 34.029 REFUND.
   The Tax Collector shall refund, on petition of and proof by the taxpayer,
earned income tax paid on the taxpayer’s ordinary and necessary business
expenses, to the extent that such expenses are not paid by the taxpayer’s
employer.
(Prior Code, § 353.04A) (Ord. 603, passed 12-18-1990)
§ 34.030 COLLECTION AT SOURCE.
   (A)   Every employer within the borough shall deduct, monthly or more
frequently than monthly, at the time of payment of compensation due by him or
her to an employee, the tax of 1% of the amount of compensation for such
period. Such employer shall, quarterly, make a return and pay over to the Tax
Collector the amount of tax deducted, or the balance of any tax deducted and
not previously, during such quarter, remitted to the Tax Collector. Such
quarterly returns shall be filed and the tax due therewith paid over on or
before April 30 of the current year, July 31 of the current year, October 31 of
the current year, and January 31 of the succeeding year, for taxes deducted
during the preceding three-month periods ending March 31 of the current year,
June 30 of the current year, September 30 of the current year, and December 31
of the current year, respectively. Such return shall be on a form furnished by
or obtainable from the Tax Collector and shall set forth the total amount of
compensation paid by each employer during such quarter; the amount of tax
withheld; previous remittances, if any, to the Tax Collector for the said
quarter; and the balance remitted therewith. On or before February 28 of each
year, there shall be filed an annual return, which return shall be on a form
furnished by and obtainable from the Tax Collector, and shall set forth the
name and residence of each employee of such employer during all or part of the
preceding calendar year, the amount of compensation earned by each of such
employees during the preceding calendar year, and any other pertinent
information that may be required. Provided, however, that the failure or
omission by any employer, located either within or outside of the borough, to
deduct such tax and to make such return to the Tax Collector shall not relieve
an employee from the payment of such tax and the compliance with such
regulations, with respect to making returns and the payment thereof, as may be
established under this subchapter. Every employer who discontinues business
prior to December 31 of the current year shall, within 30 days after the
discontinuance of business, file the returns and withholding statements
required and pay the tax due.
   (B)   If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate
of 6% per annum on the amount of said tax, and an additional penalty of 0.5% of
the amount of unpaid tax for each month or fraction thereof during which the
tax remains unpaid, shall be added and collected. Where suit is brought for the
recovery of any such tax, the person liable therefor shall, in addition, be
liable for the costs of collection and the interest and penalties herein
imposed.
(Prior Code, § 353.05) (Ord. 499, passed 12-9-1975; Ord. 514, passed 9-13-1977;
Ord. 595, passed 12-9-1989)
§ 34.031 POWERS AND DUTIES OF TAX COLLECTOR.
   The Tax Collector or any other person designated by Council for the purpose
is hereby authorized to examine any of the books, papers, and records of any
employer or supposed employer or of any taxpayer or supposed taxpayer in order
to verify the accuracy of any return made, or, if no return is made, to
ascertain the amount of tax due by any person under this subchapter. Every such
employer or supposed employer or taxpayer or supposed taxpayer is hereby
directed and required to give to the Tax Collector or such other authorized
person the means, facilities, and opportunity for such examinations and
investigations as are hereby authorized. The Tax Collector, or any other person
whom Council appoints, is hereby authorized to examine any person under oath
concerning any income which was or should have been returned for taxation, and
to this end Council may compel the production of books, records, and papers and
the attendance of all persons before such Tax Collector, whether as parties or
as witnesses, whom the Tax Collector believes to have knowledge of such income.
(Prior Code, § 353.06) (Ord. 499, passed 12-9-1975)
§ 34.032 INFORMATION TO BE CONFIDENTIAL.
   Any information gained by the Tax Collector or any other official or agent
of the borough as a result of any return, investigation, hearing, or
verification required or authorized by this subchapter shall be confidential,
except for official purposes, and except in accordance with proper judicial
order, or as otherwise provided by law. Any disclosure of any such information,
contrary to the provisions of this section, shall constitute a violation of
this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 353.07) (Ord. 499, passed 12-9-1975) Penalty, see §
34.999
§ 34.033 INTEREST AND PENALTIES.
   If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate of 6%
per annum on the amount of said tax, and an additional penalty of 0.5% of the
amount of unpaid tax for each month or fraction thereof during which the tax
remains unpaid, shall be added and collected. Where suit is brought for the
recovery of any such tax, the person liable therefor shall, in addition, be
liable for the costs of collection and the interest and penalties herein
imposed.
(Prior Code, § 353.08) (Ord. 499, passed 12-9-1975; Ord. 595, passed 12-19-
1989)
§ 34.034 INTEREST, PENALTIES, COSTS RECOVERABLE.
   All taxes imposed by this subchapter, together with all penalties, interest,
and costs shall be recoverable by the Borough Solicitor as debts of like amount
are by law recoverable.
(Prior Code, § 353.09) (Ord. 499, passed 12-9-1975)
§ 34.035 EXPENSES.
   All expenses incurred in the administration of this subchapter shall be paid
by the borough.
(Prior Code, § 353.10) (Ord. 499, passed 12-9-1975)
§ 34.036 APPLICABILITY.
   This subchapter shall not apply to any person or property as to whom or
which it is beyond the legal power of Council to impose the tax or duties
herein provided for.
(Prior Code, § 353.11) (Ord. 499, passed 12-9-1975)
§ 34.037 TERM.
   The tax enacted under this subchapter shall continue in force on a calendar-
year basis.
(Prior Code, § 353.12) (Ord. 499, passed 12-9-1975)
TAX ON PROPERTY TRANSFERS
§ 34.050 SHORT TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known as the “Realty Transfer Tax Ordinance of Ford
City Borough.”
(Prior Code, § 359.01) (Ord. 566, passed 3-17-1987)
§ 34.051 AUTHORITY.
   A realty transfer tax for general revenue purposes is hereby imposed upon
the transfer of real estate or interest in real estate situated within the
borough regardless of where the documents making the transfer are made,
executed or delivered, or where the actual settlements on such transfer took
place as authorized by Article XI-D, “Local Real Estate Transfer Tax,” 72 P.S.
§§ 8101-D et seq.
(Prior Code, § 359.02) (Ord. 566, passed 3-17-1987)
§ 34.052 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ASSOCIATION. A partnership, limited partnership, or any other form of
unincorporated enterprise owned or conducted by two or more persons, other than
a private trust or decedent’s estate.
   CORPORATION. A corporation, joint-stock association, business trust, or
banking institution which is organized under the laws of this commonwealth, the
United States, or any other state, territory, foreign country, or dependency.
   DOCUMENT. Any deed, instrument, or writing which conveys, transfers,
demises, vests, confirms, or evidences any transfer or demise, vests, confirms,
or evidences any transfer or demise of title to real estate, but does not
include wills, mortgages, deeds of trust, or other instruments of like
character given as security for a debt and deeds of release thereof to the
debtor, land contracts whereby the legal title does not pass to the grantee
until the total consideration specified in the contract has been paid or any
cancellation thereof, unless the consideration is payable over a period of time
exceeding 30 years, or instruments which solely grant, vest, or confirm a
public utility easement. DOCUMENT shall also include a declaration of
acquisition required to be presented for recording under §
34.061.
   FAMILY FARM CORPORATION. A corporation of which at least 75% of its assets
are devoted to the business of agriculture and at least 75% of its assets are
devoted to the business of agriculture and at least 75% of each class of stock
of the corporation is continuously owned by members of the same family. The
BUSINESS OF AGRICULTURE shall not be deemed to include:
      (1)   Recreational activities, such as, but not limited to, hunting,
fishing, camping, skiing, show competition, or racing;
      (2)   The raising, breeding or training of game animals or game birds,
fish, cats, dogs, or pets or animals intended for use in sporting or
recreational activities;
      (3)   Fur farming;
      (4)   Stockyard or slaughterhouse operations; or
      (5)   Manufacturing or processing operations of any kind.
   MEMBERS OF THE SAME FAMILY. Any individual, such individual’s brothers and
sisters, the brothers and sisters of such individual’s parents and
grandparents, the ancestors and lineal descendants of any of the foregoing, a
spouse of any of the foregoing, and the estate of any of the foregoing.
Individuals related by the half-blood or legal adoption shall be treated as if
they were related by the whole-blood.
   PERSON. Every natural person, association, or corporation. Whenever used in
any clause prescribing and imposing a fine or imprisonment, or both, the term
PERSON as applied to associations, shall include the responsible members or
general partners thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers thereof.
   REAL ESTATE.
      (1)   All lands, tenements, or hereditaments within the borough,
including without limitation, buildings, structures, fixtures, mines, minerals,
oil, gas, quarries, spaces with or without upper or lower boundaries, trees, or
other improvements, immovables, or interests which by custom, usage, or law
pass with a conveyance of land, but excluding permanently attached machinery
and equipment in an industrial plant.
      (2)   A condominium unit.
      (3)   A tenant-stockholder’s interest in a cooperative housing
corporation, trust, or association under a proprietary lease or occupancy
agreement.
   REAL ESTATE COMPANY. A corporation or association which is primarily engaged
in the business of holding, selling or leasing real estate, 90% or more of the
ownership interest in which is held by 35 or fewer persons and which:
      (1)   Derives 60% or more of its annual gross receipts from the ownership
or disposition of real estate; or
      (2)   Holds real estate, the value of which comprises 90% or more of the
value of its entire tangible asset holdings exclusive of tangible assets which
are freely transferable and actively traded on an established market.
   TITLE TO REAL ESTATE.
      (1)   Any interest in real estate which endures for a period of time, the
termination of which is not fixed or ascertained by a specific number of years,
including without limitation an estate in fee simple, life estate, or perpetual
leasehold; or
      (2)   Any interest in real estate enduring for a fixed period of years
but which, either by reason of the length of the term of the grant of a right
to extend the term of renewal or otherwise, consists of a group of rights
approximating those of an estate in fee simple, life estate, or perpetual
leasehold, including without limitation a leasehold interest or possessory
interest under a lease or occupancy agreement for a term of 30 years or more or
a leasehold interest or possessory interest in real estate in which the lessee
has equity.
   TRANSACTION. The making, executing, delivering, accepting, or presenting for
recording of a document.
   VALUE.
      (1)   In the case of any bona fide sale of real estate at arm’s length
for actual monetary worth, the amount of the actual consideration therefor,
paid or to be paid, including liens or other encumbrances thereon existing
before the transfer and not removed thereby, whether or not the underlying
indebtedness is assumed, and ground rents, or a commensurate part thereof where
such liens or other encumbrances and ground rents also encumber or are charged
against other real estate; provided, that where such documents shall set forth
a nominal consideration, the VALUE thereof shall be determined from the price
set forth in or actual consideration for the contract of sale;
      (2)   In the case of a gift, sale by execution upon a judgment or upon
the foreclosure of a mortgage by a judicial officer, transactions without
consideration or for consideration less than the actual monetary worth of real
estate, a taxable lease, an occupancy agreement, a leasehold or possessory
interest, any exchange of properties, or the real estate of an acquired
company, the actual monetary worth of the real estate determined by adjusting
the assessed VALUE of the real estate for local real estate tax purposes for
the common level ration factor developed by the State Department of Revenue for
state realty transfer tax base calculations;
      (3)   In the case of an easement or other interest in real estate, the
VALUE of which is not determinable under divisions (1) or (2) of this
definition, the actual monetary worth of such interest; or
      (4)   The actual consideration for or actual monetary worth of any
executory agreement for the construction of buildings, structures or other
permanent improvements to real estate between the grantor and other persons
existing before the transfer and not removed thereby, or between the grantor,
the agent or principal of the grantor of a related corporation, association, or
partnership and the grantee existing before or effective with the transfer.
(Prior Code, § 359.03) (Ord. 566, passed 3-17-1987)
§ 34.053 IMPOSITION OF TAX; INTEREST.
   (A)   (1)   The Borough Council adopts Article XI-D of the Tax Reform Code
of 1971, being 72 P.S. §§ 8101-D et seq., and imposes a realty transfer tax as
authorized under that subchapter subject to the rate limitations therein. The
tax imposed under this section shall be at the rate of 1%.
      (2)   The tax imposed under division (A)(1) above and all applicable
interest and penalty shall be administered, collected and enforced under the
Act of December 31, 1965 (P.L. 1257, No. 511), and amended, known as “The Local
Tax Enabling Act,” being 53 P.S. §§ 6924.101 et seq., provided, that if the
correct amount of the tax is not paid by the last date prescribed for timely
payment, the Borough Council, pursuant to § 1102-D of the Tax Reform Code of
1971 (72 P.S. § 8102-D), authorizes and directs the Department of Revenue of
the commonwealth to determine, collect, and enforce the tax, interest, and
penalties.
      (3)   Any tax imposed under division (A)(1) above that is not paid by the
date the tax is due shall bear interest as prescribed for interest on
delinquent municipal claims under the Act of May 16, 1923 (P.L. 207, No. 103)
(53 P.S. §§ 7101 et seq.), as amended, known as the “Municipal Claims and Tax
Liens Act.” The interest rate shall be the lesser of the interest rate imposed
upon delinquent Commonwealth taxes as provided in § 806 of the Act of April 9,
1929 upon delinquent commonwealth taxes as provided in § 806 of the Act of
April 9, 1929 (P.L. 343, No. 176) (72 P.S. § 806), as amended, known as the
“The Fiscal Code,” or the maximum interest rate permitted under the municipal
claims and tax liens for claims.
      (4)   The provisions of this subchapter shall become effective on and be
applicable to any document made, executed, delivered, accepted, or presented
for recoding on or after September 28, 2007.
   (B)   The payment of the tax imposed herein shall be evidenced by affixing
of an official stamp or writing by the Recorder of other designated official
whereon the date of the payment of the tax, amount of the tax, and the
signature of the collecting agent shall be set forth.
   (C)   It is the intent of this subchapter that the entire burden of the tax
imposed herein on a person or transfer shall not exceed the limitations
prescribed in the Local Tax Enabling Act, Act of December 31, 1965, P.L. No.
1257, being 53 P.S. §§ 6924.101 et seq., so that if any other political
subdivision shall impose or hereafter shall impose such tax on the same person
or transfer then the tax levied by the borough under the authority of that Act
shall during the time such duplication of the tax exists, except as hereinafter
otherwise provided, the one-half of the rate and such one-half rate shall
become effective without any action on the part of the borough; provided,
however, that the borough and any other political subdivision which imposes
such tax on the same person or transfer may agree that, instead of limiting
their respective rates to one-half of the rate herein provided, they will
impose respectively different rates, the total of which shall not exceed the
maximum rate permitted under the Local Tax Enabling Act.
   (D)   If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate
in effect at the time the tax is due shall be added and collected.
(Prior Code, § 359.04) (Ord. 566, passed 3-17-1987; Ord. 672, passed 9-26-2007)
§ 34.054 EXEMPT PARTIES.
   The United States, the commonwealth, or any of their instrumentalities,
agencies, or political subdivisions shall be exempt from payment or the tax
imposed by this subchapter. The exemption of such governmental bodies shall
not, however, relieve any other party to a transaction from liability for the
tax.
(Prior Code, § 359.05) (Ord. 566, passed 3-17-1987)
§ 34.055 EXCLUDED TRANSACTIONS.
   (A)   The tax imposed by §
34.053 shall not be imposed upon:
      (1)   A transfer to the commonwealth or to any of its instrumentalities,
agencies, or political subdivision by gift, dedication, or deed in lieu of
condemnation or deed by confirmation in connection with condemnation
proceedings or a reconveyance by the condemning body of the property condemned
to the owner of record at the time of condemnation, which reconveyance is made
within one year from the date of condemnation;
      (2)   A document which the borough is prohibited from taxing under the
Constitution or statutes of the United States;
      (3)   A conveyance to a municipality, township, school district, or
county pursuant to acquisition by the municipality township, school district,
or county of a tax delinquent property at sheriff sale or tax claim bureau
sale;
      (4)   A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration which corrects or
confirms a transfer previously recorded, but which does not extend or limit
existing record legal title or interest;
      (5)   A transfer of division in kind for no or nominal actual
consideration of property passed by testate or intestate succession and held by
co-tenants; however, if any of the parties take shares greater in value than
their undivided interest, tax is due on the excess;
      (6)   A transfer between husband and wife, between persons who were
previously husband and wife who have since been divorced, provided the property
or interest therein subject to such transfer was acquired by the husband and
wife or husband or wife prior to the granting of the final decree in divorce,
between parent and child or the spouse of such child, between brother or sister
or spouse of a brother or sister and brother or sister or the spouse of a
brother or sister, and between a grandparent and grandchild or the spouse of
such grandchild, except that a subsequent transfer by the grantee within one
year shall be subject to tax as if the grantor were making such transfer;
      (7)   A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration of property
passing by testate or intestate succession from a personal representative of a
decedent to the decedent’s devisee or heir;
      (8)   A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration to a trustee of
an ordinary trust where the transfer of the same property would be exempt if
the transfer was made directly from the grantor to all of the possible
beneficiaries, whether or not such beneficiaries are contingent or specifically
named. No such exemption shall be granted unless the Recorder of Deeds is
presented with a copy of the trust instrument that clearly identifies the
grantor and all possible beneficiaries;
      (9)   A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from a trustee to
a beneficiary of an ordinary trust;
      (10)   A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from trustee to
successor trustee;
      (11)   (a)   A transfer either for no or nominal actual consideration
between principal and agent or straw party; or from or to an agent or straw
party where, if the agent or straw party were his or her principal, no tax
would be imposed under this subchapter.
         (b)   Where the document by which title is acquired by a grantee or
statement of value fails to set forth that the property was acquired by the
grantee from or for the benefit of his or her principal, there is a rebuttable
presumption that the property is the property of the grantee in his or her
individual capacity if the grantee claims an exemption from taxation under this
division (A)(11).
      (12)   A transfer made pursuant to the statutory merger, consolidation of
a corporation or statutory division of a nonprofit corporation, except where
the department reasonably determines that the primary intent for such merger,
consolidation, or division is avoidance of the tax imposed by this subchapter;
      (13)   A transfer from a corporation or association of real estate held
of record in the name of the corporation or association where the grantee owns
stock of the corporation or an interest in the association in the same
proportion as his or her interest in or ownership of the real estate being
conveyed and where the stock of the corporation or the interest in the
association has been held by the grantee for more than two years;
      (14)   A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or
authority to a grantee of property conveyed by the grantee to that agency or
authority as security for a debt or the grantee or a transfer to a nonprofit
industrial development agency or authority;
      (15)   A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or
authority to a grantee purchasing directly from it, but only if the grantee
shall directly use such real estate for the primary purpose of manufacturing,
fabricating, compounding, processing, publishing, research and development,
transportation, energy conversion, energy production, pollution control,
warehousing, or agriculture; and the agency or authority has the full ownership
interest in the real estate transferred;
      (16)   A transfer by a mortgagor to the holder of a bona fide mortgage in
default in lieu of a foreclosure or a transfer pursuant to a judicial sale in
which the successful bidder is a bona fide holder of a mortgage, unless the
holder assigns the bid to another person;
      (17)   Any transfer between religious organizations or other bodies or
persons holding title for a religious organization if such real estate is not
being or has not been used by such transferor for commercial purposes;
      (18)   A transfer to a conservancy which possesses a tax exempt status
pursuant to IRC § 501(c)(3) (68A Stat. 3, 26 U.S.C. § 501(c)(3)), and which has
as its primary purpose preservation of land for historic, recreational, scenic,
agricultural or open space opportunities;
      (19)   A transfer of real estate devoted to the business of agriculture
to a family farm corporation by a member of the same family which directly owns
at least 75% of each class of the stock thereof;
      (20)   A transfer between members of the same family of an ownership
interest in a real estate company or family farm corporation;
      (21)   A transaction wherein the tax due is $1 or less; or
      (22)   Leases for the production or extraction of coal, oil, natural gas,
or minerals and assignments thereof.
   (B)   In order to exercise any exclusion provided in this section, the true,
full and complete value of the transfer shall be shown on the statement of
value. A copy of the Pennsylvania Realty Transfer Tax Statement of Value may be
submitted for this purpose. For leases of coal, oil, natural gas, or minerals,
the statement of value may be limited to an explanation of the reason such
document is not subject to tax under this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 359.06) (Ord. 566, passed 3-17-1987)
§ 34.056 DOCUMENTS RELATING TO ASSOCIATIONS OR CORPORATIONS AND MEMBERS,
PARTNERS, STOCKHOLDERS, AND SHAREHOLDERS THEREOF.
   Except as otherwise provided in §
34.055, documents which make, confirm, or evidence any transfer or demise of
title to real estate between associations or corporations and the members,
partners, shareholders, or stockholders thereof are fully taxable. For the
purposes of this subchapter, corporations and associations are entities
separate from their members, partners, stockholders, or shareholders.
(Prior Code, § 359.07) (Ord. 566, passed 3-17-1987)
§ 34.057 ACQUIRED COMPANY.
   (A)   A real estate company is an acquired company upon a change in the
ownership interest in the company, however effected, if the change does not
effect the continuity of the company; and of itself or together with prior
changes has the effect of transferring, directly or indirectly, 90% or more of
the total ownership interest in the company within a period of three years.
   (B)   With respect to real estate acquired after February 16, 1986, a family
farm corporation is an acquired company when, because of voluntary or
involuntary dissolution, it ceases to be a family farm corporation or when,
because of issuance or transfer of stock or transfer of assets that are devoted
to the business of agriculture, it fails to meet the minimum requirements of a
family farm corporation under this subchapter.
   (C)   Within 30 days after becoming an acquired company, the company shall
present a declaration of acquisition with the Recorder of each county in which
it holds real estate for the affixation of documentary stamps and recording.
Such declaration shall set forth the value of real estate holdings of the
acquired company in such county. A copy of the Pennsylvania Realty Transfer Tax
Declaration of Acquisition may be submitted for this purpose.
(Prior Code, § 359.08) (Ord. 566, passed 3-17-1987)
§ 34.058 CREDITS AGAINST TAX.
   (A)   Where there is a transfer of a residential property by a licensed real
estate broker, which property was transferred to him or her within the
preceding year as consideration for the purchase of other residential property,
a credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the transfer to him or
her shall be given to him or her toward the amount of the tax due upon the
transfer.
   (B)   Where there is a transfer by a builder of residential property which
was transferred to the builder within the preceding year as consideration for
the purchase of new, previously unoccupied residential property, a credit for
the amount of the tax paid at the time of the transfer to the builder shall be
given to the builder toward the amount of the tax due upon the transfer.
   (C)   Where there is a transfer of real estate which is leased by the
grantor, a credit for the amount of tax paid at the time of the lease shall be
given the grantor toward the tax due upon the transfer.
   (D)   Where there is a conveyance by deed of real estate which was
previously sold under a land contract by the grantor, a credit for the amount
of tax paid at the time of the sale shall be given the grantor toward the tax
due upon the deed.
   (E)   If the tax due upon the transfer is greater than the credit given
under this section, the difference shall be paid. If the credit allowed is
greater than the amount or tax due, no refund or carryover credit shall be
allowed.
(Prior Code, § 359.09) (Ord. 566, passed 3-17-1987)
§ 34.059 EXTENSION OF LEASE.
   In determining the term of a lease, it shall be presumed that a right or
option to renew or extend a lease will be exercised if the rental charge to the
lessee is fixed or if a method for calculating the rental charge is
established.
(Prior Code, § 359.10) (Ord. 566, passed 3-17-1987)
§ 34.060 PROCEEDS OF JUDICIAL SALE.
   The tax herein imposed shall be fully paid, and have priority out of the
proceeds or any judicial sale of real estate before any other obligation,
claim, lien, judgment, estate, or costs of the sale and of the writ upon which
the sale is made except the state realty transfer tax, and the Sheriff, or
other officer, conducting said sale, shall pay the tax herein imposed out of
the first monies paid to him or her in connection therewith. If the proceeds of
the sale are insufficient to pay the entire tax herein imposed, the purchaser
shall be liable for the remaining tax.
(Prior Code, § 359.11) (Ord. 566, passed 3-17-1987)
§ 34.061 DUTIES OF RECORDER OF DEEDS.
   (A)   As provided in 16 P.S. § 11011-6, as amended by Act No. 21 of July 7,
1963 (P.L. 40), the Recorder of Deeds shall be the collection agent for the
local realty transfer tax, including any amount payable to the borough based on
a redetermination of the amount of tax by the commonwealth of the commonwealth
realty transfer tax, without compensation from the borough.
   (B)   In order to ascertain the amount of taxes due when the property is
located in more than one political subdivision, the Recorder shall not accept
for recording such a deed unless it is accompanied by a statement of value
showing what taxes are due each municipality.
   (C)   On or before the tenth of each month, the Recorder shall pay over to
the borough all local realty transfer taxes collected, less 2% for use of the
county, together with a report containing the information as is required by the
commonwealth in reporting collections of the commonwealth realty transfer tax.
The 2% commission shall be paid to the county.
   (D)   Upon a determination of the amount of realty transfer tax due by the
commonwealth, the Recorder shall record the deed or record the additional
realty transfer tax form only when both the state and local amounts and a re-
recording or recording fee has been tendered.
(Prior Code, § 359.12) (Ord. 566, passed 3-17-1987)
§ 34.062 STATEMENT OF VALUE.
    Every document lodged with or presented to the Recorder of Deeds for
recording shall set forth therein and as a part of such document the true,
full, and complete value thereof, or shall be accompanied by a statement of
value executed by a responsible person connected with the transaction showing
such connection and setting forth the true, full and complete value thereof or
the reason, if any, why such document is not subject to tax under this article.
A copy of the Pennsylvania Realty Transfer Tax Statement of Value may be
submitted for this purpose. The provisions of this section shall not apply to
an excludable real estate transfers which are exempt from taxation based on
family relationship. Other documents presented for the affixation of stamps
shall be accompanied by a certified copy of the document and statement of value
executed by a responsible person connected with the transaction showing such
connection and setting forth the true, full, and complete value thereof, or the
reason, if any, why such document is not subject to tax under this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 359.13) (Ord. 566, passed 3-17-1987)
§ 34.063 CIVIL PENALTIES.
   (A)   If any part of any underpayment of tax imposed by this subchapter is
due to fraud, there shall be added to the tax an amount equal to 50% of the
underpayment.
   (B)   In the case of failure to record a declaration required under this
subchapter on the date prescribed therefore, unless it is shown that such
failure is due to reasonable cause, there shall be added to the tax 5% of the
amount of such tax if the failure is for not more than one month, with an
additional 5% for such additional month or fraction thereof during which such
failure continues, not exceeding 50% in the aggregate.
(Prior Code, § 359.14)
§ 34.064 LIEN.
   The tax imposed by this subchapter shall become a lien upon the lands,
tenements, or hereditaments, or any interest therein lying, being situated,
wholly or in part within the boundaries of the borough, which lands, tenement,
and hereditaments, or interest therein, are described in or conveyed by or
transferred by the deed which is the subject of the tax imposed, assessed, and
levied by this subchapter, said lien to begin at the time when the tax under
this subchapter is due and payable, and continue until discharge by payment or
in accordance with the law, and the solicitor is authorized to file a municipal
or tax claim in the Court of Common Pleas of the county in which said county is
located in accordance with the provisions of the Municipal Claims and Liens Act
of 1923, being 53 P.S. §§ 7101 et seq., its supplements and amendments.
(Prior Code, § 359.15) (Ord. 566, passed 3-17-1987)
§ 34.065 ENFORCEMENT.
   All taxes imposed by this subchapter together with interest and penalties
presented herein, shall be recoverable as other debts of like character are
recovered.
(Prior Code, § 359.16) (Ord. 566, passed 3-17-1987)
§ 34.066 REGULATIONS.
   The Council of the borough or its designee(s) is charged with enforcement
and collection of tax and are empowered to promulgate and enforce reasonable
regulations for enforcement and collection of the tax. The regulations which
have been promulgated by the State Department of Revenue under 72 P.S. §§ 8101-
C et seq. are incorporated into and made a part of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 359.17) (Ord. 566, passed 3-17-1987)
REAL ESTATE TAX ABATEMENT
§ 34.080 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABATEMENT. The temporary exemption from real estate taxation the assessed
value of certain improvements located on DETERIORATING PROPERTY (as defined
below) or in a DETERIORATING AREA (as defined below) according to the terms and
conditions hereinafter set forth.
   DETERIORATING AREA. That portion of the property located within the
geographical boundaries of the borough which the Council of the borough
determines to be physically blighted on the basis of one or more of the
following standards:
      (1)   The residential buildings, by reason of age, obsolescence,
inadequate or outmoded design, or physical deterioration have become economic
and/or social liabilities;
      (2)   The residential buildings are substandard or unsanitary for
healthful and safe living purposes;
      (3)   The residential buildings are overcrowded, poorly spaced, or are so
lacking in light, space, and air as to be conducive to unwholesome living;
      (4)   The residential buildings are faultily arranged, cover the land to
an excessive extent or show a deleterious use of land, or exhibit any
combination of the above which is detrimental to health, safety, or welfare;
      (5)   A significant percentage of buildings used for residential purposes
are more than 20 years of age;
      (6)   A substantial amount of unimproved, overgrown, and unsightly vacant
land exists which has remained so for a period of live years or more indicating
a growth or total lack of utilization of land for residential purposes; or
      (7)   A disproportionate number of tax exempt or delinquent properties
exist in the area.
   DETERIORATING PROPERTY. A DWELLING UNIT (as defined below) located in a
DETERIORATING AREA or a DWELLING UNIT which has been or upon request is
certified by a health, housing, or building inspection agency as unfit for
human habitation for rent withholding, or other health or welfare purposes, or
has been the subject of an order by such an agency requiring the unit to be
vacated, condemned, or demolished by reason of noncompliance with laws,
ordinances, or regulations.
   DWELLING UNIT. A house, apartment, or group of rooms intended for occupancy
as separate living quarters by family or other groups or a person living alone,
containing a kitchen or cooking equipment for the exclusive use of the
occupants.
   IMPROVEMENT. Repair, construction, or reconstruction, including alterations
and additions, having the effect of rehabilitating a structure so that it
becomes habitable or attains higher standards of housing safety, health, or
amenity, or is brought into compliance with laws, ordinances, or regulations
governing housing standards; ordinary upkeep and maintenance shall not be
deemed an improvement.
(Prior Code, § 363.01) (Ord. 679, passed 11-21-2008)
§ 34.081 PURPOSE.
   The Borough Council has determined that it is in the best interest of the
community to encourage the maintenance of neighborhoods, consistency of zoning
districts, rejuvenation of blighted areas, and the development of vacant
property, and that the adoption of an abatement with regard to the construction
of improvements to certain deteriorating property and deteriorating area an
appropriate method to achieve the above-stated goals.
(Prior Code, § 363.02) (Ord. 679, passed 11-21-2008)
§ 34.082 SCHEDULE OF ABATEMENT.
   The abatement from real estate tax for such improvements to deteriorating
property or deteriorating area will be provided in accordance with the
following schedule:
   (A)   Year one: 100% of the assessed value of the improvements;
   (B)   Year two: 90% of the assessed value of the improvements;
   (C)   Year three: 80% of the assessed value of the improvements;
   (D)   Year four: 70% of the assessed value of the improvements;
   (E)   Year five: 60% of the assessed value of the improvements;
   (F)   Year six: 50% of the assessed value of the improvements;
   (G)   Year seven: 40% of the assessed value of the improvements;
   (H)   Year eight: 30% of the assessed value of the improvements;
   (I)   Year nine: 20% of the assessed value of the improvements; and
   (J)   Year ten: 10% of the assessed value of the improvements.
(Prior Code, § 363.03) (Ord. 679, passed 11-21-2008)
§ 34.083 APPLICATION FOR ABATEMENT.
   (A)   Any person desiring an abatement pursuant to this subchapter shall
notify the Borough Code Enforcement Officer in writing on a form prescribed by
the borough. The applicant must submit the form at the time he or she secures
the building permit or, if no building permit or other notification of
improvement is required, at the time he or she commences construction.
   (B)   The borough’s Code Enforcement Officer shall immediately notify the
Armstrong School District of any approved abatement application by delivering a
copy of the application and approval to the District.
(Prior Code, § 363.04) (Ord. 679, passed 11-21-2008)
§ 34.084 ABATEMENT RUNS WITH THE LAND.
   The abatement from taxes authorized by this subchapter shall be upon the
property and shall not terminate upon the sale, conveyance, bequest, or other
alienation of such property.
(Prior Code, § 363.05) (Ord. 679, passed 11-21-2008)
§ 34.085 COST OF IMPROVEMENTS.
   The cost of improvements per dwelling unit to be exempted existing at the
time of the initial request for tax exemption shall be applicable to the
exemption request, and subsequent amendments to the subchapter, if any, and
shall not apply to requests initiated prior to their adoption.
(Prior Code, § 363.06) (Ord. 679, passed 11-21-2008)
§ 34.086 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   The ordinance codified herein shall become effective on January 1, 2009.
(Prior Code, § 363.07) (Ord. 679, passed 11-21-2008)
§ 34.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Whoever makes false and untrue statements on any return required by §§
34.001 through
34.013, or who refuses inspection of the books, records, and accounts in his or
her custody and control setting forth the number of employees in his or her
employment subject to this tax, or whoever fails or refuses to file any return
required by §§
34.001 through
34.013 shall, upon conviction before any District Judge for the borough, be
sentenced to pay a fine or not more than $500 and costs for each offense, and
in default of the payment of the fines and costs, be imprisoned in the County
Jail for a period not exceeding 30 days for each offense. It is further
provided that the action to enforce the fine and penalty herein provided may be
instituted against any person in charge of the business of any employer who has
failed or refused to file a return required by §§
34.001 through
34.013.
(Prior Code, § 345.99)
   (C)   Any person convicted before a District Magistrate of violating any
provisions or requirements of §§
34.025 through
34.037 or of failing, neglecting, or refusing to pay any tax, penalties, or
interest imposed under §§
34.025 through
34.037; or refusing to permit the Tax Collector or any person to examine any of
his or her books, papers, or records; or of knowingly making any incomplete,
false, or fraudulent return or of doing or attempting to do anything whatever
to avoid the payment of the whole or any part of the tax imposed under §§
34.025 through
34.037 shall be liable to a fine or penalty not exceeding $600, and costs of
prosecution, for each and every offense and, in default of payment of such fine
and costs, to imprisonment for not more than 30 days.
(Prior Code, § 353.99)
   (D)   Any person who violates any of the provisions of §§
34.050 through
34.066 shall be guilty of a summary offenses and upon conviction thereof before
any District Magistrate, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600 for
each offense and costs, and in default of the said payment of fine and costs to
be imprisoned for a period not exceeding 30 days. The penalty imposed under §§
34.050 through
34.066 shall be in addition to any other penalty imposed by any other section
of §§
34.050 through
34.066.
(Prior Code, § 359.99)
(Ord. 499, passed 12-9-1975; Ord. 514, passed 9-13-1977; Ord. 515, passed 10-
11-1977; Ord. 592, passed 7-18-1989; Ord. 674, passed 12-17-2007)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
   Chapter
      
50.   COMMON UTILITIES PROVISIONS
      
51.   WATER
      
52.   SEWER
      
53.   GARBAGE
CHAPTER 50: COMMON UTILITIES PROVISIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
50.01   Definitions
   
50.02   When payment for services is due
   
50.03   Application for monies received
   
50.04   Future changes in fees and charges
   
50.05   New customer fee
   
50.06   Rental unit billing; turn-off
   
50.07   Delinquent and installment account agreements
   
50.08   No-lien letters and refunds
   
50.09   Checks returned for nonsufficient funds
Obstruction of Lines and Poles
   
50.20   Interference with use of utility facilities
   
50.21   Abatement
   
50.22   Borough’s remedy for nonperformance
   
50.23   Recovery of costs
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 50.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APARTMENT. Each division of any dwelling house or building, whether single
or double, that is occupied by different families or family units or tenants as
a separate dwelling unit.
   BOROUGH. The Borough of Ford City, Armstrong County, Pennsylvania.
   COUNCIL. The Borough Council of the Borough of Ford City duly elected as
defined in the Borough Code.
   CUSTOMER. Any individual person or family group or any commercial, business,
professional, governmental, or fraternal organization occupying a dwelling unit
or other unit receiving water or sewage service.
   DWELLING UNIT. Any building or division of such building or apartment in
such building which is used for human habitation by a separate family group or
by separate individuals.
   SANITARY SEWAGE. The normal water carrying household and toilet waste from
residences, business buildings, institutions, commercial and industrial
establishments.
   SEWAGE SERVICE. The service provided by the Borough Municipal Sewage
Disposal Authority carrying sanitary sewage away from buildings and the
treatment thereof in the sewage disposal plant.
   SEWER SYSTEM. All facilities operated by the Borough Municipal Sewage
Disposal Authority for the collection and disposal of sanitary sewage.
   WATER SERVICE. The supplying of water through the borough’s water
distribution system for consumption by its customers.
   WATER WORKS. All facilities for the collection, treatment, and distribution
of water to the borough’s customers.
(Prior Code, § 961.01) (Ord. 654, passed 11- -2003)
§ 50.02 WHEN PAYMENT FOR SERVICES IS DUE.
   (A)   It is the policy of the borough to discontinue utility service to
customers by reason of nonpayment of bills only after notice and a meaningful
opportunity to be heard on disputed bills. The borough’s form for application
for utility service and all bills shall contain, in addition to the title,
address, room number and telephone number of the official in charge of billing,
clearly visible and easily readable provisions to the effect:
      (1)   That all bills are due and payable on or before the date set forth
on the bill;
      (2)   That if any bill is not paid by or before that date, a second bill
will be mailed containing a cutoff notice that if the bill is not paid within
ten days of the mailing of the second bill, service will be discontinued for
nonpayment; and
      (3)   That any customer disputing the correctness of his or her bill
shall have a right to a hearing at which time he or she may be represented in
person and by counsel or any other person of his or her choosing and may
present orally or in writing his or her complaint and contentions to the
borough official in charge of utility billing. This official shall be
authorized to order that the customer’s service not be discontinued and shall
have the authority to make a final determination of the customer’s complaint.
   (B)   Requests for delays or waiver of payment will not be entertained; only
questions of proper and correct billing will be considered. In the absence of
payment of the bill rendered or resort to the hearing procedure provided
herein, service will be discontinued at the time specified, but in no event
until the charges have been due and unpaid for at least 30 days.
   (C)   When it becomes necessary for the borough to discontinue utility
service to a customer for nonpayment of bills, service will be reinstated only
after all bills for service then due have been paid, along with a turn-on
charge in the sum of $20.
§ 50.03 APPLICATION OF MONIES RECEIVED.
   All monies received by the borough for water, sewage, and garbage charges
will be applied to the account in the following order:
   (A)   First, to the accrued interest;
   (B)   Second, to the penalty charge;
   (C)   Third, to the sewage charge;
   (D)   Fourth, to the stormwater charge;
   (E)   Fifth, to the monthly water service charge; and
   (F)   Sixth, to garbage charges.
(Prior Code, § 961.03) (Ord. 654, passed 11- -2003)
§ 50.04 FUTURE CHANGES IN FEES AND CHARGES.
   The fees and charges states in §§
50.05,
50.08,
50.09,
51.06,
51.08,
51.22, and
51.24 are initial fees and charges, which may be changed from time to time by
resolution of the Borough Council.
(Prior Code, § 961.04) (Ord. 654, passed 11- -2003)
§ 50.05 NEW CUSTOMER FEE.
   All new customers for water, sewage, and garbage collection services shall
be required to pay a nonrefundable fee. This fee shall be paid prior to any
services being initiated by the borough.
(Prior Code, § 961.05) (Ord. 654, passed 11- -2003)
§ 50.06 RENTAL UNIT BILLING; TURN-OFF.
   In all cases where the customer desires to discontinue service, and the
customer is a tenant or a landlord, both the tenant and the landlord must
contact the Borough Office and request the turn-off of service. The date to
discontinue service will be the date upon which both the landlord and tenant
contacted the borough, whichever is later. Prior to turning on service again,
all amounts owing on the account must be paid in full.
(Prior Code, § 961.06) (Ord. 654, passed 11- -2003)
§ 50.07 DELINQUENT AND INSTALLMENT ACCOUNT AGREEMENTS.
   (A)   If an account becomes delinquent or has an extremely large bill, the
borough, at its sole discretion, may enter into an installment agreement with
the customer.
   (B)   The terms of the agreement shall be set by the borough.
   (C)   In any event, the current bill plus the monthly installment amount
must be paid by the fifteenth day of each month or service may be terminated by
the borough.
(Prior Code, § 961.07) (Ord. 654, passed 11- -2003)
§ 50.08 NO-LIEN LETTERS AND REFUNDS.
   There shall be a charge per account for each no-lien letter requested. The
borough shall not be required to make any refunds if the amount owing the
customer is less than $1.
(Prior Code, § 961.08) (Ord. 654, passed 11- -2003)
§ 50.09 CHECKS RETURNED FOR NONSUFFICIENT FUNDS.
   There shall be a nonsufficient funds fee billed to each customer for checks
returned to the borough for nonsufficient funds.
(Prior Code, § 961.09) (Ord. 654, passed 11- -2003)
OBSTRUCTION OF LINES AND POLES
§ 50.20 INTERFERENCE WITH USE OF UTILITY FACILITIES.
   No person shall construct or maintain any buildings, poles, wires, shade or
ornamental trees, or any other obstruction in, along, or upon any street,
alley, or public highway of the borough which may interfere with the convenient
use of the streets, alleys, and highways or the common sewers or sewerage
system or the poles, wires, and lighting system of the borough, or the pipes
and other apparatus for the supply of water for the use of the inhabitants of
the borough.
(Prior Code, § 941.01) (Ord. 171, passed 6-2-1930) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 50.21 ABATEMENT.
   Whenever it appears or is made to appear to Council that any such building
or obstruction has been constructed or shall be constructed, or is maintained
in, along, and over any of the streets and highways of the borough, and that
the same are in any way interfering with the common sewers or sewerage system
or the lights and lighting system or the pipes and other apparatus provided for
a supply of water within the borough, and the convenient use thereof, which
obstructions shall include all shade and ornamental trees in and along such
streets and highways whose roots interfere with the convenient use of any sewer
or water pipe or any apparatus connected therewith, or the limbs, branches, or
foliage thereof interfering with the poles, wires, lights, and apparatus of the
electric system of the borough, the same shall be declared to be a nuisance and
shall be abated as such.
(Prior Code, § 941.02) (Ord. 171, passed 6-2-1930)
§ 50.22 BOROUGH’S REMEDY FOR NONPERFORMANCE.
   Whenever Council, by affirmative action, declares any of such obstructions
to be nuisances, notice shall be given through the Borough Secretary to the
owner of the property where the same is located, erected, or maintained, to
remove and abate the nuisance within ten days. Upon failure to comply with such
notice and requirement within such period, the borough, through its proper
officers, agents, and employees, may proceed to remove the obstructions and
nuisances either in their entirety or to such an extent that the nuisance shall
not interfere with or obstruct the convenient use of the sewers, water mains
and apparatus, and electric light poles, wires, and apparatus belonging to the
borough or to a public utility company, which partial removal shall include
trimming the limbs and foliage or cutting the roots of such shade or ornamental
trees as are in, along, and upon such streets and highways or upon private
grounds and in such close proximity to the sewage system, water system, or
lighting system as to necessitate attention and removal.
(Prior Code, § 941.03) (Ord. 171, passed 6-2-1930)
§ 50.23 RECOVERY OF COSTS.
   If and when any such work in the removal of nuisances is done by the
borough, the costs thereof, together with a penalty of 10% added thereto, shall
be recovered from the owner of the real estate where the nuisances had been
constructed or maintained, in the manner prescribed by law.
(Prior Code, § 941.04) (Ord. 171, passed 6-2-1930)
CHAPTER 51: WATER
Section
Lines, Connections, and Meters
   
51.01   Collection of costs for service lines
   
51.02   Individual service lines for apartments
   
51.03   Tap-in charge
   
51.04   Application for service from old connection
   
51.05   Application for service from new connection
   
51.06   Charges for reinstallation of meters
   
51.07   Connections; maintenance of lines and meters
   
51.08   Application requirements
   
51.09   New meters
Services and Rates
   
51.20   Responsibility for charges
   
51.21   Use of meters; location
   
51.22   Imposition of water rates
   
51.23   Discontinuance of service; emergencies; lawn sprinkling
   
51.24   Renewal of service
   
51.25   Discontinuance of water service to violators of sewer rules
 
   
51.99   Penalty
LINES, CONNECTIONS, AND METERS
§ 51.01 COLLECTION OF COSTS FOR SERVICE LINES.
   On all streets, avenues, and alleys where the service lines have been laid
to the curb, the cost of such lines shall be collected from the property owners
before the water is turned on.
(Prior Code, § 933.01) (Ord. 159, passed 2-3-1926)
§ 51.02 INDIVIDUAL SERVICE LINES FOR APARTMENTS.
   Each and every apartment in any dwelling house or other building to be
supplied with water shall have its own service line to the main line.
(Prior Code, § 933.02) (Ord. 159, passed 2-3-1926) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.03 TAP-IN CHARGE.
   There will be a charge for new tap-ins to the main water service which
charge shall be determined by the Borough Engineer at the time of the tap-in.
(Prior Code, § 933.04) (Ord. 654, passed 11- -2003)
§ 51.04 APPLICATION FOR SERVICE FROM OLD CONNECTION.
   Where water connection has previously been installed and water is desired, a
proper application shall be signed by the owner or landlord.
(Prior Code, § 933.05) (Ord. 159, passed 2-3-1926)
§ 51.05 APPLICATION FOR SERVICE FROM NEW CONNECTION.
   (A)   Service connection shall be made upon written application on a blank
prepared by the borough for the purpose signed by the owner, or his or her
properly authorized agent, and water shall be furnished upon written
application signed either by the owner, his or her duly authorized agent, or by
a tenant, except as otherwise noted, and after approval of such application by
the borough is endorsed thereon.
   (B)   A new application must be made and approved by the borough upon any
change in ownership of property, in tenancy or in the service, as described in
the application, and the borough shall have the right, upon five days’ notice,
to discontinue the water supply until such new application has been made and
approved.
(Prior Code, § 933.06) (Ord. 159, passed 2-3-1926) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.06 CHARGES FOR REINSTALLATION OF METERS.
   (A)   The charges for reinstallation of meters, when removed because of
damage in any way for which the customer is responsible either because of
willful deed or negligence, shall be as set from time to time by resolution of
Council and cost of parts. This cost shall be as set from time to time by
resolution of Council for meters one inch in diameter and smaller, plus the
cost of any parts, and as set from time to time by resolution of Council
additional per one-half inch in diameter, or fraction thereof for meters larger
than one inch, which charge shall include testing and shall be paid in advance.
   (B)   When the meters are removed after installation, at the request of the
customer for testing, the following rules shall apply.
      (1)   If the meter tested shall be found to be accurate within the limits
herein specified, a fee determined for the schedule in division (B)(2) below,
shall be paid to the borough by the customer requiring such test; but if not so
found, then the cost thereof shall be borne by the borough.
      (2)   The amount of fee shall be as set from time to time by resolution
of Council for each water service meter having an outlet not exceeding one
inch. For other water service meters having an outlet not exceeding two inches,
the test fee shall be as set from time to time by resolution of Council per
meter. The charge for request test of meters above two inches shall be at the
rate as set from time to time by resolution of Council per inch of diameter
outlet.
(Prior Code, § 933.07) (Ord. 458, passed 8-19-1968; Ord. 654, passed 11- -2003)
§ 51.07 CONNECTIONS; MAINTENANCE OF LINES AND METERS.
   (A)   The borough shall furnish, place, and maintain, at its own cost, the
ferrule and coupling at the connection of the service line and the main.
   (B)   The service line, which shall be of copper or other appropriate
material, including the curb stop and box, shall be furnished, laid, and
maintained by the applicant at his or her own cost, subject to the rules of the
borough.
   (C)   All connections, service lines, and fixtures furnished by the
applicant shall be maintained by him or her in good order, and all valves,
meters, and appliances furnished and owned by the borough and on the property
of the applicant shall be properly protected and cared for by the applicant.
All leaks in the service line or any other pipe or fixture in or upon the
premises supplied must be immediately repaired by the owner or occupant of the
premises.
   (D)   All pipes, meters, and fixtures shall, at all reasonable hours, be
subject to the inspection by proper employees of the borough. No addition or
alteration in or about any connection with the main or pipe system on the
premises shall be made by anyone without first notifying the borough and
preparing an amended application made for such purpose. This rule shall not
apply to changes in pipes where no new fixtures or outlets are contemplated.
   (E)   The borough shall in no event be responsible for maintaining any
portion of the service line owned by the applicant or for damage done by water
escaping therefrom or for lines or fixtures on the applicant’s property. The
applicant shall at all times comply with municipal regulations with reference
thereto and shall make changes therein required on account of changes of grade,
relocation of mains, or otherwise.
   (F)   No service line shall be laid in any trench wherein is laid a gas
pipe, sewer pipe, or any other facility of a public service company or
municipality, unless authorized and approved by the borough.
   (G)   All injuries to service pipes or street mains caused by careless or
negligent work or improper filling or excavations for any purpose shall be
chargeable to the person causing such injury, and the expense of repairing the
same shall be recovered from such person.
   (H)   No owner or tenant of any premises supplied by the borough shall
furnish water to other persons or families except as specified in his or her
application and approved by the borough. In case of violation of this rule, the
supply shall be shut off and the applicant shall be charged with the proper
actual or estimated charge for such service, in accordance with the rates of
the borough.
   (I)   Meters will be maintained by the borough, so far as ordinary wear and
tear are concerned, but damage due to freezing where the meters are located
inside the building or cellar, or due to external causes under the applicant’s
control, shall be paid for by the applicant.
   (J)   The applicant shall notify the borough of any injury to or
nonperformance by the meter, as soon as it comes to his or her knowledge.
   (K)   Where water is furnished by meter, the quantity recorded by it shall
be conclusive on both the applicant and the borough, except when the meter has
been found to be registering inaccurately or has ceased to register. In the
latter case, the quantity may be determined by the average registration of the
meter when in order.
   (L)   In case of a disputed account involving the accuracy of a meter, such
meter shall be tested upon the request of the applicant. In the event that the
meter as tested is found to have an error in registration of 4% or more, the
bills will be increased or decreased accordingly.
(Prior Code, § 933.08) (Ord. 159, passed 2-3-1926)
§ 51.08 APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   On or after January 1, 1982, a person, natural or otherwise, who
desires water service from the borough, shall make written application therefor
on an application form provided by the borough.
   (B)   The application shall be signed by the owner of the premises to be
serviced with water, where the owner is to be the occupier of the premises.
   (C)   The application shall be signed by the owner of the premises to be
serviced with water, where the premises are to be occupied by a tenant, and
when the water service statement is to be mailed to the owner.
   (D)   The application shall be signed by the owner of the premises to be
serviced with water and by the tenant, where the premises are to be occupied by
a tenant, and when the water service statement is to be mailed to the tenant.
In all such cases, the application shall be accompanied by a security deposit
for a sum established, from time to time, by resolution of Council.
   (E)   As used in this section, the singular shall include the plural, and
the plural shall include the singular.
(Prior Code, § 933.09) (Ord. 539, passed 11-23-1981)
§ 51.09 NEW METERS.
   (A)   New buildings requiring a new meter will be charged the actual cost of
the meter. The charge for reducing or enlarging an existing meter will be the
actual cost of the meter. Reducing and enlarging will be at the owner’s
request.
   (B)   All plumbing changes must be done by the owner and at the owner’s
cost. Request for a meter to be removed must be in writing and must be
accompanied by a nonrefundable fee as set from time to time by resolution of
Council to the borough. This request must also be approved by the Borough Code
Enforcement Officer.
(Prior Code, § 933.10) (Ord. 654, passed 11- -2003)
SERVICES AND RATES
§ 51.20 RESPONSIBILITY FOR CHARGES.
   (A)   All charges for water are to be assessed against the owner of the
property wherein the water is to be used.
   (B)   Responsibility for water rates imposed in connection with multiple
dwelling units serviced by one meter and/or receiving one statement for the
consumption of water shall be imposed upon the owner or owners of said building
or structure, and any such statement for subject water services shall be
appropriately forwarded to such owner or owners.
(Prior Code, § 931.01) (Ord. 159, passed 2-3-1926; Ord. 557, passed 11-21-1985)
§ 51.21 USE OF METERS; LOCATION.
   The borough will sell water to consumers only through meters to be furnished
by the borough for that purpose, and at the rates established by §
51.22. The meter shall be set inside the building to be furnished with water,
wherever it is practicable to do so, in such position that no connection shall
be between it and the main line furnishing it with water.
(Prior Code, § 931.02) (Ord. 159, passed 2-3-1926)
§ 51.22 IMPOSITION OF WATER RATES.
   Effective beginning the billing period November 15, 2016, the following
scheduled rates for the consumption of water are hereby imposed, which rates
will be sufficient to cover all operational and maintenance costs of the Water
Treatment Plant, the debt service on the PENNVEST loan, and all other
outstanding debt of the borough. The following rates shall apply to each
specific metered service connection to the main water distribution system
regardless of whether two or more service connections provide water to an
individual customer.
   (A)   Monthly minimum charges. Minimum monthly charges shall be as set from
time to time by resolution of Council.
   (B)   Monthly bulk consumption charges. Monthly bulk consumption charges
shall be as set from time to time by resolution of Council.
   (C)   Private fire hydrants.
      (1)   Direction connection to main each: shall be as set from time to
time by resolution of Council..
      (2)   The customer shall be entitled to the number of hydrants, hose
connections, or sprinkler heads indicated by the charge for the size of service
pipe connection employed from the main in the street, and all over this number
will be billed at the regular schedule of rates, except that where fire service
is permitted though the same service line and meter as providing normal water
service, the regular minimum charge shall apply as indicated for the size of
the meter employed.
      (3)   The customer will understand that a charge for private fire
protection is primarily a compensation for standing ready to serve and that the
amount of said charge does not contemplate the use of water, therefore,
excepting for test purposes and for actual extinguishing of fire, additional
charges will be rendered for any general use of water through such connections
and on the basis of actual delivery.
   (D)   Sprinkler or fire service system. Sprinkler or fire service system
charges shall be as set from time to time by resolution of Council.
   (E)   Touch read remote meters. All customers are required to install a
remote meter reading device on the outside of each dwelling and/or other unit
receiving water service. There will be a fee assessed against a customer in the
amount of one-third of the cost of a new meter and remote. Installation is to
be performed by an approved representative of the borough.
   (F)   Shut-off notice. Prior to shutting off any water service to a
customer, the borough shall give notice to the customer by certified mail and
by posting a shut-off notice on the house for a period of not less than three
days prior to shutting off service. The posted three-day shut-off notice is a
charge as set from time to time by resolution of Council.
   (G)   Additional charges.
      (1)   Work order.
         (a)   Generation. Generation of a work order to shut off utility
service for reason of non-payment: as set from time to time by resolution of
Council.
         (b)   Completion. Completion of a work order resulting in utility
service turned off for reason of nonpayment: as set from time to time by
resolution of Council.
      (2)   Final water meter reading. The final water meter reading: as set
from time to time by resolution of Council. (Snowbirds are exempt and customers
requiring a final meter reading because they are purchasing property with the
borough and moving into the “new service address.”)
      (3)   Magistrate letter. Sending a Magistrate letter: as set from time to
time by resolution of Council.
      (4)   Partial payments. Partial payments for utility service will not be
accepted.
(Prior Code, § 931.03) (Ord. 654, passed 11- -2003; Ord. 662, passed 12-29-
2005; Ord. 692, passed 12-29-2010; Ord. 696, passed 10-10-2011; Ord. 704,
passed 12-27-2012; Ord. 731, passed 7-2-2016)
§ 51.23 DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE; EMERGENCIES; LAWN SPRINKLING.
   (A)   Service under any application may be discontinued for any of the
following reasons:
      (1)   For failure to protect and keep the meter, connections, service
lines, or fixtures in good order;
      (2)   For neglecting to make or renew advance payment, or for nonpayment
of any account for water supplied, for water service, for fire protection, or
for meter or service maintenance, or of any scheduled fee or charge, within 30
days of the billing date;
      (3)   For molesting any service pipe, meter, curb stopcock, valve seal,
or other appliance of the borough controlling or regulating the water supply;
      (4)   In case of the vacancy of premises; or
      (5)   For violation of any rules of the borough.
   (B)   Water will be turned off of any premises, under the written order of
the applicant, without in any way affecting the existing application.
   (C)   No water fixtures or appliances in connection therewith will be
considered cut off until it is disconnected so that it cannot be used again, or
is sealed in a manner satisfactory to the borough.
   (D)   No plumber, owner, or other unauthorized person shall turn the water
on or off at any corporation stop or curb stop or disconnect or remove the
meter without the consent of the borough. Violators are subject to the
penalties imposed by the law and this subchapter.
   (E)   As necessity may arise in case of break, emergency, or for other
unavoidable cause, the borough shall have the right to temporarily cut off the
water supply in order to make necessary repairs, connections, and the like, but
the borough will use all reasonable and practicable measures to notify the
consumer of such discontinuance of service. In such case, the borough shall not
be liable for any damage or inconvenience suffered by the applicant or for any
claim against it at any time for interruption in service, reducing the supply,
inadequate pressure, or poor quality of the water, as a result of causes beyond
its control.
   (F)   The borough shall have the right to reserve a sufficient supply of
water at all times in its reservoirs to provide for fire and other emergencies
and it may restrict or regulate the quantity of water used by consumers in case
of scarcity or whenever the public welfare requires it. No street or lawn
sprinkling shall be done at a time of water shortage or other water emergency
declared by the Mayor. Sprinkling shall be discontinued whenever an alarm of
fire is sounded.
(Prior Code, § 931.04) (Ord. 159, passed 2-3-1926) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.24 RENEWAL OF SERVICE.
   (A)   Conditions. Service will be renewed under a proper application when
conditions under which such service was discontinued are corrected and upon
payment of all charges and penalties provided in this subchapter.
   (B)   Turn-on and turn-off charge. In all cases where water from the
borough’s water system is turned on into a customer’s building, where the water
service is turned off, or where there is a change in customer billing, there
will be a charge in the amount as set from time to time by resolution of
Council.
(Prior Code, § 931.05) (Ord. 458, passed 8-19-1968; Ord. 518, passed 12-13-
1977; Ord. 654, passed 11- -2003)
§ 51.25 DISCONTINUANCE OF WATER SERVICE TO VIOLATORS OF SEWER RULES.
   (A)   It is the policy of the borough to discontinue utility service to
customers by reason of nonpayment of bills only after notice and a meaningful
opportunity to be heard on disputed bills. The borough’s form for application
for utility service and all bills shall contain, in addition to the title,
address, room number and telephone number of the official in charge of billing,
clearly visible and easily readable provisions to the effect:
      (1)   That all bills are due and payable on or before the date set forth
on the bill;
      (2)   That if any bill is not paid by or before that date, a second bill
will be mailed containing a cutoff notice that if the bill is not paid within
ten days of the mailing of the second bill, service will be discontinued for
nonpayment; and
      (3)   That any customer disputing the correctness of his or her bill
shall have a right to a hearing at which time he or she may be represented in
person and by counsel or any other person of his or her choosing and may
present orally or in writing his or her complaint and contentions to the
borough official in charge of utility billing. This official shall be
authorized to order that the customer’s service not be discontinued and shall
have the authority to make a final determination of the customer’s complaint.
   (B)   Requests for delays or waiver of payment will not be entertained; only
questions of proper and correct billing will be considered. In the absence of
payment of the bill rendered or resort to the hearing procedure provided
herein, service will be discontinued at the time specified, but in no event
until the charges have been due and unpaid for at least 30 days.
   (C)   When it becomes necessary for the borough to discontinue utility
service to a customer for nonpayment of bills, service will be reinstated only
after all bills for service then due have been paid, along with a turn-on
charge in the sum as set from time to time by resolution of Council.
§ 51.99 PENALTY.
   Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this code
of ordinances or fails to comply therewith or with any of the requirements
thereof, upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a Magisterial
District Judge in the manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses
under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a
fine of not less than $100, nor more than $1,000, plus costs, including
reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred by the borough and, in default of payment
of said fines and costs, to a term of imprisonment to the extent permitted by
law for the punishment of summary offenses. A separate offense shall arise for
each day or portion thereof in which a violation of this code of ordinances is
found to exist or for each section of this code of ordinances found to have
been violated. The borough may also commence appropriate actions in equity to
prevent, restrain, correct, enjoin or abate violations of this code of
ordinances. All fines and penalties collected for violation of this code of
ordinances shall be paid to the borough.
CHAPTER 52: SEWER
Section
Connections and Regulations
   
52.01   Connections required
   
52.02   Conditions prerequisite to connection
   
52.03   Standards and specifications
   
52.04   Prohibited waste
   
52.05   Privy vaults, cesspools prohibited
   
52.06   Borough’s remedy for nonperformance of privy vaults
   
52.07   Connection of privy vaults and the like to sewers prohibited
Service and Rates
   
52.20   Service and rates
   
52.21   Rules and regulations
 
   
52.99   Penalty
CONNECTIONS AND REGULATIONS
§ 52.01 CONNECTIONS REQUIRED.
   All land in the borough which adjoins or abuts on any street, avenue, or
alley in which a public sewer, whether sanitary, storm, or combined, has been
laid, or which is a part of a lot in one of the several plans of lots within
the borough, which lot adjoins or abuts upon any street, avenue, or alley in
which a public sewer, whether sanitary, storm, or combined, has been laid,
shall be connected with such sewer. The discharge of all fecal matter, human
excrement, kitchen and laundry wastes, and any other sewage from the premises
shall be made into a sanitary sewer, if one exists, and if not, into a combined
sewer. The discharge of all storm and rain water from roofs of dwellings and
commercial buildings, from drains or from any other source shall be made, by
suitable gutters and downspouts, into a storm sewer, where one exists, and if
not, into a combined sewer. Every such property shall be connected separately
and independently with the sewer through the house connection branch nearest
thereto in a downstream direction. For connections for sanitary wastes, the
grouping of buildings upon one house sewer shall not be permitted except under
special circumstances and for good sanitary reasons with special permission
granted by Council upon recommendation from the Superintendent of Public Works.
(Prior Code, § 923.01) (Ord. 421, passed 3-15-1963)
§ 52.02 CONDITIONS PREREQUISITE TO CONNECTION.
   Except when a connection is made while a public sewer is being constructed
and before the excavation for the public sewer has been covered, no person
shall make or cause to be made any connection of his or her property with any
of the borough sewers until he or she has fulfilled all of the following
conditions.
   (A)   He or she shall notify the Superintendent of Public Works of his or
her desire and intention to make such connection at least 24 hours before the
time the connection is to be made, in order that the Superintendent of Public
Works or his or her authorized agent may be present to supervise the work of
the connection.
   (B)   He or she shall pay a sewer connection fee in an amount to be
determined by Council from time to time, payable to the Borough Secretary, for
the use of the borough.
   (C)   He or she shall apply for and obtain a permit to excavate in the
street in accordance with §§
150.15 through 150.45.
(Prior Code, § 923.02) (Ord. 421, passed 3-15-1963)
§ 52.03 STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS.
   All work of making connections to any of the borough sewers shall be done
under the personal supervision of the Superintendent of Public Works or his or
her authorized agent and shall conform to the requirements of this section. All
connections shall be made at the place where the “Y” in the borough sewer is
provided, but if no “Y” is provided in the sewer, then the property owner
making such connection shall, at his or her expense, install the “Y” making
such connection. All connections to the borough sewer shall be made by a master
plumber under the supervision of the Superintendent of Public Works or his or
her representative. All joints shall be sealed, made airtight, and made smooth
and clean inside, with all sewers in straight alignment and of proper grade, so
as to provide free flow of sewage matter without any obstructions. In addition,
joints shall be made in conformity with the borough’s specification for its
sanitary sewers. All work pertaining to the connection with the borough’s
sewers shall be, financially and otherwise, the responsibility of the owner of
the property with which connection is made, subject to the right of supervision
hereby reserved by the borough.
(Prior Code, § 923.03) (Ord. 421, passed 3-15-1963) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.04 PROHIBITED WASTE.
   No person shall connect or cause to be connected with any of the public
sewers in the borough, directly or indirectly, any steam exhaust boiler blow-
off, sediment drip, or any pipe carrying or constructed to carry hot water or
acid, germicide, grease, brewery mash, gasoline, naptha, benzine, oil, or any
other substance detrimental to the sewers or to the operation of the sewerage
system or the sewage disposal works of the borough.
(Prior Code, § 923.04) (Ord. 421, passed 3-15-1963) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.05 PRIVY VAULTS, CESSPOOLS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   (1)   It is hereby required that all privy vaults or cesspools or
similar receptacles for human excrement on all occupied premises within the
borough which are accessible to the public sewer system shall be cleansed and
filled within 30 days after notice to do so has been served upon the owner of
the premises on which such privy vault or cesspool is located, to the end that
they shall be altogether abandoned.
      (2)   No such owner shall fail to comply with this requirement.
   (B)   Such cleansing and filling shall be done under the direction and
supervision of the Health Officer of the borough.
(Prior Code, § 923.05) (Ord. 134, passed 1-9-1924; Ord. 421, passed 3-15-1963)
Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.06 BOROUGH’S REMEDY FOR NONPERFORMANCE OF PRIVY VAULTS.
   Upon failure or neglect of the owner of occupied premises on which there is
a privy vault or cesspool to cleanse and fill the same in accordance with §
52.05, the borough shall cleanse and fill such privy vault or cesspool or cause
the same to be cleansed and filled and collect the cost and expense thereof,
with a penalty of 10% additional for such failure or neglect, from the owner of
the property on which such work was done.
(Prior Code, § 923.06) (Ord. 134, passed 1-9-1924)
§ 52.07 CONNECTION OF PRIVY VAULTS AND THE LIKE TO SEWERS PROHIBITED.
   No privy vault, cesspool, or similar receptacle for human excrement shall at
any time be connected with any of the borough sewers.
(Prior Code, § 923.07) (Ord. 421, passed 3-15-1963) Penalty, see §
52.99
SERVICE AND RATES
§ 52.20 SERVICE AND RATES.
   The sewer system of the borough is under control of the Borough of Ford City
Sewage Authority. Current rates and charges are on file with the Authority.
§ 52.21 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The borough reserves the right to, and may from time to time, adopt, revise,
amend, and re-adopt such rules and regulations as it deems necessary and proper
for the use and operation of the sewer system and all such rules and
regulations shall be and become a part of this subchapter and enforceable as
part of this subchapter. Such rules and regulations, when adopted by Council,
shall be printed in book or pamphlet form and published at length according to
law, and when so published shall be and become a part of this subchapter and
enforceable as a part of this subchapter.   
(Prior Code, § 921.10) (Ord. 420, passed 3-15-1963; Ord. 699, passed 12-12-
2011)
§ 52.99 PENALTY.
   Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this code
of ordinances or fails to comply therewith or with any of the requirements
thereof, upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a Magisterial
District Judge in the manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses
under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a
fine of not less than $100, nor more than $1,000, plus costs, including
reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred by the borough and, in default of payment
of said fines and costs, to a term of imprisonment to the extent permitted by
law for the punishment of summary offenses. A separate offense shall arise for
each day or portion thereof in which a violation of this code of ordinances is
found to exist or for each section of this code of ordinances found to have
been violated. The borough may also commence appropriate actions in equity to
prevent, restrain, correct, enjoin or abate violations of this code of
ordinances. All fines and penalties collected for violation of this code of
ordinances shall be paid to the borough.
CHAPTER 53: GARBAGE
Section
Solid Waste Management
   
53.01   Short title
   
53.02   Purpose
   
53.03   Definitions
   
53.04   Collection of municipal solid waste
   
53.05   Containers generally
   
53.06   Storage on residential properties
   
53.07   Storage on commercial, industrial, and institutional properties
   
53.08   Transportation and disposal of municipal solid waste
   
53.09   Unlawful disposition of municipal solid waste
   
53.10   Bulk waste
   
53.11   Construction and demolition waste
   
53.12   Accumulation of waste prohibited
   
53.13   Service fee and charges
Municipal Garbage Collection Service
   
53.25   Finding
   
53.26   Use of service required
   
53.27   Written application required
   
53.28   Application signatures
   
53.29   Usage
   
53.30   Monthly garbage collection fee
   
53.31   Annual trash day
 
   
53.99   Penalty
SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT
§ 53.01 SHORT TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known as the “Borough of Ford City Solid Waste
Ordinance.”
(Ord. 757, passed 12-11-2023)
§ 53.02 PURPOSE.
   (A)   It is the intent and purpose of this subchapter to promote the public
health, safety, and welfare and to eliminate public health hazards,
environmental pollution, and economic loss by providing that all residential,
commercial, industrial, and institutional municipal solid waste accumulated or
stored upon any property within the borough shall be collected, transported,
and disposed of within the following conditions.
      (1)   All residential properties shall be served by the borough’s
contracted hauler.
      (2)   All nonresidential properties not subject to the borough’s contract
shall have contracted waste service with a hauler.
      (3)   All municipal solid waste shall be disposed of at an approved
facility, in accordance with the County Solid Waste Management Plan, as well as
local, state, federal, and county laws and ordinances.
   (B)   This subchapter is enacted to assure borough compliance with the
Municipal Waste Act, being 53 P.S. §§ 4000.101 et seq.
(Ord. 757, passed 12-11-2023)
§ 53.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACT 97. The Solid Waste Management Act, 35 P.S. §§ 6018.101 et seq., as
amended.
   ACT 101. The Municipal Waste Planning, Recycling, and Waste Reduction Act of
1988, 53 P.S. §§ 4000.101 et seq., as amended.
   AGREEMENT. The contract between the borough and contractor for the
collection and disposal of municipal solid waste and/or the collection and
processing of recyclable materials.
   BOROUGH. The Borough of Ford City.
   BULKY WASTE. Large items of solid waste, including, but not limited to,
furniture and large auto parts, which may require special handling due to their
size, shape, or weight, but not including garbage, rubbish, construction
demolition waste, dead animals, electronic waste, hazardous waste, white waste,
stable matter, or yard waste.
   COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT. Properties used primarily for commercial,
religious, or industrial purposes.
   CONSTRUCTION DEMOLITION WASTE. All municipal and residential waste,
including without limitation building materials, grubbing waste, and rubble
resulting from construction, remodeling, repair, and demolition operations on
houses, commercial buildings, and other structures and pavements.
   CONTAINER. Containers provided or designated by the borough for the curbside
collection of municipal solid waste.
   CONTRACTED HAULER or HAULER. The person, corporation, or partnership
performing municipal solid waste collection and disposal and/or recyclable
materials collection and processing under contract with the borough.
   CURBSIDE COLLECTION. The collection of municipal solid waste and/or
recyclable materials from one containers and/or recycling containers placed at
the alley or curb which would be unobstructed and clearly visible to the
contractor. Collection from containers and/or recyclable containers more than
five feet from the curb is not included in this bid, nor is collection from
containers and/or recycling containers within five-foot areas that are hidden
or otherwise obstructed from view of the contractor. In areas where there is no
curb, CURBSIDE COLLECTION refers to the edge of the traveled roadway, so long
as the placement of containers and/or recycling containers does not impede
vehicular or pedestrian traffic or create hazards to vehicles or persons
traveling in this area.
   DEAD ANIMALS. Animals or portions thereof equal to or greater than ten
pounds in weight that have expired from any cause, except those slaughtered or
killed for human use.
   DISPOSAL SITE. A refuse depository, including, but not limited to, municipal
solid waste landfills, transfer stations, incinerators, and waste processing/
separation centers with all permits required by the laws of the federal
government and commonwealth for the processing or final disposal of all refuse
properly discarded under the state laws to receive for processing final
disposal of refuse and dead animals.
   ELECTRONIC WASTE or E-WASTE. All discarded electrical or electronic devices,
including without limitation computers, office electronic equipment,
entertainment device electronics, mobile phones, and television sets.
   GARBAGE. Any solid waste derived from animal, grain, fruit, or vegetable
matter that is capable of being decomposed by microorganisms with sufficient
rapidity to cause such nuisances as odors, gases, or vectors. GARBAGE shall not
include bulky waste, construction demolition waste, dead animals, rubbish,
electronic waste, hazardous waste, white waste, stable matter, or yard waste.
   HAZARDOUS WASTE. Any solid waste or combination of solid wastes, as defined
in Act 97, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical,
or infectious characteristics, may:
      (1)   Cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an
increase in morbidity in either an individual or the total population; or
      (2)   Pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or
the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or
otherwise managed.
   INSTITUTIONAL ESTABLISHMENT. Educational facilities, including, but not
limited to, schools and universities.
   MUNICIPAL ESTABLISHMENT. Public facilities operated by a municipality, a
municipal authority, or other governmental or quasi-governmental authority or
agency.
   MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE. Garbage, rubbish, residential refuse, lunchroom or
office waste, and other material, including solid, liquid, semisolid, or
contained gaseous material resulting from operation of residential units,
municipal establishments, commercial establishments, institutional
establishment, and community activities, and any sludge not meeting the
definition of residual or hazardous waste under Act 97 from a municipal,
commercial or institutional water supply treatment plant, wastewater treatment
plant, or air pollution control facility. This term does not include bulky
waste, recyclable materials, construction demolition waste, dead animals,
electronic waste, hazardous waste, white waste, stable matter, or yard waste.
   PRODUCER. An occupant of a residential unit who generates residential
refuse, commercial establishments, and institutional establishments.
   RECYCLABLE MATERIALS. Materials generated within the borough that can be
separated from municipal solid waste and returned to commerce to be reused as a
resource in the development of useful products, including without limitation:
clear class; colored glass; aluminum, steel, ferrous and bi-metal containers;
paper; and clear plastic (PET) and high density polyethylene (HDPE) plastic
containers, including milk, water, juice, and soda bottles.
   RECYCLING CONTAINERS. Containers provided or designated by the borough for
the curbside collection of recyclable materials.
   RESIDENTIAL REFUSE. All garbage and rubbish generated by a producer at a
residential unit.
   RESIDENTIAL UNIT. A dwelling within the corporate limits of the borough
occupied by a person or group of persons. A RESIDENTIAL UNIT shall be deemed
occupied when either water or domestic light and power services are being
supplied thereto. A condominium dwelling, whether of single or multilevel
construction, consisting of four or less contiguous or separate single-family
dwelling units, shall be treated as a RESIDENTIAL UNIT, except that each
single-family dwelling within any such RESIDENTIAL UNIT shall be billed
separately as a RESIDENTIAL UNIT.
   RUBBISH. All non-putrescible municipal solid waste except garbage and other
decomposable matter. This category includes, but is not limited to, waste wood,
wood products, tree trimmings, grass cuttings, dead plants, weeds, leaves, dead
trees or branches thereof, chips, shavings, sawdust, printed matter,
pasteboard, rags, straw, used clothing, used and discarded shoes and boots,
combustible waste pulp and other products such as are used for packaging or
wrapping, crockery and glass, ashes, cinders, floor sweepings, mineral or
metallic substances, and any and all other waste materials. RUBBISH shall not
include bulky waste, construction demolition waste, dead animals, electronic
waste, garbage, hazardous waste, white waste, stable matter, or yard waste.
   STABLE MATTER. All manure and other waste matter normally accumulated and
resulting from the keeping of animals such as, but not limited to, dogs and
cats.
   WHITE WASTE. All discarded appliances, including without limitation
refrigerators and water heaters.
   YARD WASTE. Leaves, grass clippings, garden residue, tree trimmings, chipped
shrubbery, and other vegetative material commonly found in or about the yard.
(Ord. 757, passed 12-11-2023)
§ 53.04 COLLECTION OF MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person other than persons defined herein to
collect and/or transport municipal solid waste which is generated within the
borough as a regular hauling business. The borough may decide to enter into an
exclusive contract for residential and/or commercial refuse collection or any
part thereof.
(Ord. 757, passed 12-11-2023) Penalty, see §
53.99
§ 53.05 CONTAINERS GENERALLY.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of every person owning a residential, commercial,
industrial, or institutional property within the borough where municipal solid
waste is generated and accumulated, by his/her own expense and cost, except as
otherwise specified in this subchapter, to provide and keep at all times a
sufficient number of containers to hold all municipal solid waste accumulated
between intervals of collection of such waste by a hauler; and to ensure the
sanitary and legal disposal of such waste in accordance with this subchapter
and all other borough, state, and federal applicable laws and regulations.
   (B)   It shall be the responsibility of each every person owning a
residential, commercial, industrial, or institutional property within the
borough to keep all refuse receptacles in good repair and sanitary condition.
Any receptacle which does not conform to the provisions of this subchapter or
that may have ragged or sharp edges or any other defect liable to hamper or
injure the hauler shall be promptly replaced upon notice. Failure to comply
within ten days will result in the removal of the defective receptacle as
refuse.
   (C)   No container shall be so filled that the lid will not fit tightly.
(Ord. 757, passed 12-11-2023) Penalty, see §
53.99
§ 53.06 STORAGE ON RESIDENTIAL PROPERTIES.
   (A)   Containers. All municipal solid waste accumulated by owners of
residential properties and/or the occupants of residential properties shall be
placed in containers for collection by a hauler. Containers used for curbside
collection shall be watertight, covered plastic or metallic cans that can be
easily and quickly handled by one person. Refuse containers shall be not less
than five gallons nor more than 65 gallons in capacity. The weight of a single
filled container shall not exceed 50 pounds.
   (B)   Location of containers. For residential properties with curbside
collection, each container shall be placed for collection so as to be
accessible to the hauler at ground level and at a point immediately behind the
curbline of the street, within no more than ten feet of the cartway of the
street or alley from which the collection with a vehicle is made if there is no
curbing, or at a location mutually agreeable between the resident, the borough,
and the hauler. Failure to place containers at such locations may result in
refuse not being collected.
   (C)   Removal of containers after collection. All containers shall be
removed from the curb or street within 24 hours after collection. Failure to
remove containers from the curb or street in accordance with this section shall
constitute a violation of this subchapter, subject to the penalties contained
herein.
   (D)   Disabilities. Persons with physical disabilities (as defined in the
Americans with Disabilities Act, being 42 U.S.C. §§ 12101 et seq.) whose
residence is included under the borough’s hauler contract may place refuse at
other-than-street or alley locations at no additional charge when approved by
the borough and its hauler.
(Ord. 757, passed 12-11-2023) Penalty, see §
53.99
§ 53.07 STORAGE ON COMMERCIAL, INDUSTRIAL, AND INSTITUTIONAL PROPERTIES.
   (A)   Containers. Storage of municipal solid waste on commercial,
industrial, and institutional properties shall be done in a dumpster for
collection by a hauler. If the amount of waste generated per week is less than
a two-yard dumpster the same type of containers as required for residential
properties as defined in § 51.19 shall be allowed if agreed upon by the
borough, customer, and the hauler.
   (B)   Location of containers. Dumpsters for the storage and collection of
municipal solid waste at commercial, industrial, or institutional properties
shall be placed, whenever possible, at ground level and at a point on the
property being serviced by the hauler which will enable clear and easy access
to the dumpster by the hauler’s vehicle. This location, if required, shall be
in compliance with the borough’s zoning ordinance or other applicable
regulations for the location of such containers. Such locations shall not
interfere with travel upon public or private sidewalks, walkways, driveways,
roads, streets, highways, alleys, or entrances and exits of public or private
buildings.
(Ord. 757, passed 12-11-2023) Penalty, see §
53.99
§ 53.08 TRANSPORTATION AND DISPOSAL OF MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE.
   (A)   Any person transporting municipal solid waste within the borough shall
prevent or remedy any spillage from vehicles or containers used in the
transport of such municipal solid waste. The haulers shall collect municipal
solid waste in vehicles which are suitable for such collection, which are
dedicated for use in performance of such collection, and which bear prominent
legible marking, signs, or decals identifying them as being municipal solid
waste collection vehicles, and stating the name of the hauler. The vehicles
shall be securely covered, watertight, strongly built, and kept thoroughly
cleaned and well maintained.
   (B)   The borough, or its designated agent, shall have the authority to
inspect the vehicles used for the transport of municipal solid waste as it
deems necessary to determine compliance with this subchapter. The hauler shall
correct deficiencies immediately upon notification by the borough or its
designated agent, and said vehicle shall not be used for refuse collection
until the deficiencies have been corrected.
   (C)   All municipal solid waste produced, collected, and transported from
within the jurisdictional limits of the borough shall be disposed of at the
facilities designated in the County Solid Waste Management Plan.
(Ord. 757, passed 12-11-2023) Penalty, see §
53.99
§ 53.09 UNLAWFUL DISPOSITION OF MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to bring any municipal solid waste into
the borough or to transport municipal solid waste from one address to another
within or outside of the borough for the purpose of taking advantage of the
collection service to avoid the cost of collection.
(Ord. 757, passed 12-11-2023) Penalty, see §
53.99
§ 53.10 BULK WASTE.
   (A)   Bulk waste shall be disposed of in accordance with the Armstrong
County Solid Waste Management Plan at a permitted disposal facility, a facility
designated by the borough to take such bulk items, or a legitimate salvage
dealer that is in the business of disposing or recycling such items. Bulk waste
may be transported in a vehicle appropriate to the type of waste so as to
prevent spillage, accidental loss, and the like.
   (B)   Nothing contained herein shall be deemed to prohibit any person not
regularly engaged in the business of collecting municipal solid waste from
hauling his or her bulk waste to a permitted disposal facility or to a disposal
facility as designated by the borough in accordance with the regulations of the
disposal facility.
(Ord. 757, passed 12-11-2023) Penalty, see §
53.99
§ 53.11 CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION WASTE.
   All waste materials resulting from the building, structural alteration,
repair, construction, or demolition of buildings or structures shall be
disposed of as permitted by applicable borough, county, state, and federal laws
and regulations as may be in effect or as may be subsequently imposed. It shall
be the responsibility of the property owner to ensure the disposal of such
waste in accordance with applicable laws and regulations. Nothing contained
herein shall be deemed to prohibit any person not regularly engaged in the
business of collecting municipal solid waste from hauling his or her
construction and demolition waste to a state permitted disposal facility or to
a disposal facility as designated by the borough in accordance with the
regulations of the disposal facility.
(Ord. 757, passed 12-11-2023) Penalty, see §
53.99
§ 53.12 ACCUMULATION OF WASTE PROHIBITED.
   For reasons of health and sanitation, it shall be unlawful for any person to
accumulate or permit to accumulate upon private property in the borough, any of
the types of wastes defined under §
53.03.
(Ord. 757, passed 12-11-2023) Penalty, see §
53.99
§ 53.13 SERVICE FEE AND CHARGES.
   (A)   It shall be the duty and responsibility of every owner of property and
every person occupying a dwelling unit, premises or place of business within
the borough where municipal solid waste is generated to pay a service fee for
the collection and disposal of this waste, except as otherwise provided by this
subchapter, to a hauler, or to the borough. A hauler or the borough may
discontinue service for nonpayment of service fees by a residential,
commercial, industrial, or institutional establishment. To discontinue
residential service, the customer shall be in arrears a minimum of 90 days and
shall have received during this period a minimum of two written notices from
the borough regarding the amount due and procedures for payment. The second
notice shall be sent by certified mail. At the time of the discontinuance of
service, the customer shall be considered in violation of this subchapter.
Discontinuance of service due to nonpayment of service fees shall not relieve
the resident or establishment from abiding by all of the requirements of this
subchapter. The borough, or its designated agent, hauler, or exclusive
contractor may impose an administrative fee to reinstate customers whose
service is disconnected.
   (B)   The cost of municipal solid waste collection service, and the
responsibility of payment therefore, shall be borne by the owner of the
premises from which said municipal solid waste is collected or upon which
premises said municipal solid waste is generated and disposed of. No agreement
between an owner and occupant or other person shall relieve the owner of any
premises from liability for payments as set forth hereinafter.
   (C)   All service fees established for the collection of municipal solid
waste by the borough shall be established by a resolution of Borough Council.
Service charges so established shall be reviewed at least annually and adjusted
as necessary to ensure that all costs involved in the collection and disposal
of municipal solid waste, including the administrative costs of the borough, or
its designated agent, are covered by the service charges.
(Ord. 757, passed 12-11-2023)
MUNICIPAL GARBAGE COLLECTION SERVICE
§ 53.25 FINDING.
   The Council of the borough hereby makes a finding that all residential water
service customers of the borough are users of the garbage collection service
provided by the borough, and vice-versa.
(Prior Code, § 953.01) (Ord. 541, passed 12-28-1981)
§ 53.26 USE OF SERVICE REQUIRED.
   (A)   All residents and businesses of the borough must use the garbage
collection service provided by the borough to collect and dispose of garbage
originating from their residences or places of business.
   (B)   The borough shall be the only garbage collection service in and for
the borough unless it grants a permit or approves a contract to other garbage
collection services.
   (C)   No person, resident, or business may collect garbage in the borough
without a borough permit or approved contract.
(Prior Code, § 953.02) (Ord. 541, passed 12-28-1981; Ord. 591, passed 6-20-
1989) Penalty, see §
53.99
§ 53.27 WRITTEN APPLICATION REQUIRED.
   After the effective date of this subchapter, all new residents or residents
who change their place of residence shall make written application for garbage
collection service on application forms provided by the borough.
(Prior Code, § 953.03) (Ord. 541, passed 12-28-1981)
§ 53.28 APPLICATION SIGNATURES.
   (A)   The application form shall be signed by the owners of the residential
premises to be serviced, where the owner is to be the occupier of the
residential premises.
   (B)   The application form shall be signed by the owner of the residential
premises to be serviced, where the residential premises are to be occupied by a
tenant and when the garbage collection service statement is to be mailed to the
owner.
   (C)   The application form shall be signed by the owner of the residential
premises to be serviced and by the tenant, where the residential premises are
to be occupied by a tenant, and when the garbage collection service statement
is to be mailed to the tenant.
(Prior Code, § 953.04) (Ord. 541, passed 12-28-1981)
§ 53.29 USAGE.
   As used in this subchapter, the singular shall include the plural.
(Prior Code, § 953.05) (Ord. 541, passed 12-28-1981)
§ 53.30 MONTHLY GARBAGE COLLECTION FEE.
   (A)   Fee levied.
      (1)   There is hereby established and levied upon all users of the
garbage collection service provided by the borough a monthly garbage collection
fee as established by resolution of the Borough Council from time to time and
monthly landfill closure cost fee as established by resolution of the Borough
Council from time to time, effective on passage.
      (2)   This division (A) shall become effective on the billing cycle due
January 1, 2011.
   (B)   Applicability. Effective February 17, 1985, this section and the
monthly fee shall apply to each individual resident or residents maintaining a
separate dwelling unit, apartment, or individual unit consisting of a separate
customer.
   (C)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      APARTMENT. Each division of any dwelling house or building, whether
single or double, that is occupied by different families or family units or
tenants as a separate dwelling unit.
      CUSTOMER. Any individual person or family group or any commercial,
business, professional, government or fraternal organization occupying a
dwelling unit or other unit receiving water or sewage service.
      DWELLING UNIT. Any building or division of such building or apartment in
such building which is used for human habitation by a separate family group or
by separate individuals.
   (D)   Pickup limitations.
      (1)   Each customer for garbage collection service as defined in division
(C) above shall be limited to four bags or items of garbage per pick-up.
Additional bags or items of garbage in excess of four will be picked up at each
collection only if the bags have visibly attached garbage tags which may be
purchased from the borough.
      (2)   No bag or item of garbage shall be picked up at each collection if
it weighs in excess of what one person can lift.
(Prior Code, § 953.06) (Ord. 541, passed 12-28-1981; Ord. 546, passed 5-9-1983;
Ord. 555, passed 1-17-1985; Ord. 576, passed 12-15-1987; Ord. 580, passed 5-17-
1988; Ord. 587, passed 1-4-1989; Ord. 597, passed 5-15-1990; Ord. 602, passed
12-7-1990; Ord. 613, passed 12-30-1991; Ord. 641, passed 1-15-2002; Ord. 649,
passed 12-9-2002; Ord. 654, passed 11- -2003; Ord. 662, passed 12-29-2005; Ord.
676, passed 5-19-2008; Ord. 693, passed 12-29-2010)
§ 53.31 ANNUAL TRASH DAY.
   The borough shall conduct an annual trash day each year. Rules governing the
collection process shall be promulgated from time to time by Borough Council
regulation.
(Prior Code, § 953.08) (Ord. 676, passed 5-19-2008)
§ 53.99 PENALTY.
   Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this code
of ordinances or fails to comply therewith or with any of the requirements
thereof, upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a Magisterial
District Judge in the manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses
under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a
fine of not less than $100, nor more than $1,000, plus costs, including
reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred by the borough and, in default of payment
of said fines and costs, to a term of imprisonment to the extent permitted by
law for the punishment of summary offenses. A separate offense shall arise for
each day or portion thereof in which a violation of this code of ordinances is
found to exist or for each section of this code of ordinances found to have
been violated. The borough may also commence appropriate actions in equity to
prevent, restrain, correct, enjoin or abate violations of this code of
ordinances. All fines and penalties collected for violation of this code of
ordinances shall be paid to the borough.
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   GENERAL TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
      
71.   STREETS AND TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES
      
72.   VEHICLES
      
73.   PARKING
      
74.   PARKING AND TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
CHAPTER 70: GENERAL TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
70.01   Definitions
Enforcement
   
70.15   Responsibility of Code Enforcement Officer, police, and firefighters
   
70.16   Temporary regulations
   
70.17   Obedience to police officers
   
70.18   Persons affected; compliance required
   
70.19   Emergency vehicles
   
70.20   Application to persons riding, driving animals, pushcarts, bicycles
   
70.21   Procedure upon arrest
   
70.22   Disposition and use of fines
 
   
70.99   Penalty for Title VII
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 70.01 DEFINITIONS.
   The terms used in this Traffic Code shall have the meanings respectively
ascribed to them in the Vehicle Code of Pennsylvania, being 75 Pa.C.S. §§ 101
et seq., P.L. 162, § 1, as amended. In addition thereto, until otherwise
defined by Acts of Assembly, the following terms shall be defined as set forth
in this section.
   AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES. Vehicles of the Police Department or
Volunteer Fire Department and such ambulances and emergency vehicles of
municipal departments or public service corporations as are designated or
authorized by the Chief of Police.
   CURB. The boundaries of a street.
   DRIVER. Means and includes the rider or driver of animals, the rider of
bicycles, and the operator of vehicles.
   OFFICIAL TRAFFIC SIGN. All signs, markings, and lines not inconsistent with
this Traffic Code, painted, placed, or erected by authority of a public body or
officials having jurisdiction for the purpose of guiding, directing, warning,
or regulating traffic.   
   PARKED VEHICLE. A waiting vehicle and waiting vehicles drawn up alongside of
one another not parallel to the curb.   
   POLICE OFFICERS. Every officer or member of the Police Department, or any
officer authorized to regulate or direct traffic or to make arrests for
violations of traffic regulations.
   SIDEWALK. The portion of a street, alley, or road between the curb lines and
the adjacent property lines.
   STREET. The part of a public highway intended for vehicles.
   VEHICLE CODE or VEHICLE CODE OF PENNSYLVANIA. The Act of Assembly of April
29, 1959, P.L. No. 58, as amended.
(Prior Code, § 501.01) (Ord. 74, passed 6-5-1917; Ord. 232, passed 8-21-1945)
ENFORCEMENT
§ 70.15 RESPONSIBILITY OF CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER, POLICE, AND FIREFIGHTERS.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the Code Enforcement Officer and police
officers to enforce the provisions of this Traffic Code.
   (B)   Police officers are hereby authorized to direct all traffic either in
person or by means of visible or audible signals in conformity with the
provisions of this Traffic Code, provided, that in the event of a fire or other
emergency or to expedite traffic or safeguard pedestrians, police officers and
the officers and police patrol of the Volunteer Fire Department may direct
traffic, as conditions may require, notwithstanding the provisions of this
Traffic Code.
(Prior Code, § 503.01) (Ord. 232, passed 8-21-1945)
§ 70.16 TEMPORARY REGULATIONS.
   The Code Enforcement Officer is hereby authorized to make and enforce any
temporary regulations that may be necessary to make effective the provisions of
this Traffic Code under special conditions or in cases of emergency.
(Prior Code, § 503.02) (Ord. 232, passed 8-21-1945)
§ 70.17 OBEDIENCE TO POLICE OFFICERS.
   No person shall refuse or otherwise fail to comply with any lawful order,
signal, or direction of a police officer.
(Prior Code, § 503.03) (Ord. 232, passed 8-21-1945) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.18 PERSONS AFFECTED; COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.
   The provisions of this Traffic Code shall apply to public employees as well
as to private individuals, and no operator of any vehicle shall violate any of
the provisions of this Traffic Code, except as otherwise permitted herein.
(Prior Code, § 503.04) (Ord. 232, passed 8-21-1945) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.19 EMERGENCY VEHICLES.
   The provisions of this Traffic Code regulating the movement, parking, and
standing of vehicles shall not apply to authorized emergency vehicles while the
driver of such vehicle is operating the same in an emergency in the necessary
performance of public duties. The exemption shall not, however, protect the
driver of any such vehicle for the consequences of a disregard of the safety of
others.
(Prior Code, § 503.05) (Ord. 232, passed 8-21-1945)
§ 70.20 APPLICATION TO PERSONS RIDING, DRIVING ANIMALS, PUSHCARTS, BICYCLES.
   Every person propelling any pushcart or riding a bicycle or an animal upon a
roadway, and every person driving any animal shall be subject to the provisions
of this Traffic Code the same as the operator of any vehicle, except those
provisions which by their very nature can have no application.
(Prior Code, § 503.06) (Ord. 232, passed 8-21-1945)
§ 70.21 PROCEDURE UPON ARREST.
   Whenever any person is arrested for a violation of any of the provisions of
this Traffic Code, such person may be tried summarily, or the procedure shall
be as provided by the Vehicle Code of the state, being 75 Pa.C.S. §§ 101 et
seq.
(Prior Code, § 503.07) (Ord. 232, passed 8-21-1945)
§ 70.22 DISPOSITION AND USE OF FINES.
   All fines and penalties collected under the provisions of this Traffic Code,
being 75 Pa.C.S. §§ 101 et seq., except for prosecutions instituted under the
Vehicle Code of the state, shall be paid into the Borough Treasury and, unless
otherwise directed by state law, shall be used for the construction, repair,
and maintenance of the streets and highways of the borough.
(Prior Code, § 503.08) (Ord. 232, passed 8-21-1945)
§ 70.99 PENALTY FOR TITLE VII.
   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this Traffic Code, or any rules or
regulations made pursuant thereto, shall be fined not more than $50 or as may
be stipulated by the Vehicle Code of the state, being 75 Pa.C.S. §§ 101 et
seq., and, in default of the payment thereof, may be imprisoned in the County
Jail for not more than ten days.
(Prior Code, § 503.99)
CHAPTER 71: STREETS AND TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES
Section
Street Obstructions and Special Uses
   
71.01   Interference with use of public ways
   
71.02   Depositing glass, refuse, and the like upon public ways
   
71.03   Through streets
   
71.04   Play streets
   
71.05   Temporary use restrictions
   
71.06   Toy vehicles upon roadway
Traffic Control Devices
   
71.20   Placement, purchase, and maintenance
   
71.21   Compliance; driving to right of signs
   
71.22   Crosswalks; turning at intersections
Interference with Snow Removal
   
71.35   Definitions
   
71.36   Manner of parking prohibited
   
71.37   Notice; failure to remove
   
71.38   Duty of owner or occupant
   
71.39   Placement of snow on streets prohibited
   
71.40   Effective dates
 
   
71.99   Penalty
STREET OBSTRUCTIONS AND SPECIAL USES
§ 71.01 INTERFERENCE WITH USE OF PUBLIC WAYS.
   The public streets and highways of the borough are hereby declared to be for
the common use of the traveling public except insofar as the same may be
restricted herein or by other proper municipal action. No person shall place or
cause to be placed any obstruction above, upon, or under any public street or
highway, except with the consent of Council and subject to such conditions as
Council may impose, and then at the risk and responsibility of such person.
(Prior Code, § 511.01) (Ord. 74, passed 6-5-1917) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.02 DEPOSITING GLASS, REFUSE, AND THE LIKE UPON PUBLIC WAYS.
   No person shall place or throw, or cause or permit to be placed or thrown,
any glass, metal, refuse, or other substances or materials upon any street or
highway.
(Prior Code, § 511.02) (Ord. 74, passed 6-5-1917) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.03 THROUGH STREETS.
   In the interest of public safety and convenience, Council shall from time to
time, by resolution, establish or abolish through streets or highways, and when
so established, the following additional regulations shall apply.
   (A)   Every operator of a vehicle or conveyance traveling upon any street or
highway intersecting any through street or highway thus designated shall bring
such vehicle or other conveyance to a full stop at the place where such street
or highway intersects, subject, however, to the direction of any traffic
control sign or signal or any police officer at such intersection.
   (B)   The operator of any vehicle who has come to a full stop as required
above, upon entering the through street or highway, as well as the operators of
vehicles on such through streets or highways, shall be subject to the usual
right-of-way rules prescribed by law and applicable to vehicles at
intersections.
   (C)   Council may, by resolution from time to time, direct the placing and
maintaining at any street or highway intersecting a through street or highway,
at or near the property line of the through street or highway such appropriate
signs, devices, or marks in the roadway bearing the words “thru traffic stop”
in letters at least six inches in height. All such signs shall be illuminated
at night or so placed as to be illuminated by street lights or by the
headlights of approaching motor vehicles.
(Prior Code, § 511.03) (Ord. 232, passed 8-21-1945) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.04 PLAY STREETS.
   Council may, by resolution from time to time, designate any street or
highway or part of a street or highway under its jurisdiction a “play street”
or “play highway” and may close such designated street or highway to general
traffic where interference to traffic will not be serious. Such streets or
highways, or portions of streets or highways, shall be used for play purposes
and shall be clearly designated by appropriate signs, specifying the hours
between which such streets or highways shall be closed to general traffic.   
(Prior Code, § 511.05) (Ord. 232, passed 8-21-1945)
§ 71.05 TEMPORARY USE RESTRICTIONS.
   Council may, by resolution from time to time, prohibit the operation of
vehicles upon any street or highway within its jurisdiction, or impose
restrictions as to the kinds of vehicles and the weight of vehicles and their
loads, for a total period not to exceed 90 days in any one calendar year,
whenever any such street or highway, by reason of improvement or repairs,
deterioration, rain, snow, or other climatic conditions, will be seriously
damaged or destroyed unless the use of vehicles thereon is prohibited or the
permissible weights reduced. However, appropriate signs shall be erected and
maintained designating the provisions of the ordinance, resolution, or rule, at
each end of that portion of any street or highway affected thereby.
(Prior Code, § 511.06) (Ord. 232, passed 8-21-1945)
§ 71.06 TOY VEHICLES UPON ROADWAY.
   No person upon roller skates or riding in or by means of any coaster, toy
vehicle, or similar device shall go upon any roadway except while crossing a
street on a crosswalk.
(Prior Code, § 511.07) (Ord. 232, passed 8-21-1945) Penalty, see §
71.99
TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES
§ 71.20 PLACEMENT, PURCHASE, AND MAINTENANCE.
   Council shall, by resolution, determine and designate the character or type
of all traffic signs and signals and purchase the same when necessary, and all
signs and signals required hereunder for a particular purpose so far as
practicable shall be uniform as to type and location throughout the borough.
Subject to this provision, it shall be the duty of the Public Works Director,
Borough Manager and/or their designee, and he or she is hereby authorized and
required to, place and maintain or cause to be placed and maintained all
traffic signs and signals herein required.
(Prior Code, § 513.01) (Ord. 232, passed 8-21-1945)
§ 71.21 COMPLIANCE; DRIVING TO RIGHT OF SIGNS.
   (A)   No operator shall disobey the instructions of any official traffic
sign or signal placed in accordance with the provisions of this subchapter
unless otherwise directed by a police officer.   
   (B)   Whenever and wherever there is placed in or upon the streets, alleys,
and highways of the borough, any monument, sign, post, dummy, or other marker,
indicating or directing that the users of such public way, when traveling
thereon, or in making any turn into or upon an intersecting highway, shall keep
to the right of such monument, sign, post dummy, or other marker, it shall be
the duty of the user of such highway to observe such directions, and it shall
be unlawful for any user of such highways to pass any such marker on the left
hand side thereof.
(Prior Code, § 513.02) (Ord. 191, passed 3-5-1935; Ord. 232, passed 8-21-1945)
Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.22 CROSSWALKS; TURNING AT INTERSECTIONS.
   Council may, by resolution from time to time, establish, designate, and
maintain or cause to be maintained by appropriate devices, marks or lines upon
the surface of the roadway, crosswalks, or intersections where there is
particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway, and may, by resolution
from time to time, regulate or prohibit turning at intersections and cause
proper signs to be erected and maintained giving notice of such regulations. It
shall be the duty of the Code Enforcement Officer to enforce such regulations
and prohibitions.
(Prior Code, § 513.03) (Ord. 232, passed 8-21-1945)
INTERFERENCE WITH SNOW REMOVAL
§ 71.35 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   INDIVIDUAL. Any person, persons, partnership, firm, company, corporation or
other association.
   NOTICE. For purposes of authorizing the removing of a vehicle by an
authorized agent of the Borough, shall mean the placing by a borough employee
of a written notice upon the vehicle.
   NUISANCE. For purposes of this subchapter, shall include, but is not limited
to, the parking or leaving standing any vehicle upon any street of the borough
in such a way or at a time so as to prevent or interfere with the removal or
plowing of snow, the piling of snow upon the paved portion of the streets of
said borough, and the failure to remove snow and sleet from the sidewalks of
said borough.
   STREET. Includes alleys, avenues, boulevards, lanes, roads, streets, and
other public ways in the borough.
(Prior Code, § 515.01) (Ord. 633, passed 3-3-1997)
§ 71.36 MANNER OF PARKING PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any individual to park or leave standing any
vehicle upon any street of the borough in such a way or at such a time that
will prevent or interfere with the removal or plowing of snow.
(Prior Code, § 515.02) (Ord. 633, passed 3-3-1997) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.37 NOTICE; FAILURE TO REMOVE.
   Any vehicle upon which proper notice has been placed and which has not been
removed by the owner thereof within 12 hours of said posting of notice may be
removed by authorized agent of the borough, and all charges incurred in such
removal, including, but not limited to, towing of said vehicle and storage
thereof, shall be paid by the owner of said vehicle. Said vehicle shall be
deemed a safety hazard under Act No. 81, Motor Vehicle Code of the state, §
3352, subsections (a) and (b), being 75 Pa.C.S. § 3352(a) and (b).
(Prior Code, § 515.03) (Ord. 633, passed 3-3-1997)
§ 71.38 DUTY OF OWNER OR OCCUPANT.
   No owner or occupant of any lot or part of a lot within the borough shall
fail, within six hours after any fall or deposit of snow and sleet, to remove
the same from the pavements and sidewalks fronting the premises respectively
owned or occupied by him or her.
(Prior Code, § 515.04) (Ord. 633, passed 3-3-1997) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.39 PLACEMENT OF SNOW ON STREETS PROHIBITED.
   The streets of the borough are hereby declared to be for the common use of
the traveling public. No individual shall shovel, place, throw, or by the use
of any other means cause snow to be piled upon the paved portion of the streets
of the borough.
(Prior Code, § 515.05) (Ord. 633, passed 3-3-1997) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.40 EFFECTIVE DATES.
   This subchapter shall be effective from November 15 to the following April
30, inclusive, of each calendar year.
(Prior Code, § 515.06) (Ord. 633, passed 3-3-1997)
§ 71.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
70.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any individual violating the provisions of §§
71.35 through
71.40, or aiding, abetting, or assisting therein, shall, upon conviction
thereof, before any District Magistrate in the county, be subject to a fine of
not less than $25 nor more than $600, together with costs of prosecution, which
fine shall be paid to the Borough Treasurer for the use of the borough, and in
default of payment of said fine and costs, shall be sentenced to undergo
imprisonment in the County Jail for not less than one day nor more than ten
days. Each day a vehicle shall remain parked or left standing in violation of
§§
71.35 through
71.40 shall constitute a separate violation.
(Prior Code, § 515.99) (Ord. 633, passed 3-3-1997)
CHAPTER 72: VEHICLES
Section
General Provisions
   
72.01   Speed regulations
   
72.02   Motorcycles
Operation Generally
   
72.15   U-turns
   
72.16   Backing
   
72.17   Emerging from alleys, buildings
   
72.18   Driving on sidewalk areas
   
72.19   Driving through processions
   
72.20   Displaying advertisements
Safety and Equipment
   
72.35   Driving unsafe vehicles
   
72.36   Noisy loads
   
72.37   Loose, shifting loads
   
72.38   Unattended motor vehicles
   
72.39   Unauthorized riders
   
72.40   Dense exhaust fumes
 
   
72.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 72.01 SPEED REGULATIONS.
   No person shall operate a vehicle upon the streets or highways of the
borough at a speed greater than that established by the Vehicle Code of the
state, being 75 Pa.C.S. §§ 101 et seq.
(Prior Code, § 523.01) (Ord. 74, passed 6-5-1917) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.02 MOTORCYCLES.
   No operator of any motorcycle shall carry any other person upon the
handlebars, frame, or tank of such vehicle, and no person shall so ride upon
any such vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 531.01) (Ord. 232, passed 8-21-1945) Penalty, see §
72.99
OPERATION GENERALLY
§ 72.15 U-TURNS.
   No operator of any vehicle shall make a U-turn or turn such vehicle as to
proceed in the opposite direction on the avenues, streets, or alleys of the
borough.
(Prior Code, § 521.01) (Ord. 477, passed 5-1-1972) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.16 BACKING.
   (A)   No operator of a vehicle shall back the same unless such movement can
be made in safety.
   (B)   No operator shall back a vehicle to make a turn if it obstructs
traffic, but shall go around the block or to a street wide and clear enough for
the purpose.
(Prior Code, § 521.02) (Ord. 74, passed 6-5-1917; Ord. 232, passed 8-21-1945)
Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.17 EMERGING FROM ALLEYS, BUILDINGS.
   The operator of a vehicle emerging from an alley, driveway, or building
shall stop such vehicle prior to driving onto a sidewalk or onto the sidewalk
area extending across an alleyway.
(Prior Code, § 521.03) (Ord. 232, passed 8-21-1945) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.18 DRIVING ON SIDEWALK AREAS.
   No operator of a vehicle shall drive within any sidewalk area except where
the same is used as a permanent or temporary driveway.
(Prior Code, § 521.04) (Ord. 232, passed 8-21-1945) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.19 DRIVING THROUGH PROCESSIONS.
   No operator of any vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a
funeral or any authorized procession while such procession is conspicuously so
designated. This provision shall not apply at intersections where traffic is
controlled by traffic control signals or police officers.   
(Prior Code, § 521.05) (Ord. 232, passed 8-21-1945) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.20 DISPLAYING ADVERTISEMENTS.
   No person shall operate any vehicle on any street or highway for the primary
purpose of displaying advertisements unless a special permit is granted
therefor by the Borough Manager and/or his or her deisgnee.
(Prior Code, § 521.06) (Ord. 232, passed 8-21-1945) Penalty, see §
72.99
SAFETY AND EQUIPMENT
§ 72.35 DRIVING UNSAFE VEHICLES.
   No person shall drive a vehicle which is in such condition or so constructed
or loaded as to be likely to cause delay in traffic or accident or injury to
human, beast, or property.
(Prior Code, § 525.01) (Ord. 232, passed 8-21-1945) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.36 NOISY LOADS.
   No person shall load a vehicle with iron or other material that may strike
together, or drive a vehicle so loaded, without such material being properly
“deafened” so as to prevent unnecessary noise.
(Prior Code, § 525.02) (Ord. 232, passed 8-21-1945) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.37 LOOSE, SHIFTING LOADS.
   No person shall load a vehicle with sand, gravel, lime, manure, dirt,
shavings, sawdust, or other loose, sifting materials, or drive a vehicle so
loaded unless such vehicle is equipped with an absolutely tight box or other
receptacle into which such material is loaded, and no part of any such load
shall be higher than the sides and ends of the box or receptacle into which
such material is loaded.
(Prior Code, § 525.03) (Ord. 232, passed 8-21-1945) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.38 UNATTENDED MOTOR VEHICLES.
   A motor vehicle left standing without its operator in charge thereof shall
be efficiently locked, its emergency brake set, and its engine shut off.
(Prior Code, § 525.04) (Ord. 74, passed 6-5-1917) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.39 UNAUTHORIZED RIDERS.
   No person shall ride upon any vehicle without the driver’s consent nor with
any part of his or her body protruding therefrom.
(Prior Code, § 525.05) (Ord. 74, passed 6-5-1917) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.40 DENSE EXHAUST FUMES.
   No person shall operate any vehicle which, by its operation, emits dense
smoke from its exhaust pipe or from any other part of such vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 525.06) (Ord. 74, passed 6-5-1917) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
70.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Whoever violates §
72.15 shall be fined not more than $1,000.
(Prior Code, § 521.99) (Ord. 477, passed 5-1-1972; Ord. 592, passed 7-18-1989)
CHAPTER 73: PARKING
Section
Parking Generally
   
73.01   Prohibited standing or parking places
   
73.02   Bus stops and taxicab stands
   
73.03   Parking without license plates
   
73.04   Vehicles exceeding 23 feet
   
73.05   Fire zones
   
73.06   Parallel parking required; exceptions
   
73.07   Angle parking
   
73.08   Displaying vehicle for sale or rent
   
73.09   Obstruction of crosswalks
   
73.10   Obstruction of traffic
   
73.11   Priority of vehicles picking up or discharging passengers
Parking Meters
   
73.25   Meter zones and fees
   
73.26   Installation and performance of meters
   
73.27   Use of meters
   
73.28   Parking within lines or markings
   
73.29   Use of slugs and the like
   
73.30   Tampering with meters
   
73.31   Further violation
   
73.32   Rates
PARKING GENERALLY
§ 73.01 PROHIBITED STANDING OR PARKING PLACES.
   No person shall stop, stand, or park any vehicle in any of the following
places, except when necessary to avoid a conflict with other traffic or in
compliance with the direction of a police officer:
   (A)   Within an intersection;
   (B)   On a crosswalk;
   (C)   On a sidewalk;
   (D)   Alongside another vehicle, or “double-parked;”
   (E)   With the left side to the curb;
   (F)   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when such
stopping, standing, or parking would obstruct traffic;
   (G)   In front of any entrance to any public hall, theater, or church, or
any place of like nature, while the same is being occupied, except to take on
or discharge passengers;
   (H)   At any place where no-parking signs appear;
   (I)   Any other place where parking is prohibited by the Vehicle Code of the
state, being 75 Pa.C.S. §§ 101 et seq.; or
   (J)   Within ten feet of a fire hydrant.
(Prior Code, § 551.01) (Ord. 74, passed 6-5-1917; Ord. 232, passed 8-21-1945)
Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 73.02 BUS STOPS AND TAXICAB STANDS.
   (A)   Council may, by resolution, establish bus stops and taxicab stands on
such public streets and highways, in such places and in such numbers as it
determines to be of the greatest convenience to the public, and every bus stop
and taxicab stand shall be designated by appropriate signs.
   (B)   No person shall stand or park any vehicle other than a bus in any
officially designated bus stop, and no person shall stand or park any vehicle
other than a taxicab in any officially designated taxicab stand, except that
the operator of any passenger vehicle may temporarily stop in such stop or
stand for the purpose of and while actually engaged in the loading or unloading
of passengers.
   (C)   No operator of any bus or taxicab shall stand or park such bus or
taxicab upon any street or highway in any business district at any place other
than at a bus stop or taxicab stand, respectively, except that this provision
shall not prevent the operator of any such vehicle from temporarily stopping
such vehicle in accordance with other parking regulations at any place for the
purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers.
(Prior Code, § 551.02) (Ord. 232, passed 8-21-1945) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 73.03 PARKING WITHOUT LICENSE PLATES.
   No person shall park on any street or highway any vehicle which does not
have displayed thereon a proper license plate or plates.
(Prior Code, § 551.03) (Ord. 232, passed 8-21-1945) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 73.04 VEHICLES EXCEEDING 23 FEET.
   No person shall park any vehicle exceeding 23 feet in length within the
Business District or the area bounded by Third Avenue and Fifth Avenue, and by
Eighth Street and Tenth Street, inclusive. However, this provision shall not
prevent the operator of any such vehicle from stopping to actually load or
unload or from temporarily waiting to be serviced at a service station.
(Prior Code, § 551.04) (Ord. 232, passed 8-21-1945) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 73.05 FIRE ZONES.
   During a fire of a building or any alarm of fire, the particular section or
block of the street or streets in which the same is situated shall be a fire
zone, and no motor vehicle shall be operated or parked in such zones during the
progress of the fire or emergency.
(Prior Code, § 551.05) (Ord. 232, passed 8-21-1945) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 73.06 PARALLEL PARKING REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS.
   Except when necessary in obedience to traffic regulations or traffic signs
or signals, no operator of any vehicle shall park, stand, or stop such vehicle
in a street or highway other than parallel with the edge of the street or
highway headed in the direction of traffic, and with the curb side wheels of
the vehicle on the street or highway and within six inches of the edge of the
street or highway, except as provided in the following:
   (A)   Upon those streets or highways which have been marked or assigned for
angle parking, vehicles shall be parked at an angle to the curb indicated by
such marks or signs;
   (B)   Vehicles may stand backed up to the curb while actually loading or
unloading, and in such case no part of such vehicles shall extend towards the
center of the street more than 14 feet from the curb line. However, the
operator of such vehicle shall first obtain permission from the Code
Enforcement Officer or the Chief of Police; and/or
   (C)   (1)   Whenever it appears necessary to the owner or operator of a
motor or other vehicle to protect life or property, he or she may park such
vehicle by driving over the curb on the right-hand side of any street or
highway.
      (2)   However, he or she shall be liable for any property damage caused
by his or her parking over the curb.
(Prior Code, § 551.06) (Ord. 303, passed 1-18-1954) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 73.07 ANGLE PARKING.
   (A)   Council shall determine upon what streets or highways angle parking
shall be permitted and shall cause the same to be marked for that purpose.
   (B)   Except where angle parking is allowed, no person shall park or stand
any vehicle at any angle backed up or head on to a curb except while actually
loading or unloading, and then only as provided in §
73.06(B).
(Prior Code, § 551.07) (Ord. 74, passed 6-5-1917) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 73.08 DISPLAYING VEHICLE FOR SALE OR RENT.
   No person shall park any vehicle upon a street or highway for the purpose of
advertising its sale or rental.   
(Prior Code, § 551.08) (Ord. 232, passed 8-21-1945) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 73.09 OBSTRUCTION OF CROSSWALKS.
   No person shall stop, stand, or park any vehicle in any street or highway so
as to obstruct a crossing or crosswalk, except to allow another vehicle or
pedestrian to cross its path.   
(Prior Code, § 551.09) (Ord. 74, passed 6-5-1917) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 73.10 OBSTRUCTION OF TRAFFIC.
   No person shall occupy any street or highway with any vehicle so as to
interfere with or interrupt the passage of other vehicles thereon.
(Prior Code, § 551.10) (Ord. 232, passed 8-21-1945) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 73.11 PRIORITY OF VEHICLES PICKING UP OR DISCHARGING PASSENGERS.
   No operator of any vehicle which is parked in front of an entrance to a
building shall fail to promptly give way to a vehicle arriving to pick up or
discharge passengers.
(Prior Code, § 551.11) (Ord. 74, passed 6-5-1917) Penalty, see §
70.99
PARKING METERS
§ 73.25 METER ZONES AND FEES.
   (A)   Council, by resolution, shall establish and designate portions of the
public streets and highways of the borough as parking meter zones.
   (B)   All parking meters within the borough will be effective and require
payment of fees from Monday through Friday between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and
5:00 p.m.
(Prior Code, § 553.01) (Ord. 408, passed 3-16-1962; Ord. 568, passed 6-16-1987;
Ord. 645, passed 9-9-2002)
§ 73.26 INSTALLATION AND PERFORMANCE OF METERS.
   (A)   On streets and highways designated as parking meter zones, the Public
Works Director, Borough Manager and/or their designee or other person
designated by Council shall cause parking spaces to be marked off, on the curb
or pavement, or by other appropriate means, and in each space so marked shall
erect or cause to be erected a parking meter, which upon the deposit of a coin
or combination of coins of the United States in an amount indicated on the
meter, will entitle the user to park his or her car for a limited time as
indicated on the meter.
   (B)   The meter shall also indicate when the authorized parking time has
expired.
(Prior Code, § 553.02) (Ord. 238, passed 6-2-1947; Ord. 568, passed 6-16-1987)
§ 73.27 USE OF METERS.
   (A)   (1)   In order that authorized persons may properly compute the time
during which a vehicle is parked, the owner or operator of such vehicle shall,
upon entering such parking space, during the time of limited parking,
immediately deposit a coin or combination of coins of the United States in the
parking meter situated at the side of such parking space, and operate same
according to instructions thereon.
      (2)   Failure to do so shall constitute a violation of this subchapter.
      (3)   Upon the deposit of such coin and placing the meter in operation,
the parking space may be lawfully occupied by such vehicle during the period of
parking time which has been prescribed for the particular amount deposited.
   (B)   (1)   When a vehicle shall be unlawfully parked as provided in this
section, any person authorized to do so by the borough shall issue a ticket or
citation containing a notice that such vehicle was parked in violation of this
subchapter, and designating the license number of the vehicle involved in such
violation, the time when such vehicle was parked in violation of this
subchapter, and the amount of the penalty of said violation.
      (2)   The penalty for violating this section shall be determined by
Borough Council by resolution from time to time.
   (C)   If a vehicle remains parked in any such parking space for such length
of time as the meter indicates by a proper signal that the lawful parking
period has expired, such vehicle shall be considered as parking overtime, and
the parking of a vehicle overtime shall be a violation of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 553.03) (Ord. 238, passed 6-2-1947; Ord. 568, passed 6-16-1987)
Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 73.28 PARKING WITHIN LINES OR MARKINGS.
   No person shall park any vehicle across any line or marking designating a
parking space, or park any vehicle in any way that the same shall not be wholly
within a parking space as designated by such lines or markings.
(Prior Code, § 553.04) (Ord. 238, passed 6-2-1947; Ord. 568, passed 6-16-1987)
Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 73.29 USE OF SLUGS AND THE LIKE.
   No person shall deposit or cause to be deposited in any parking meter a
slug, device, or metallic substitute for a coin of the United States.
(Prior Code, § 553.05) (Ord. 238, passed 6-2-1947; Ord. 568, passed 6-16-1987)
Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 73.30 TAMPERING WITH METERS.
   No person shall deface, tamper with, damage, open, or willfully break,
destroy, or impair the usefulness of any parking meter installed under the
terms of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 553.06) (Ord. 238, passed 6-2-1947; Ord. 568, passed 6-16-1987)
Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 73.31 FURTHER VIOLATION.
   In the event that a violation has not been corrected within one hour after
the issuance of a ticket or citation, a further ticket or citation may be
issued for a violation of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 553.07) (Ord. 568, passed 6-16-1987)
§ 73.32 RATES.
   Council shall, by resolution, determine the amount of time a vehicle may be
parked upon deposit into a parking meter of a particular coin.
(Prior Code, § 553.08) (Ord. 568, passed 6-16-1987)
CHAPTER 74: PARKING AND TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
Schedule
      
I.   School zones
      
II.   Commercial and heavy vehicles
      
III.   One-way streets
      
IV.   Stop intersections
      
V.   Authority of Council; signs; limited and prohibited parking places
      
VI.   Permit parking
SCHEDULE I. SCHOOL ZONES.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this schedule, the following
definitions apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      BOROUGH. The Borough of Ford City, Armstrong County, Pennsylvania.
      MOTOR VEHICLE. Any self-propelled vehicle, including any device in upon
or by which any person or property is or may be transported upon a highway,
including, but not limited to, a car, van, truck, bus, or motorcycle.
      SCHOOL DAY. A day when the school is open for the attendance of the
children.
   (B)   School zones. The remaining school zone is for the Divine Redeemer
School. Any other school zone will be as set by Council moving forward.
   (C)   Penalty.
      (1)   Any person who shall violate the provisions of this schedule shall
be cited with a violation of 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 3365(b) and 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 3362 of
the State Motor Vehicle Code, which now reads as follows: three points and a
fine in an amount not to exceed $1,000.
      (2)   Any person exceeding the maximum speed amount by more than five mph
shall pay an additional fine of $2 per mile for each mile in excess of five mph
over the maximum speed limit.
(Prior Code, § 523.99)
(Ord. 569, passed 11-17-1987; Ord. 592, passed 7-18-1989)
SCHEDULE II. COMMERCIAL AND HEAVY VEHICLES.
   (A)   Truck route established. There is hereby established in the borough a
truck route which all trucks and motor vehicles, whose capacity exceeds one and
one-half tons, shall use in traversing the public ways of the borough, except
as hereinafter provided.
(Prior Code, § 527.01)
   (B)   Description of route. The truck route shall commence at the northern
end of Fifth Avenue at the intersection of Seventeenth Street, and shall extend
south along Fifth Avenue to the southern boundary of the borough. However,
trucks may enter the Borough from its eastern limits on Hill Road, until the
point where Hill Road joins with Fifth Avenue.
(Prior Code, § 527.02)
   (C)   Use of route; exceptions. All trucks or motor vehicles whose capacity
exceeds one and one-half tons shall hereafter be required to use the truck
route for passing through the borough or for the hauling of any substances,
whether merchandise or material, within the borough, or from any point within
the borough to any point without the borough, or vice-versa, except that when
any such truck or motor vehicle contains either merchandise or material which
is to be delivered to or hauled from any point within the borough not located
on the truck route, such truck or motor vehicle shall be permitted to leave the
truck route on the street nearest its destination and proceed by the most
direct route to such destination using the streets or avenues of the borough.
Immediately after being loaded or unloaded, such truck or motor vehicle shall
be returned to the truck route by the most direct route using the streets or
avenues of the borough.
(Prior Code, § 527.03)
   (D)   Signs. The Public Works Director, Borough Manager and/or their
designee shall cause neat, legible signs to be erected along the truck route
designating it as such and warning all truck drivers that violations of the
provisions of this schedule will result in a fine or imprisonment, as provided
in §
70.99.
(Prior Code, § 527.04)
(Ord. 356, passed 8-10-1956) Penalty, see §
70.99
SCHEDULE III. ONE-WAY STREETS.
   Council may, by resolution from time to time, designate the streets or
highways upon which vehicular traffic shall move or turn only in one direction.
A sign indicating the direction of traffic or turn shall be erected and
maintained at every intersection where movement of such traffic is so
regulated.
(Prior Code, § 511.04) (Ord. 232, passed 8-21-1945; Res. 319, passed 9-13-1954;
Ord. 630-A, passed 6-3-1996; Ord. 673, passed 10-1-2007) Penalty, see §
70.99
SCHEDULE IV. STOP INTERSECTIONS.
   (A)   Intersections.
      (1)   Fourth Avenue.
         (a)   Pursuant to authority of 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 6109(a)(6), as amended,
the driver of a vehicle shall be required to stop at the following locations
before proceeding:
            1.   The driver of a vehicle traveling north on Fourth Avenue shall
stop at the southerly side of the Fourth Avenue-Twelfth Street intersection
before entering the intersection; and
            2.   The driver of a vehicle traveling south on Fourth Avenue shall
stop at the northerly side of the Fourth Avenue-Twelfth Street intersection
before entering the intersection.
         (b)   Pursuant to authority of 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 6124, Erection of
Traffic Control Devices at Intersections Act No. 81, § 1, of June 17, 1976,
P.L. No. 162 effective July 1, 1977, as amended, it is hereby directed that
three stop signs be erected at Hill Street and Short Street of the borough, to
direct that all vehicular traffic stop at this intersection before proceeding.
      (2)   Sixth Avenue. Pursuant to authority 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 6109(a)(6), as
amended, the driver of a vehicle shall be required to stop at the following
locations before proceeding:
         (a)   The driver of a vehicle traveling north on Sixth Avenue shall
stop at the southerly side of the Sixth Avenue–Ninth Street intersection before
entering the intersection; and
         (b)   The driver of a vehicle traveling south on Sixth Avenue shall
stop at the northerly side of the Sixth Avenue–Ninth Street intersection before
entering the intersection.
      (3)   Eighth Street. Pursuant to authority 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 6109(a)(6), as
amended, the driver of a vehicle shall be required to stop at the following
locations before proceeding:
         (a)   The driver of a vehicle traveling north on Third Avenue shall
stop at the southerly side of the Third Avenue–Eighth Street intersection
before entering the intersection; and
         (b)   The driver of a vehicle traveling south on Third Avenue shall
stop at the northerly side of the Third Avenue–Eighth Street intersection
before entering the intersection.
   (B)   Penalty. The penalties for violating the provisions of this section
shall be specified by the State Vehicle Code.
   (C)   Signs. Proper signs which conform to the requirements of the State
Department of Transportation shall be erected at the locations specified
herein.
(Prior Code, § 511.08) (Ord. 622, passed 7-1-1995; Ord. 653, passed 5-5-2003;
Ord. 667, passed 11-6-2006; Ord. 683, passed 7-6-2009) Penalty, see §
70.99
SCHEDULE V. AUTHORITY OF COUNCIL; SIGNS; LIMITED AND PROHIBITED PARKING PLACES.
   (A)   Council may, by resolution from time to time, designate the streets or
highways, or any part or side thereof, upon which parking shall be prohibited
or limited as to time.
   (B)   No person shall stop, stand, or park any vehicle within any portion of
a street or highway for a longer period of time than that designated by signs
erected upon such street or highway by the borough.
   (C)   With the exception of pick-up trucks, United States military vehicles,
or vehicles parked in permitted areas, no person shall park a truck, truck
tractor, truck camper, trailer, camper, any motor vehicle designed for and used
to provide a mobile swelling, sleeping, office or commercial space, or any
boat, watercraft, and trailers designed to transport same, upon any street
located within the borough.
(Prior Code, § 551.12)
(Ord. 74, passed 6-5-1917; Ord. 232, passed 8-21-1945; Res. 296, passed 7-6-
1953; Res. 304, passed 1-18-1954; Res. 315, passed 6-7-1954; Res. 334, passed
7-5-1955; Res. 336, passed 8-1-1955; Res. 337, passed 9-12-1955; Res. 343,
passed 12-5-1955; Res. 346, passed 3-5-1956; Ord. 618, passed 4-19-1994; Ord.
623-B, passed 9-19-1995; Ord. 639, passed 1-8-2001; Ord. 644, passed 4-1-2002;
Ord. 652, passed 5-5-2003; Ord. 659-2, passed 4-4-2005; Ord. 670, passed 6-18-
2007) Penalty, see §
70.99
SCHEDULE VI. PERMIT PARKING.
   (A)   Permit parking only zones. A permit parking zone is hereby established
for both the west and east sides of Third Avenue starting at Joe Cippel Way and
ending at Eleventh Street, Monday through Friday, between the hours 8:00 a.m.
and 5:00 p.m.
(Prior Code, § 555.01)
   (B)   Permit parking sub-zones. The parking zone defined in division (A)
above shall be further divided into sub-zones. The said sub-zones are
established as follows:
      (1)   Sub-zone 1. Both the west and east sides of Third Avenue from Joe
Cippel Way to Tenth Street;
      (2)   Sub-zone 2. Both the west and east sides of Third Avenue from Tenth
Street to O’Conner Street; and
      (3)   Sub-zone 3. The west side of Third Avenue from O’Conner Street to
Eleventh Street.
(Prior Code, § 555.02)
   (C)   Fees.
      (1)   Any fees will be as set from time to time by Council via
resolution.
      (2)   The fees in division (C)(1) above are initial fees and may be
changed from time to time by resolution of the Borough Council. During the days
of the week and during the times provided for in division (A) above, only
persons who have a valid parking permit for a sub-zone shall be permitted to
park a vehicle in that sub-zone, and then, only in their designated place.
(Prior Code, § 555.03)
   (D)   Signage and labels. Appropriate signage, stenciling, and vehicle
labels shall be prepared and installed, as applicable, to accomplish the
purposes of this schedule.
(Prior Code, § 555.04)
   (E)   Penalty.
      (1)   Whoever violates any provision of this schedule shall be guilty of
a summary offense and fined not more than $300 per day or violators shall pay
the costs of prosecution. In default of this payment of such fines and costs,
the violator shall be imprisoned not more than 30 days.
      (2)   Anyone who violates any provision of divisions (A) through (D)
above, except as provided above, shall be guilty of a summary offense and shall
be subject to be fined in an amount not to exceed $300 per day and costs of
prosecution. In default of the payment of such fines and costs, the violator
shall be imprisoned for not more than 30 days.
(Prior Code, § 555.99)
(Ord. 573, passed 12-15-1987; Ord. 644, passed 4-1-2002; Ord. 670, passed 6-18-
2007)
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   ANIMALS
      
91.   HEALTH, SAFETY, AND SANITATION
      
92.   PARKS AND PLAYGROUNDS
CHAPTER 90: ANIMALS
Section
Animals Generally
   
90.01   Removal of dead animals
   
90.02   Hogs and pens
   
90.03   Animals upon streets
Dogs
   
90.15   Compliance, licensing required
   
90.16   Control of animal in public place
   
90.17   Restricted in Business District
   
90.18   Leash required
Chickens, Swine and Other Farm Animals
   
90.30   Authority
   
90.31   Purpose
   
90.32   Definitions
   
90.33   Prohibited animals
   
90.34   Permitted hens
   
90.35   Nuisances
   
90.36   Inspections
 
   
90.99   Penalty
ANIMALS GENERALLY
§ 90.01 REMOVAL OF DEAD ANIMALS.
   The carcass of any animal which has died within the borough shall be removed
within 24 hours and properly disposed of by the owner of the animal if the
owner is known, or by the owner of the property on which the dead animal is
found. If the ownership is unknown and the carcass is found on a street, alley,
or public place, it shall be removed by the Borough Code Enforcement Officer in
accordance with the laws of the commonwealth.
(Prior Code, § 701.01) (Ord. 67, passed 8-4-1914) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.02 HOGS AND PENS.
   No hog pens shall be constructed or maintained within the borough, and no
hogs shall be kept within the borough.
(Prior Code, § 701.02) (Ord. 67, passed 8-4-1914; Ord. 248, passed 9-14-1948)
Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.03 ANIMALS UPON STREETS.
   No animal shall be left unattended on any street or highway unless securely
fastened, and no person shall stop or stand any animal on any street for a
longer period than one hour.
(Prior Code, § 701.03) (Ord. 232, passed 8-21-1945) Penalty, see §
90.99
DOGS
§ 90.15 COMPLIANCE, LICENSING REQUIRED.
   All persons, owning, keeping, or having any dog in the borough shall comply
with all state laws providing for the licensing and care of such dog and will
control or contain such dog so that the dog will not run at large beyond the
private property of the owner or keeper of the dog.
(Prior Code, § 707.01) (Ord. 476, passed 5-1-1972) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.16 CONTROL OF ANIMAL IN PUBLIC PLACE.
   No person shall permit any dog owned or controlled by him or her to excrete
or deposit any bodily waste or filth in or upon the avenues, streets, alleys,
or ways, parks, or public playgrounds or upon land of other persons.
(Prior Code, § 707.02) (Ord. 476, passed 5-1-1972) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.17 RESTRICTED IN BUSINESS DISTRICT.
   All dogs shall be restricted from the streets or sidewalks of the Business
District of the borough, bounded by Third Avenue on the west, O’Connor Street
on the north, Fifth Avenue on the east, and Eighth Street on the south.
(Prior Code, § 707.03) (Ord. 476, passed 5-1-1972) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.18 LEASH REQUIRED.
   No person shall walk a dog in public without a leash.
(Prior Code, § 707.04) (Ord. 476, passed 5-1-1972) Penalty, see §
90.99
CHICKENS, SWINE AND OTHER FARM ANIMALS
§ 90.30 AUTHORITY.
   This subchapter is adopted pursuant to the borough’s authority under 8
Pa.C.S. § 1202 to regulate animals, abate nuisances, protect public health and
preserve the residential character of the borough. This subchapter applies
borough-wide regardless of zoning district.
§ 90.31 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to prevent nuisances, protect public
health and safety, reduce odor and vermin issues, avoid property damage and
maintain safe and sanitary conditions throughout the borough.
§ 90.32 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly requires a different meaning. All definitions shall
be interpreted broadly and inclusively to ensure full regulatory coverage.
   ANIMAL. Any live creature, whether domesticated, companion, livestock,
avian, reptile or amphibian, excluding humans.
   CHICKEN. A domesticated fowl (Gallus gallus domesticus) of any age,
including hens and pullets. This term excludes roosters.
   COOP. A fully enclosed, predator-resistant structure designed for housing
hens, with a roof, floor, solid walls or secure wire walls and protected
openings for ventilation.
   FARM ANIMAL. Any animal ordinarily associated with agricultural or livestock
operations, including, but not limited to: chickens, ducks, geese, turkeys,
gamebirds, pigeons, peafowl, goats, sheep, cattle, horses, donkeys, mules,
llamas, alpacas, bees, rabbits or similar species, whether kept for personal
use, hobby use or commercial use, including miniature, dwarf or specialty
breeds.
   HEN. A female chicken of any age.
   HOG or SWINE. Any member of the species Sus scrofa domesticus, including
potbellied pigs, miniature pigs, “micro-pigs,” or any breed or variety marketed
as a companion or household pet. Size, age, or marketing description does not
exempt a hog or swine from this definition.
   OWNER or KEEPER. Any individual, household or entity that owns, harbors,
keeps, maintains, controls or permits an animal on their property.
   PROPERTY. Any parcel of land, lot or structure within the borough.
   ROOSTER. A male chicken of any age, including cockerels.
   RUN. An outdoor enclosure fenced and secured on all sides, including the top
if necessary, that prevents hens from escaping and prevents access by
predators.
§ 90.33 PROHIBITED ANIMALS.
   (A)   Farm animals. All farm animals are prohibited within the borough,
except hens kept in compliance with §
90.34. This includes all livestock, poultry, waterfowl, small gamebirds and
similar species.
   (B)   Roosters. Roosters are prohibited borough-wide without exception.
§ 90.34 PERMITTED HENS.
   Hens may be kept only under all of the following conditions:
   (A)   Maximum number. No more than six hens may be kept on a property.
   (B)   Eligible properties. Hens may only be kept on lots improved with a
single-family detached dwelling. Hens are prohibited on:
      (1)   Duplexes;
      (2)   Townhouses;
      (3)   Multi-family dwellings;
      (4)   Apartments;
      (5)   Mixed-use buildings;
      (6)   Vacant lots; and
      (7)   Commercial or industrial properties.
   (C)   Location requirements. All hens, coops and runs must be located:
      (1)   Entirely within the rear yard;
      (2)   At least ten feet from all property lines;
      (3)   At least 25 feet from any dwelling on an adjacent lot; and
      (4)   Outside easements, stormwater facilities and drainage areas.
   (D)   Coop requirements.
      (1)   Coops must be fully enclosed, predator-proof, structurally sound
and weather-resistant.
      (2)   Coops shall not exceed 100 square feet unless otherwise approved
under Borough Code.
      (3)   Coops must be kept clean, sanitary and free from accumulated waste,
standing water or odors.
   (E)   Run requirements.
      (1)   Runs must be securely fenced to prevent escape or predator entry.
      (2)   Hens must remain within the coop or run at all times. Free-range
activity is prohibited.
   (F)   Food and waste management.
      (1)   Feed must be stored in sealed, rodent-proof containers.
      (2)   Waste must be removed regularly and disposed of in a sanitary
manner.
      (3)   Waste shall not be allowed to accumulate, generate odors, attract
vermin or create runoff.
   (G)   Slaughtering. Outdoor slaughtering is prohibited.
§ 90.35 NUISANCES.
   The keeping of hens shall not create odors, noise, waste accumulation,
insects, vermin, runoff or unsanitary conditions. Any such condition is a
violation of this subchapter regardless of compliance with §
90.34.
§ 90.36 INSPECTIONS.
   The borough may conduct inspections, with reasonable notice, to ensure
compliance with this subchapter.
§ 90.99 PENALTY.
   Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this code
of ordinances or fails to comply therewith or with any of the requirements
thereof, upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a Magisterial
District Judge in the manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses
under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a
fine of not less than $100, nor more than $1,000, plus costs, including
reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred by the borough and, in default of payment
of said fines and costs, to a term of imprisonment to the extent permitted by
law for the punishment of summary offenses. A separate offense shall arise for
each day or portion thereof in which a violation of this code of ordinances is
found to exist or for each section of this code of ordinances found to have
been violated. The borough may also commence appropriate actions in equity to
prevent, restrain, correct, enjoin or abate violations of this code of
ordinances. All fines and penalties collected for violation of this code of
ordinances shall be paid to the borough.
CHAPTER 91: HEALTH, SAFETY, AND SANITATION
Section
General Provisions
   
91.01   Abandoned vehicles
   
91.02   Slaughtering animals
   
91.03   Open burning of natural materials
   
91.04   Littering
   
91.05   Snow removal; responsibility of owners and occupants
   
91.06   Abandoned refrigerators
   
91.07   Washing automobiles
Nuisances Generally
   
91.15   Definitions
   
91.16   Made unlawful
   
91.17   Notice to remove or remedy
   
91.18   Removal or remedy by Council
Public Waste
   
91.30   Nuisance conditions upon private property; abatement
   
91.31   Deposit of waste upon public ways
   
91.32   Spitting in or upon public places
Weeds
   
91.45   Vegetation nuisance under certain conditions
   
91.46   Responsibility for removal
   
91.47   Notice to remove, trim, or cut; cost of abatement by borough
 
   
91.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 91.01 ABANDONED VEHICLES.
   (A)   Parking or repairing on streets. No person shall abandon any motor
vehicle on the public avenues, streets, or alleys, or park or permit to be
parked any disabled motor vehicle or vehicle which does not bear current
inspection and registration plates, upon the avenues, streets, or alleys of the
borough, or repair or permit to be repaired a motor vehicle while parked on the
avenues, streets, or alleys of the borough, except for such emergency service
as is necessary to move the vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 703.01)
   (B)   Gasoline, grease, oil, and the like on streets. No person shall
deposit or permit to be deposited any gasoline, grease, oil, hydraulic fluid,
or radiator coolant upon the surface of the avenues, streets, or alleys of the
borough, either directly or from a motor vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 703.02)
(Ord. 481, passed 5-1-1972) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.02 SLAUGHTERING ANIMALS.
   (A)   Slaughter, gutting, rendering, and storage prohibited. No person shall
willfully kill or slaughter, within the borough, any animal, the meat of which
is intended or is offered for sale for human consumption, either within or
without the borough. No person shall remove the intestines or hides of any such
slain animal, render lard or tallow from the carcass of such slain animal, or
store or keep in storage in any place within the borough the hides of any such
slain animal.
(Prior Code, § 1109.01)
   (B)   Abatement. Any violation of the provisions of this section shall be
deemed and is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, and the proper officers
or agents of the borough are hereby authorized and empowered to enter and
prosecute such actions, either at law or in equity, as may be necessary to
suppress or abate such nuisance. Such remedy shall be in addition to any
penalty provided in §
91.99(C).
(Prior Code, § 1109.02)
(Ord. 248, passed 9-14-1948) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.03 OPEN BURNING OF NATURAL MATERIALS.
   (A)   No person shall burn any material in the open within the borough
except natural, non-noxious materials consisting only of leaves, paper,
cardboard, and untreated, unpainted, and uncoated wood. The burning of trash,
refuse, household garbage, construction debris, plastics, chemicals, or any
noxious or synthetic material is strictly prohibited. Open burning of permitted
natural materials may occur only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m.
and between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and sunset on Tuesdays, Wednesdays,
Thursdays, Fridays, and Saturdays of each week. Even during such hours,
permitted materials shall be burned on private premises only and shall be
placed in a suitable container so as to prevent sparks, burning embers, ashes,
or other charred materials from being blown or scattered.
   (B)   Within a reasonable time following the permissible burning periods,
all smoldering materials emitting smoke or other offensive odors shall be
smothered or quenched with water to eliminate such smoke or odors.
   (C)   At no time shall any material be set afire or burned on any of the
avenues, streets, alleys, thoroughfares, parks, or playgrounds of the borough.
§ 91.04 LITTERING.
   No person shall throw or cause to be thrown on any streets, alleys, or other
public places of the borough any paper, tin cans, broken glass, stones, nails,
or other rubbish.
(Prior Code, § 721.02) (Ord. 24, passed 4-22-1903; Ord. 67, passed 1-4-1914;
Ord. 227, passed 12-4-1944) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.05 SNOW REMOVAL; RESPONSIBILITY OF OWNERS AND OCCUPANTS.
   No owner or occupant of any lot or part of a lot within the borough shall
fail, within six hours after any fall or deposit of snow and sleet, to remove
the same from the pavements and sidewalks fronting the premises respectively
owned or occupied by him or her.
(Prior Code, § 721.03) (Ord. 63, passed 2-2-1914) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.06 ABANDONED REFRIGERATORS.
   No person shall leave or permit to remain outside of any dwelling, building,
or other structure or within any unoccupied or abandoned dwelling or building
under his or her control, in a place accessible to children, any abandoned or
unattended or discarded icebox, refrigerator, or other container which has an
airtight or discarded snap-lock, or other locking device which may not be
released from the inside of any such container, unless he or she has first
removed, destroyed, or broken the door or lid, snap-lock, or other locking
device from such icebox, refrigerator, or other container.   
(Prior Code, § 721.06) (Ord. 317, passed 7-15-1954) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.07 WASHING AUTOMOBILES.
   No person shall wash or cause to be washed upon any street, avenue, or
public thoroughfare of the borough, either gratuitously or for hire, any motor
vehicle. However, this section shall not extend to the washing of any motor
vehicle by the owner thereof in front of his or her own premises or property,
whether the same be owned in fee or leased.
(Prior Code, § 721.07) (Ord. 160, passed 4-5-1926) Penalty, see §
91.99
NUISANCES GENERALLY
§ 91.15 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   NUISANCE. Shall include, but not be limited to, accumulations of garbage and
rubbish, storage of abandoned or junked motor vehicles, dilapidated or unsturdy
structures which pose a danger to public health or safety, on public or private
grounds, and the carrying on of an offensive manufacture or business. Also
includes that as set by Borough Council.
   PERSON. Includes all natural persons, associations, firms, partnerships, and
corporations.
(Prior Code, § 731.01) (Ord. 521, passed 11-13-1978)
§ 91.16 MADE UNLAWFUL.
   After the effective date of this subchapter, it shall be unlawful for any
person to maintain or permit to be maintained any nuisance within the limits of
the borough.
(Prior Code, § 731.02) (Ord. 521, passed 11-13-1978) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.17 NOTICE TO REMOVE OR REMEDY.
   (A)   Notwithstanding §
91.99(E), the Council of the borough may give notice to the owner of the public
or private grounds of which a nuisance is maintained or allowed to be
maintained to remove or remedy the nuisance within 30 days of receipt of such
notice. Notice shall be sent to the owner at his or her residence by certified
mail.
   (B)   In the event the owner fails to remove or remedy the nuisance within
30 days of receipt of notice to do so, the Council of the borough may remove or
remedy the nuisance or may institute proceedings in a Court of Equity to secure
the relief which the Court may deem just and proper.
(Prior Code, § 731.03) (Ord. 521, passed 11-13-1978)
§ 91.18 REMOVAL OR REMEDY BY COUNCIL.
   Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this code
of ordinances or fails to comply therewith or with any of the requirements
thereof, upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a Magisterial
District Judge in the manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses
under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a
fine of not less than $100, nor more than $1,000, plus costs, including
reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred by the borough and, in default of payment
of said fines and costs, to a term of imprisonment to the extent permitted by
law for the punishment of summary offenses. A separate offense shall arise for
each day or portion thereof in which a violation of this code of ordinances is
found to exist or for each section of this code of ordinances found to have
been violated. The borough may also commence appropriate actions in equity to
prevent, restrain, correct, enjoin or abate violations of this code of
ordinances. All fines and penalties collected for violation of this code of
ordinances shall be paid to the borough.
PUBLIC WASTE
§ 91.30 NUISANCE CONDITIONS UPON PRIVATE PROPERTY; ABATEMENT.
   No person shall maintain or permit to be maintained on any property owned or
occupied by him or her within the borough any condition productive of a
nuisance, detrimental to the public health or which may be so declared by the
Borough Code Enforcement Officer. Upon receipt of a notice from the Borough
Code Enforcement Officer that such a condition exists on the property owned or
occupied by such person, it shall be his or her duty to abate the nuisance
created thereby to the satisfaction of the Borough Code Enforcement Officer
within the time specified in the notice.
(Prior Code, § 1103.02) (Ord. 67, passed 8-4-1914) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.31 DEPOSIT OF WASTE UPON PUBLIC WAYS.
   No person shall place upon any public street or alley any organic matter
subject to decomposition, either vegetable or animal, or allow kitchen waste
from any property owned or occupied by him or her to run into any alley,
street, or gutter along any street or alley, or to accumulate upon the surface
of the ground in any place in such manner as to be offensive or to constitute a
menace to health.
(Prior Code, § 1103.03) (Ord. 67, passed 8-4-1914) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.32 SPITTING IN OR UPON PUBLIC PLACES.
   No person shall spit on any sidewalk, in any public conveyance, or on the
floor or steps of any public hall or building.   
(Prior Code, § 1103.04) (Ord. 67, passed 8-4-1914) Penalty, see §
91.99
WEEDS
§ 91.45 VEGETATION NUISANCE UNDER CERTAIN CONDITIONS.
   No person, firm, or corporation owning or occupying any property in the
borough shall permit:
   (A)   Any grass or weeds or any vegetation whatsoever, not edible or planted
for some useful or ornamental purpose, to grow or remain upon such premises so
as to exceed the height of six inches or to throw off any unpleasant or noxious
odor or to conceal any filthy deposit or to create or produce pollen. Any
grass, weeds, or other vegetation growing upon any premises in the borough in
violation of any provision of this section is hereby declared to be a nuisance
and detrimental to the health, safety, cleanliness, and comfort of the
inhabitants of the borough; or
   (B)   Any dead trees or any dead portion of a tree to remain upon such
premises. Any such dead tree or any dead portion thereof upon any premises in
the borough in violation of any provision of this section is hereby declared to
be a nuisance and detrimental to the health, safety, cleanliness, and comfort
of the inhabitants of the borough.
(Prior Code, § 1111.01) (Ord. 624, passed 7-1-1995) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.46 RESPONSIBILITY FOR REMOVAL.
   The owner of any premises, as to a vacant premises or premises occupied by
the owner and in case of multiple-unit property having more than one rental
unit, and the occupant in case of single-unit premises occupied or rented by
other than the owner thereof, shall remove, trim, or cut all grass, weeds, or
other vegetation and dead trees or portions thereof growing or remaining upon
such premises in violation of the provisions of §
91.45.
(Prior Code, § 1111.02) (Ord. 624, passed 7-1-1995) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.47 NOTICE TO REMOVE, TRIM, OR CUT; COST OF ABATEMENT BY BOROUGH.
   The Borough Council, or any officer or employee of the borough designated
thereby for the purpose, is hereby authorized to give notice, by personal
service or by United States mail, to the owner or occupant, as the case may be,
of any premises whereon grass, weeds, or other vegetation and dead trees or
portions thereof is growing or remaining in violation of the provisions of §
91.45, directing and requiring such owner or occupant to remove, trim, or cut
such grass, weeds, or other vegetation and dead trees or portions thereof, so
as to conform to the requirements of this subchapter, within five days after
issuance of such notice. In case any person, firm, or corporation shall
neglect, fail, or refuse to comply with such notice, within the period of time
stated therein, the borough authorities may remove, trim, or cut such grass,
weeds, or other vegetation and dead trees or portions thereof, and the cost
thereof, with an additional amount of 10%, may be collected by the borough from
such person, firm, or corporation in the manner provided by law.
(Prior Code, § 1111.03) (Ord. 624, passed 7-1-1995)
§ 91.99 PENALTY.
   Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this code
of ordinances or fails to comply therewith or with any of the requirements
thereof, upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a Magisterial
District Judge in the manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses
under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a
fine of not less than $100, nor more than $1,000, plus costs, including
reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred by the borough and, in default of payment
of said fines and costs, to a term of imprisonment to the extent permitted by
law for the punishment of summary offenses. A separate offense shall arise for
each day or portion thereof in which a violation of this code of ordinances is
found to exist or for each section of this code of ordinances found to have
been violated. The borough may also commence appropriate actions in equity to
prevent, restrain, correct, enjoin or abate violations of this code of
ordinances. All fines and penalties collected for violation of this code of
ordinances shall be paid to the borough.
CHAPTER 92: PARKS AND PLAYGROUNDS
Section
   
92.01   Statement of policy
   
92.02   Presently existing parks
   
92.03   Certain acts prohibited
   
92.04   Hours of operation
   
92.05   Rules and regulations authorized
   
92.06   Fees for use and rental of borough park and recreation facilities
 
   
92.99   Penalty
§ 92.01 STATEMENT OF POLICY.
   It is the policy of the borough that the borough-owned parks, playground,
playfields, and recreational areas (collectively the “parks”) shall be kept for
the healthful and varied amusement and recreation of the public on a year-round
basis, as a means of promoting the general health and welfare. Use to the
maximum intensity is to be encouraged, subject to requirements of health,
safety, and security of the parks. This chapter shall apply to all parks now
owned by the borough, as well as those hereafter acquired; provided that
nothing set forth herein is intended to be in conflict with or inconsistent
with the requirement of any federal or state regulation appurtenant to use of
any facility acquired or developed with federal or state funds as relates to
the use of such facility.
(Ord. 744, passed 12-16-2019)
§ 92.02 PRESENTLY EXISTING PARKS.
   (A)    The parks owned by the borough are:
      (1)   Ford City Memorial Park: Fourth Avenue at its intersection with
Eighth and Ninth Street;
      (2)   Boulder Park: Sixth Avenue;
      (3)   Malec Park: Seventh Avenue;
      (4)   Ford View Park: 330 Ferndale Street; and
      (5)   Softball fields: 1700 Ford City Road.
   (B)   The PARKS, as the term is defined herein, shall specifically include
the parks and playfields referenced in division (A) above, and any additional
parks or recreational areas acquired by the borough in the future.
(Ord. 744, passed 12-16-2019)
§ 92.03 CERTAIN ACTS PROHIBITED.
   The following acts done within the limits of the parks are hereby declared
to be unlawful, and the Borough Police Department shall have the power to
remove any individual from the parks for violation of borough ordinances and
posted park regulations or for performing any of the acts listed here:
   (A)   To injure, deface, or destroy any posted notice, rules, or regulations
relating to the use of the parks;
   (B)   To mark, cut, injure, remove, deface, destroy, disfigure, tamper,
displace, or remove any wood, turf, grass, tree, soil, rock, sand, gravel,
shelter house, building, structure, plumbing, or electrical equipment located
in the parks;
   (C)   To make or kindle a fire in the parks;
   (D)   To indulge in riotous, boisterous, threatening, or indecent conduct,
or to use abusive, threatening, profane, or indecent language in the parks;
   (E)   To expose oneself or excrete or urinate in the parks, except in
designated restroom facilities;
   (F)   To sell, expose, or offer for sale any merchandise, article, or thing
whatsoever in the parks without first obtaining a written permit from the
borough;
   (G)   To lead, ride, let loose, or permit to run at large any animal or fowl
in the parks;
   (H)   To ride, drive, or propel any powered vehicle on a foot path, or in
any other parts of the parks, except on roadways or parking lots therein. This
prohibition does not apply to emergency vehicles or borough-owned vehicles;
   (I)   To ride or drive any powered vehicle at a speed in excess of ten mph
in the parks;
   (J)   To possess, use, carry, or discharge any fireworks or explosives in
the parks;
   (K)   To carry, transport, or consume any malt, spiritous, or vinous
beverage whatsoever within the limits of the parks, or to remain while under
the influence of the same, except during events or activities authorized by the
borough taking place in the parks;
   (L)   To sell, use, possess, or transport any illegal drugs or drug
paraphernalia in the parks;
   (M)   To deposit, drop, or cast out any trash, litter, rubbish, garbage, or
debris in the parks, except to place the same within a rubbish or trash
container provided for such purpose;
   (N)   To carry a lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe, or other lighted smoking
device in the parks, except in Ford City Memorial Park located on or about
Fourth Avenue at its intersection with Eighth and Ninth Streets; or
   (O)   To unlawfully possess, use, carry, or discharge any firearms in the
park.
(Ord. 744, passed 12-16-2019) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.04 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   The parks shall be closed every night at dusk, prevailing time, and shall
remain closed until dawn, prevailing time, of the following day, except on
those days/nights when events or activities authorized by the borough are
taking place in the parks. During the closed period, it shall be unlawful for
any person, not having official business therein, to be within the territorial
limits of the parks. DUSK is defined as that time of day immediately following
sunset. DAWN is defined as that time of day immediately before sunrise. The
Borough Police Department shall have the power to close the parks for
violations of borough ordinances, violations of posted borough notices, rules,
and regulations, and/or for public safety concerns when circumstances, in the
discretion of the Borough Police Department, merits such adjustment.
(Ord. 744, passed 12-16-2019) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.05 RULES AND REGULATIONS AUTHORIZED.
   Borough Council is hereby authorized to promulgate rules and regulations for
events, activities, and conduct in the parks; said rules and regulations must
be adopted by resolution of Borough Council and approved by the Borough Manager
and/or his or her designee. Any person or persons violating the rules and
regulations shall be subject to immediate dismissal from the parks. Violation
of the rules and regulations adopted and approved by Borough Council shall
constitute a violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 744, passed 12-16-2019)
§ 92.06 FEES FOR USE AND RENTAL OF BOROUGH PARK AND RECREATION FACILITIES.
   Borough Council may establish, by resolution adopted from time to time, a
schedule of fees as shall be necessary for the use and/or rental of the parks.
(Ord. 744, passed 12-16-2019)
§ 92.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person, firm, or corporation who violates a provision of this
chapter, or who fails to comply therewith, or with any of the requirement
thereof: shall be, upon conviction thereof, sentenced to pay a fine of not less
than $100 nor more than $1,000 for each violation, plus costs, and in default
of payment of said fine and costs, to improvement to the extent permitted by
law for the punishment of summary offenses.
   (B)   A separate offense shall arise for each day or portion thereof in
which a violation is found to exist or for each section of this chapter found
to have been violated. All fines and penalties for the violation of this
chapter shall be paid to the borough.
   (C)   The borough may also commence appropriate actions in equity or other
to prevent, restrain, correct, enjoin, or abate violations of this chapter.
(Ord. 744, passed 12-16-2019)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
110.   JUNK YARDS
      
111.   MECHANICAL AMUSEMENT DEVICES
      
112.   PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS, AND TRANSIENT SALES
      
113.   LANDLORD–TENANT
CHAPTER 110: JUNK YARDS
Section
   
110.01   Title
   
110.02   Definitions
   
110.03   Prohibition of junk yard
   
110.04   Declaration of public nuisance
   
110.05   Remedies
 
   
110.99   Penalty
§ 110.01 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Ford City Borough Junk
Yard Ordinance.”
(Prior Code, § 729.01) (Ord. 627, passed 10-17-1995)
§ 110.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BOROUGH. The Borough of Ford City.
   JUNK YARD. Any business with the primary function of accumulating, storing
for an indefinite time period, and/or displaying old, used, broken,
dilapidated, discarded, salvaged, or inoperable items, materials or chemicals
for potential resale or sale of cannibalized usable parts, whether or not
enclosed within a building. Specifically excluded from this definition are
antique shops; used book stores; thrift shops for clothing, household articles,
toys or hand tools; one-time auction sites; charity drop-off points; repair
shops; licensed used car dealers; and retail stores which take in trade items
for the consideration or the convenience of the purchaser of new items.
(Prior Code, § 729.02) (Ord. 627, passed 10-17-1995)
§ 110.03 PROHIBITION OF JUNK YARD.
   No person, partnership, firm, corporation, or other entity existing under
law, shall create, erect, operate, or maintain or occupy any land within the
borough as a junk yard.
(Prior Code, § 729.03) (Ord. 627, passed 10-17-1995) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.04 DECLARATION OF PUBLIC NUISANCE.
   The erection, creation, operation, or maintenance of a junk yard or the
occupation of any lands for such purposes within the borough is hereby declared
to be a public nuisance.
(Prior Code, § 729.04) (Ord. 627, passed 10-17-1995)
§ 110.05 REMEDIES.
   In case of violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, the proper
officer of the borough, in addition to other remedies, may institute in the
name of the borough any appropriate action or proceeding, whether by legal
process or otherwise, to prevent such unlawful act and to restrain or abate
such violation.
(Prior Code, § 729.05) (Ord. 627, passed 10-17-1995)
§ 110.99 PENALTY.
   Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this code
of ordinances or fails to comply therewith or with any of the requirements
thereof, upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a Magisterial
District Judge in the manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses
under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a
fine of not less than $100, nor more than $1,000, plus costs, including
reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred by the borough and, in default of payment
of said fines and costs, to a term of imprisonment to the extent permitted by
law for the punishment of summary offenses. A separate offense shall arise for
each day or portion thereof in which a violation of this code of ordinances is
found to exist or for each section of this code of ordinances found to have
been violated. The borough may also commence appropriate actions in equity to
prevent, restrain, correct, enjoin or abate violations of this code of
ordinances. All fines and penalties collected for violation of this code of
ordinances shall be paid to the borough.
CHAPTER 111: MECHANICAL AMUSEMENT DEVICES
Section
   
111.01   Definitions
   
111.02   License required; fees; expiration date
   
111.03   Inspection
   
111.04   Suits for collection
 
   
111.99   Penalty
§ 111.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BOROUGH. The Borough of Ford City, Armstrong County, Pennsylvania.
   COIN-OPERATED AMUSEMENT MACHINE. A machine or device operated by or whose
use is permitted by the insertion of a coin or similar piece of metal, the
object of which machine or device is for the amusement of or to show the skill
of the operator. However, the phrase does not include coin-operated record
playing machines.
   COUNCIL. The Council of the Borough of Ford City, Armstrong County,
Pennsylvania.
   OPERATOR. A person using a coin-operated amusement machine for the purpose
for which it was intended.
   OWNER. A person operating, owning, maintaining, or providing the use or
operation of a coin-operated amusement machine.
   PERSON. A natural individual, firm, partnership, unincorporated association,
or corporation of any class. The singular shall include the plural and the
masculine shall include the feminine and neuter.
(Prior Code, § 313.01) (Ord. 326, passed 3-2-1955)
§ 111.02 LICENSE REQUIRED; FEES; EXPIRATION DATE.
   (A)   No person shall operate, maintain, or own, or provide the use or
operation of any coin-operated amusement machines within the limits of the
borough without first having paid annually to the borough a license fee as
established by resolution of the Borough Council from time to time for each
such machine. All such licenses shall expire on March 14 of each and every
year.
   (B)   The effective date of this section shall be March 14, 1987.
(Prior Code, § 313.02) (Ord. 459, passed 11-4-1968; Ord. 491, passed 3-12-1974;
Ord. 523, passed 1-8-1979; Ord. 564, passed 2-17-1987) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.03 PAYMENT OF FEE; CERTIFICATE.
   The fee imposed in §
111.02 is to be paid at the Borough Office to the Borough Treasurer or to such
borough official or employee as Council may designate. Upon payment of the fee,
the owner will receive a certificate from the proper borough official showing
that the fee has been paid, which certificate the owner will display on the
coin-operated amusement machine in a prominent place. Whenever a person
initially applies for a license, he or she may tender a fee that is prorated,
using a year that expires on March 14.
(Prior Code, § 313.03) (Ord. 326, passed 3-2-1955; Ord. 544, passed 1-10-1983)
§ 111.04 INSPECTION.
   Each person operating, owning, or maintaining a place of business open to
the public or to a certain group or segment of the public shall permit
inspection of his or her premises by the borough police or such other persons
as may be designated by Council to determine the compliance with this chapter
at such times and under such circumstances as are reasonable.
(Prior Code, § 313.04) (Ord. 326, passed 3-2-1955) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.05 SUITS FOR COLLECTION.
   (A)   In the event that any tax under this chapter remains due or unpaid for
30 days after the due date above set forth, the Tax Collector may sue for the
recovery of any such tax due or unpaid under this chapter, together with
interest and penalty.
   (B)   If the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate of 6% per annum
shall be calculated, beginning with the due date of the tax, and a penalty of
$20 shall be added to the flat rate of the tax for the non-payment thereof.
Where suit is brought for the recovery of this tax, the individual liable
therefor shall, in addition, be responsible and liable for the costs of
collection and reasonable attorney fees.
(Prior Code, § 313.05) (Ord. 697, passed 10-10-2011)
§ 111.99 PENALTY.
   Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this code
of ordinances or fails to comply therewith or with any of the requirements
thereof, upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a Magisterial
District Judge in the manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses
under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a
fine of not less than $100, nor more than $1,000, plus costs, including
reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred by the borough and, in default of payment
of said fines and costs, to a term of imprisonment to the extent permitted by
law for the punishment of summary offenses. A separate offense shall arise for
each day or portion thereof in which a violation of this code of ordinances is
found to exist or for each section of this code of ordinances found to have
been violated. The borough may also commence appropriate actions in equity to
prevent, restrain, correct, enjoin or abate violations of this code of
ordinances. All fines and penalties collected for violation of this code of
ordinances shall be paid to the borough.
CHAPTER 112: PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS,
AND TRANSIENT SALES
Section
   
112.01   Definitions
   
112.02   License requirement
   
112.03   Application procedure
   
112.04   Standards for issuance
   
112.05   Revocation procedure
   
112.06   Standards for revocation
   
112.07   Appeal procedure
   
112.08   Exhibition of identification
   
112.09   Borough policy on soliciting
   
112.10   Notice regulating soliciting
   
112.11   Duty of solicitors to ascertain notice
   
112.12   Prohibited solicitation
 
   
112.99   Penalty
§ 112.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BUSINESS. The business carried on by any person who is an itinerant
merchant, peddler or solicitor as defined in this section.
   GOODS. Merchandise of any description whatsoever, and includes, but is not
restricted to, wares and foodstuffs.
   ITINERANT MERCHANT. Any person, whether as owner, agent or consignee, who
engages in a temporary business of selling goods within the borough and who, in
the furtherance of such business, uses any building, structure, vehicle or any
place within the borough.
   PEDDLER. Any person, not an itinerant merchant, who:
      (1)   Travels from place to place by any means carrying goods for sale,
or making sales, or making deliveries; or
      (2)   Without traveling from place to place, sells or offers goods for
sale from any public place within the borough.
   SOLICITOR. Any person who travels by any means from place to place, taking
or attempting to take orders for sale of goods to be delivered in the future or
for services to be performed in the future. A person who is a SOLICITOR is not
a “peddler”.
§ 112.02 LICENSE REQUIREMENT.
   (A)   Any person who is an itinerant merchant, peddler or solicitor shall
obtain a license before engaging in such activity within the borough.
   (B)   The fee for the license required by this chapter shall be as set from
time to time by the Borough Council.
   (C)   No license issued under this chapter shall be transferable.
   (D)   All licenses issued under this chapter shall expire 90 days after the
date of issuance thereof.
Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.03 APPLICATION PROCEDURE.
   (A)   All applicants for licenses required by this chapter shall file an
application with the borough. This application shall be signed by the applicant
if an individual, or by all partners if a partnership, or by the president if a
corporation. The applicant may be requested to provide information concerning
the following items:
      (1)   The name and address of the applicant;
      (2)   (a)   The name of the individual having management authority or
supervision of the applicant’s business during the time that it is proposed to
be carried on in the borough;
         (b)   The local address of such individual;
         (c)   The permanent address of such individual; and
         (d)   The capacity in which such individual will act.
      (3)   The name and address of the person, if any, for whose purpose the
business will be carried on, and, if a corporation, the state of incorporation;
      (4)   The time period or periods during which it is proposed to carry on
applicant’s business;
      (5)   (a)   The nature, character and quality of the goods or services to
be offered for sale or delivered;
         (b)   If goods, their invoice value and whether they are to be sold by
sample as well as from stock; and
         (c)   If goods, where and by whom such goods are manufactured or
grown, and where such goods are at the time of application.
      (6)   The nature of the advertising proposed to be done for the business;
and
      (7)   Whether or not the applicant, or the individual identified in
division (A)(2)(a) above, or the person identified in division (A)(3) has been
convicted of any crime or misdemeanor and, if so, the nature of each offense
and the penalty assessed for each offense.
   (B)   Applicants for peddler or solicitor licenses may be required to
provide further information concerning the following items, in addition to that
requested under division (A) above:
      (1)   A description of the applicant; and
      (2)   A description of any vehicle proposed to be used in the business,
including its registration number, if any.
   (C)   All applicants for licenses required by this chapter shall attach to
their application, if required by the borough, credentials from the person, if
any, for which the applicant proposes to do business, authorizing the applicant
to act as such representative.
   (D)   Applicants who propose to handle foodstuffs shall also attach to their
application, in addition to any attachments required under division (C) above,
a statement from a licensed physician, dated not more than ten days prior to
the date of application, certifying the applicant to be free of contagious or
communicable disease.
Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.04 STANDARDS FOR ISSUANCE.
   (A)   Upon receipt of an application, an investigation of the applicant’s
business reputation and moral character shall be made.
   (B)   The application shall be approved unless such investigation discloses
tangible evidence that the conduct of the applicant’s business would pose a
substantial threat to the public health, safety, morals or general welfare. In
particular, tangible evidence that the applicant, as follows, will constitute
valid reasons for disapproval of an application:
      (1)   Has been convicted of a crime of moral turpitude;
      (2)   Has made willful misstatements in the application;
      (3)   Has committed prior violations of ordinances pertaining to
itinerant merchants, peddlers, solicitors and the like;
      (4)   Has committed prior fraudulent acts; or
      (5)   Has a record of continual breaches of solicited contracts.
§ 112.05 REVOCATION PROCEDURE.
   Any license or permit granted under this chapter may be revoked by the
borough after notice and hearing, pursuant to the standards in §
112.06. Notice of hearing for revocation shall be given in writing, setting
forth specifically the grounds of the complaint and the time and place of the
hearing. Such notice shall be mailed to the licensee at his or her last known
address, at least ten days prior to the date set for the hearing.
§ 112.06 STANDARDS FOR REVOCATION.
   A license granted under this chapter may be revoked for any of the following
reasons:
   (A)   Any fraud or misrepresentation contained in the license application;
   (B)   Any fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement made in connection
with the business being conducted under the license;
   (C)   Any violation of this chapter;
   (D)   Conviction of the licensee of any felony, or conviction of the
licensee of any misdemeanor involving moral turpitude; or
   (E)   Conducting the business licensed in an unlawful manner or in such a
way as to constitute a menace to the health, safety, morals or general welfare
of the public.
§ 112.07 APPEAL PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Any person aggrieved by a decision under §§
112.04 or
112.06 shall have the right to appeal to the Borough Council. The appeal shall
be taken by filing with the Borough Council, within 14 days after notice of the
decision has been mailed to such person’s last known address, a written
statement setting forth the grounds for appeal. The Borough Council shall set
the time and place for a hearing, and notice for such hearing shall be given to
such person in the same manner as provided in §
112.05.
   (B)   The order of the Borough Council after the hearing shall be final.
§ 112.08 EXHIBITION OF IDENTIFICATION.
   (A)   Any license issued to an itinerant merchant under this chapter shall
be posted conspicuously in or at the place named therein. In the event more
than one place within the borough shall be used to conduct the business
licensed, separate licenses shall be issued for each place.
   (B)   The borough shall issue a license to each peddler or solicitor
licensed under this chapter. The license shall contain the words “Licensed
Peddler” or “Licensed Solicitor,” the expiration date of the license and the
number of the license. The license shall be kept with the licensee during such
time as he is engaged in the business licensed.
Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.09 BOROUGH POLICY ON SOLICITING.
   It is hereby declared to be the policy of the borough that the occupants of
the residences in the borough shall make the determination of whether
solicitors shall be, or shall not be, invited to their respective residences.
§ 112.10 NOTICE REGULATING SOLICITING.
   (A)   Notice of the refusal of invitation to solicitors, to any residence,
shall be given on a weatherproof card, approximately three inches by four
inches in size, exhibited upon or near the main entrance door to the residence,
indicating the determination by the occupant, containing the applicable words,
as follows: “NO SOLICITORS” or variant.
   (B)   The letters shall be at least one-third inch in height. For the
purpose of uniformity, the cards shall be provided by the Chief of Police to
persons requesting, at the cost thereof.
   (C)   The card so exhibited shall constitute sufficient notice to any
solicitor of the determination by the occupant of the residence of the
information contained thereon.
§ 112.11 DUTY OF SOLICITORS TO ASCERTAIN NOTICE.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of every solicitor upon going onto any premises
in the borough upon which a residence is located to first examine the notice
provided for in §
112.10 if any is attached, and be governed by the statement contained on the
notice. If the notice states “NO SOLICITORS INVITED,” then the solicitor,
whether registered or not, shall immediately and peacefully depart from the
premises.
   (B)   Any solicitor who has gained entrance to any residence, whether
invited or not, shall immediately and peacefully depart from the premises when
requested to do so by the occupant.
Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.12 PROHIBITED SOLICITATION.
   It is hereby declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any
person to go upon any premises and ring the doorbell upon or near any door, or
create any sound in any manner calculated to attract the attention of the
occupant of such residence, for the purpose of securing an audience with the
occupant thereof and engage in soliciting in defiance of the notice exhibited
at the residence in accordance with the provisions of §
112.10.
§ 112.99 PENALTY.
   Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this code
of ordinances or fails to comply therewith or with any of the requirements
thereof, upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a Magisterial
District Judge in the manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses
under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a
fine of not less than $100, nor more than $1,000, plus costs, including
reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred by the borough and, in default of payment
of said fines and costs, to a term of imprisonment to the extent permitted by
law for the punishment of summary offenses. A separate offense shall arise for
each day or portion thereof in which a violation of this code of ordinances is
found to exist or for each section of this code of ordinances found to have
been violated. The borough may also commence appropriate actions in equity to
prevent, restrain, correct, enjoin or abate violations of this code of
ordinances. All fines and penalties collected for violation of this code of
ordinances shall be paid to the borough.
CHAPTER 113: LANDLORD–TENANT
Section
   
113.01   Definitions
   
113.02   Owner’s duties
   
113.03   Occupant’s duties
   
113.04   Licenses and inspections
   
113.05   Nonrenewal, suspension, or revocation of occupancy license
   
113.06   Miscellaneous provisions
   
113.07   Suits for collection
 
   
113.99   Penalty
§ 113.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BOROUGH. Borough of Ford City, Armstrong County, Pennsylvania.
   CODE. Any federal or state statute, any code, any regulation, or any
ordinance adopted, enacted, or in effect in and for the borough, concerning the
fitness for habitation, construction, maintenance, operation, occupancy, use,
or appearance of any real property within the borough.
   CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. The duly appointed Code Enforcement Officer or
duly appointed representative of the borough having charge of the Office of
Codes Enforcement in the borough.
   COMMON AREA. In multiple unit dwellings, space which is not part of a single
rental unit and which is shared in common with other occupants of a dwelling,
whether they reside in rental units or not, such common areas shall be
considered as part of the premises for purposes of this chapter.
   COMMUNITY LIVING FACILITY. A living arrangement whereby unrelated
individuals with diagnosed mental health or mental retardation problems reside
on a permanent basis with 24-hour supervision, and whose primary purpose is the
development and maintenance of community living skills.
   DISRUPTIVE CONDUCT. Any criminal activity and any form of conduct, action,
incident, or behavior perpetrated, caused or committed by any occupant or
visitor of a rental unit that is so loud, untimely, offensive, riotous, or that
otherwise disturbs other persons of reasonable sensibility in their peaceful
enjoyment of their property such that a report is made to the Police and/or to
the Code Enforcement Officer, complaining of such condition, action, incident,
or behavior.
   DISRUPTIVE CONDUCT REPORT. A written report of disruptive conduct on a form
prescribed therefore to be completed by the Code Enforcement Officer, or a
member of the Borough Police Department, as the case may be, who actually
investigates an alleged incident of disruptive conduct and which shall be
maintained by the Code Enforcement Officer.
   DWELLING. A building having one or more dwelling units.
   DWELLING UNIT. A room or group of rooms within a building, forming a single
unit, and used for living or sleeping purposes.
   GUEST. A person on the premises with the actual or implied consent of an
occupant.
   LANDLORD. One or more persons, jointly or severally, in whom is vested all
or part of the legal title to the premises, or all or part of the beneficial
ownership and right to the present use and enjoyment of the premises including
a mortgage holder in possession of a rental unit.
   MANAGER. An adult individual designated by the owner of a rental unit who
shall be the agent of the owner for service of process and receiving notices or
demands and to perform the obligation of the owner under this chapter and under
rental agreements with occupants.
   MULTIPLE UNIT DWELLINGS. A building containing two or more dwelling units,
including, but not limited to, double houses, row houses, town houses,
condominiums, apartment houses, apartment buildings, and conversion apartments.
   OCCUPANCY LICENSE. The license issued to the owner of a rental unit which is
required for the lawful rental and occupancy of such unit.
   OCCUPANT. An individual who resides in a rental unit, whether or not he or
she is the owner thereof, with whom a legal relationship with the owner/
landowner is established by a rental agreement or by the laws of the
commonwealth.
   OWNER. See LANDLORD.
   OWNER OCCUPIED DWELLING UNIT. A dwelling unit in which the owner resides on
a regular and permanent basis.
   PERSON. A natural person, partnership, corporation, unincorporated
association, limited partnership, trust, or any other entity.
   PREMISES. Any parcel of real property in the borough, including the land and
all buildings and appurtenances, structures, or appurtenant elements on which
one or more rental units are located.
   RENTAL AGREEMENT. A written or oral agreement between an owner/landlord and
occupant/tenant embodying the terms and conditions concerning the use and
occupancy of a specified rental unit or premises.
   RENTAL PROPERTY. Contiguous real property containing one or more rental
units.
   RENTAL UNIT. A dwelling unit, situated within the borough, occupied by one
or more persons, related or unrelated, under a rental agreement that is not a
community living facility, hotel, motel, hospital, nursing home, or bed and
breakfast unit.
   TENANT. See OCCUPANT.
   UNRELATED. Of or pertaining to any and all persons not related to one
another through blood, adoption, or marriage.
   YEAR. A calendar year.
(Prior Code, § 325.01) (Ord. 684, passed 10-19-2009)
§ 113.02 OWNER’S DUTIES.
   (A)   Regulation of rental units.
      (1)   Every owner shall keep and maintain all rental units in compliance
with all applicable codes and the provisions of all other applicable state laws
and regulations and local ordinances and shall at all times keep such property
in good and safe condition.
      (2)   Every owner of a rental unit shall be responsible for regulating
the proper and lawful use and maintenance of every rental unit owned by that
owner. Every owner shall also be responsible to see to it that occupants of
every rental unit conduct themselves in the manner such as to assure that the
premises are maintained in a good and safe condition and that owners and
occupants alike, protect and promote public health, safety, and welfare.
      (3)   Every owner of a rental unit shall regulate the conduct and
activity of the occupants of their rental units, both through provisions
contained in leases and through enforcement.
      (4)   Notwithstanding any provision herein, it is specifically provided
that occupants and their guests are responsible for their own conduct or
activities. This chapter shall not be construed as an assignment, transfer, or
projection over or onto any owner of any responsibility or liability which
occupants or their guests may have as a result of their conduct or activity
under any private cause of action, civil or criminal enforcement proceedings,
or criminal law, nor shall this section be construed so as to require an owner
to indemnify or defend occupants or their guests when any such action or
proceeding is brought against the occupant or their guests based upon the
occupants’ or their guests’ conduct or activity.
      (5)   Notwithstanding any provision herein, this chapter shall in no way
limit any other enforcement remedies which may be available to the borough
against an owner, occupant, or guest.
   (B)   Designation of manager.
      (1)   Every owner who is not a natural person, any owner who is a natural
person but who is not a full-time resident of the borough or does not reside
within a 25-mile radius of the borough, shall designate a manager who shall
reside in an area that is within a 25-mile radius of the borough.
      (2)   The manager shall be the agent of the owner for service of process
and receiving of notices and demands, as well as performing the obligations of
the owner under this chapter and under rental agreements with occupants. The
identity, address, and telephone number of the person designated as manager
shall be provided to the borough and such information shall be kept current and
updated in the event of any change thereto, as soon as reasonably possible.
   (C)   Disclosure.
      (1)   The owner or manager shall disclose to the occupant in writing on
or before the commencement of the tenancy:
         (a)   The name, address, and telephone number of the manager, if
applicable; and
         (b)   The name, address, and telephone number of the owner of the
premises.
      (2)   Before an occupant enters into or renews a rental agreement for a
rental unit, the owner or manager shall furnish the occupant with the most
recent occupancy inspection report relating to the rental property.
   (D)   Maintenance of premises. The owner shall maintain the premises in
compliance with all applicable codes and shall regularly perform all routine
maintenance, including lawn mowing and ice and snow removal, and shall promptly
make any and all repairs necessary to fulfill the obligations provided for
herein.
   (E)   Written maintenance agreement. The owner and occupant may agree that
the occupant is to perform the specified repairs, maintenance, tasks,
alterations, or remodeling in which case such agreement must be in writing. In
no case shall the existence of such agreement between the owner and occupant
relieve an owner of any responsibility under this chapter or other ordinances
or codes for the maintenance of the premises.
   (F)   Written rental agreement. After the effective date of the ordinance
codified herein, all rental agreements for rental units shall be in writing and
no oral leases or oral modifications thereof shall be permitted. The owner
shall provide occupant with copies of the rental agreement upon the execution
thereof.
   (G)   Term and conditions. The owner and occupant may include in the rental
agreement terms and conditions not prohibited by this chapter or other
applicable ordinances, regulations, and laws, including rent, term of the
agreement, and other provisions governing the rights and obligations of the
parties. No rental agreement may provide that the occupant or owner agrees to
waive or to forego rights or remedies under this chapter and any such
prohibited provision, if included in a rental agreement, shall be unenforceable
and void.
   (H)   Complaints. All owners shall promptly reply to reasonable complaints
and inquiries from occupants. Nothing herein shall be deemed to supersede any
rights, duties, or responsibilities of owners or occupants as provided for
under the Landlord Tenant Act of the commonwealth, being 68 P.S. §§ 250.101 et
seq., as amended.
   (I)   Common areas. Where an owner does not regulate the use of common areas
and the behavior of occupants or their guests in the common areas, the owner
shall be directly responsible for the behavior of occupants and guests in the
common area as if the owner were an occupant.
   (J)   Enforcement.
      (1)   Within ten days after receipt of a written notice from the Code
Enforcement Officer that an occupant of a rental unit has violated a provision
of this chapter, the owner shall take immediate steps to remedy the violation
and take steps to assure that there is no reoccurrence of the violation.
      (2)   Within 20 days after the receipt of the written notice of
violation, the owner shall file with the Code Enforcement Officer a report on a
form provided by the borough setting forth what action the owner has taken to
remedy the violation and what steps he or she has taken to prevent a
reoccurrence of the violation. The report shall also set forth a plan as to
steps the owner will take in the future if the violation reoccurs.
      (3)   The Code Enforcement Officer shall review the report and if
adequate steps have been taken and the plan is adequate to address future
violations, the report and remediation plan shall be approved. The owner shall,
on his or her own initiative, enforce the plan and failure to do so shall be a
violation of this chapter.
      (4)   In the event that three violations occur involving the same
occupant or occupants, the Code Enforcement Officer may direct the owner to
evict the occupants who violated this chapter and to prohibit the occupant from
occupying the premises during the subsequent licensing period.
   (K)   Code violations. Upon receiving notice of any code violations from the
Code Enforcement Officer, the owner shall promptly take action, or cause the
necessary action to be taken to abate the offending condition and eliminate the
violation. In the event the owner of the premises shall neglect, fail, or
refuse to comply with any notice from the borough or its Code Enforcement
Officer to correct a violation relating to maintenance and repair of the
premises under any code within the period of time stated in such notice, the
borough shall have the right to enjoin further occupancy of said premises until
the required remedial action has been taken. In addition, the Code Enforcement
Officer may invoke such other remedies available under applicable codes,
ordinances, or statutes, including, where appropriate, condemnation proceedings
or declaration of the premises as unfit for habitation, or suspension,
revocation, or nonrenewal of the license issued hereunder.
   (L)   Inspections. The owner shall permit inspections of any premises by the
Code Enforcement Officer at reasonable times, upon reasonable notice.
(Prior Code, § 325.02) (Ord. 684, passed 10-19-2009) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.03 OCCUPANT’S DUTIES.
   (A)   Comply with obligations. Occupants shall comply with all obligations
imposed upon occupants by this chapter, all applicable codes and ordinances of
the borough and all applicable provisions of federal and state laws.
   (B)   Health and safety regulations.
      (1)   The maximum number of persons permitted in any rental unit at any
time shall not exceed one person for each 40 square feet of habitable floor
space in said rental unit. The maximum number of persons permitted in the
common areas of any multiple unit dwelling at any time shall not exceed one
person for each 15 square feet of common area on the premises.
      (2)   Occupant(s) shall dispose from the rental unit all rubbish,
garbage, and other waste in a clean and safe manner and separate and place for
collection all recyclable materials in compliance with the Borough Solid Waste
and Recycling Ordinance and all other applicable ordinances, laws, and
regulations.
   (C)   Peaceful enjoyment. The occupant shall conduct himself or herself and
require other persons, including, but not limited to, guests on the premises
and within his or her rental unit with his or her consent, to conduct
themselves in a matter that will not disturb the peaceful enjoyment of the
premises by others and that will not disturb the peaceful enjoyment of adjacent
and nearby properties by the persons using and/or occupying the same.
   (D)   Residential use. The occupant(s) shall occupy the rental unit solely
for the purpose of a personal residence.
   (E)   Illegal activities. The occupant(s) shall not engage in, nor tolerate
or permit others on the premises, to engage in any conduct declared illegal
under the Pennsylvania Crimes Code, being 17 Pa.C.S. §§ 101 et seq., Liquor
Code, being 47 P.S. §§ 1-101 et seq., or the Controlled Substance, Drug,
Device, and Cosmetic Act, being 35 P.S. §§ 780-101 et seq.
   (F)   Disruptive conduct.
      (1)   The occupant shall not engage in, nor tolerate nor permit his or
her guests within his or her rental unit to engage in, disruptive conduct or
other violations of this chapter.
      (2)   When a police officer or the Code Enforcement Officer investigates
an alleged incident of disruptive conduct, the police officer or the Code
Enforcement Officer shall complete a disruptive conduct report upon a finding
that the reported incident did, in the officer’s judgment constitute disruptive
conduct as defined herein. The information contained in said report shall
include the identity or identities of the actors or tenants committing the
disruptive conduct and all other obtainable information, including the factual
basis for the disruptive conduct as requested on the reporting form. When an
investigation is conducted by the police, the police officer shall then submit
the completed disruptive conduct report to the Code Enforcement Officer. The
Code Enforcement Officer shall mail a copy of all disruptive conduct reports to
the owner or manager within three business days of the completion of any
investigation of the alleged disruptive conduct.
   (G)   Compliance with rental agreement. The occupant shall comply with all
lawful provisions of the rental agreement entered between the owner and
occupant. Failure to comply with any provision in said rental agreement may
result in the eviction of the occupant by the owner.
   (H)   Inspection of premises. The occupant shall permit inspections by the
Code Enforcement Officer of the premises at reasonable times and upon
reasonable notice.
(Prior Code, § 325.03) (Ord. 684, passed 10-19-2009) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.04 LICENSES AND INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   License required. Any owner of any rental unit as defined herein,
shall apply for and obtain a license for each rental unit before entering into
a rental agreement or permitting the occupancy of any rental unit. Any rental
unit, whether under oral or written lease, as of the effective date of the
ordinance codified herein, shall require a license to be obtained within 60
days of the effective date of the ordinance codified herein. For each
succeeding license year, any rental unit shall require a license to be obtained
on or before the end of January of each succeeding license year.
   (B)   Form. The application for the license shall be on a form provided by
the borough. All granting of licenses shall be conditioned upon the owner’s
continuing obligation to fully comply with the requirements of this chapter.
   (C)   List of occupants. The owner shall maintain a current list of
occupants in each rental unit which shall include their name, permanent
address, and permanent telephone number. The owner shall furnish this list to
the borough upon request and shall notify the borough of any change in the
number of occupants within ten days of such change, so that revisions can be
made to the license.
   (D)   Annual license term, fee and occupancy limit.
      (1)   Each license shall have a one-year term which shall commence on
January 1 of each year and shall terminate at the end of the day on December 31
of each license year.
      (2)   Upon application for a license and prior to an issuance or renewal
thereof, each applicant shall pay to the borough an annual occupancy license
fee and an initial inspection fee in an amount to be established from time to
time by resolution of the Borough Council. There will be no initial inspection
fee for any rental unit previously inspected within one year prior to the
effective date of the ordinance codified herein. Said resolution may provide
for more than one fee scale for different categories of premises to be more
specifically set forth in the resolution. The Borough Council may also
establish fees from time to time by resolution for appeals from the decisions
of the Code Enforcement Officer and other fees related to the administration of
this article. Until changed by borough resolution, the initial fees are listed
as follows:
         (a)   An annual occupancy license fee calculated as follows: $50 for
the first rental unit plus $15 for each additional rental unit;
         (b)   Initial inspection fee per rental unit: $25;
         (c)   Reinspection fee per rental unit: $25;
         (d)   Filing fee for appeal from Code Enforcement Officer decision:
$500. Any amount of this fee which is not expended in conducting the required
hearing shall be refunded to the appellant; and
         (e)   For divisions (D)(2)(b) and (D)(2)(c) above, should a rental
unit not be ready for inspection when the Code Enforcement Officer arrives to
inspect the unit and this situation requires that the Code Enforcement Officer
return to the unit at another time, an additional fee of $25 will be charged
for each additional time that the Code Enforcement Officer needs to return.
      (3)   The license shall indicate thereon the maximum number of occupants
in each rental unit.
   (E)   Inspection. 
      (1)   All premises shall be subject to periodic inspections by the Code
Enforcement Officer, the Borough Fire Marshal, or any other duly authorized
agent of the borough. Such inspection shall take place:
         (a)   When an application is submitted for the first time for a
license except as specified in division (D)(2) above;
         (b)   At any time during the year when the Code Enforcement Officer
has reason to believe that a violation of this chapter is being committed, or
is being permitted to take place, or any of the other applicable codes are
being violated; or
         (c)   Prior to any change in the occupancy of the rental unit by a
different tenant.
      (2)   The Code Enforcement Officer is hereby designated as the official
authorized to enforce this chapter and to take appropriate measure to abate any
violations hereof, for and on behalf of the borough.
(Prior Code, § 325.04) (Ord. 684, passed 10-19-2009)
§ 113.05 NONRENEWAL, SUSPENSION, OR REVOCATION OF OCCUPANCY LICENSE.
   (A)   General. The Code Enforcement Officer shall initiate action against an
owner that may result in a formal warning, nonrenewal, suspension, or
revocation of the owner’s license for violating any provision of this chapter
that imposes a duty upon the owner and/or for failing to regulate the breach of
duties by occupants as provided herein.
   (B)   Basis for action. An owner shall be subject to formal warning,
nonrenewal, suspension, or revocation of a license upon any of the following:
      (1)   Failure to abate a violation of the borough codes and ordinances
that apply to the premises within the time directed by the Code Enforcement
Officer;
      (2)   Refusal to permit the inspection of the premises by the Code
Enforcement Officer;
      (3)   Failure to take steps to prevent violations of this chapter by
occupants of rental units;
      (4)   Failure to file and implement an approved plan to remedy and
prevent violations of this chapter by occupants of a rental unit;
      (5)   Failure to initiate eviction proceedings against occupants after
having been directed to do so by the Code Enforcement Officer of the borough;
or
      (6)   Three violations of this chapter or other ordinances of the borough
that apply to the premises within a license term. Before a violation can be
considered under this section, the owner must have received notice in writing
of each violation within 30 days after the Code Enforcement Officer received
notice of the violation.
   (C)   Procedure for nonrenewal, suspension, or revocation of occupancy
license. Following a determination that grounds for nonrenewal, suspension or
revocation of a license exist, the Code Enforcement Officer shall notify the
owner of his or her decision and the reason therefor. Such notification shall
be in writing, addressed to the owner, and shall contain the following
information:
      (1)   The address of the premises in question and identification of the
particular rental unit(s) affected;
      (2)   A description of the violation that has been found to exist;
      (3)   A statement that the license for said rental unit will be
suspended, revoked, or will not be renewed for the next calendar year, or that
the owner will receive a formal warning. In the case of a suspension or
revocation, the notice shall state the date upon which such suspension or
revocation will commence and in the case of a suspension it shall also state
the duration of said suspension;
      (4)   A statement that, due to the nonrenewal, suspension, or revocation,
the owner is prohibited from renting, letting, or permitting occupancy of the
rental unit from and during the period said action is in effect;
      (5)   A statement informing the owner that he, she, or it has a right to
appeal the decision suspending, revoking, or nonrenewal of the license to the
Borough Council by submitting in writing to the Borough Secretary within 30
days from the date printed on the notice, a detailed statement of appeal,
including the grounds therefore and the reasons alleged as to why the
determination of the Code Enforcement Officer is incorrect or should be
overturned and a statement of the relief requested by the appellant. Such
notice of appeal may be required to be submitted on a form to be prescribed
therefore by Borough Council, to be signed by the appellant. The cost for
filing such an appeal shall be determined and established from time to time by
resolution of the Borough Council, however, until modified by resolution, the
initial fee shall be as provided for above;
      (6)   Upon receipt of an appeal in proper form, accompanied by the
requisite fee, the Borough Secretary shall schedule a hearing to be held at the
time of the next regularly scheduled Borough Council meeting to be held not
less than ten days from the date on which the appeal was filed;
      (7)   The appellant, the Code Enforcement Officer, and the owners of
properties within a radius of 300 feet from the premises for which the license
is at issue, shall receive written notice of the hearing on the appeal; and
      (8)   Borough Council shall hold a hearing on the appeal, which shall be
conducted in accordance with the local agency law. The appellant, and all other
parties having an interest, may be heard based on the facts and arguments of
the appellant and of the Code Enforcement Officer, and any relevant factual
presentations of other parties. The Borough Council shall make a decision,
either affirming, reversing, or modifying the action of the Code Enforcement
Officer from which the appeal was taken. Such decision shall be rendered at a
public meeting, either immediately following the hearing or within 30 days
thereafter. The decision shall be reduced to writing stating clearly the
factual and legal basis for the decision, which decision shall be provided
within 45 days of the date of that hearing. If Borough Council deems it
necessary or desirable, the hearing may be continued to a subsequent time and
date not later than 30 days from the initial hearing date, which time and date
shall be openly announced at the initial hearing and in such case, the time
limits for rendering the decision and written opinion thereof shall be
calculated from the date of the last hearing.
   (D)   Notification of decision.
      (1)   All notices shall be sent to the owner and manager, if applicable,
by certified mail and by regular first class mail postage prepaid. In the event
that the certified mail notice is returned by the postal authorities marked
“unclaimed” or “refused,” but the first class mail notice is not returned
within five days following the deposit in the United States Mail, said notice
shall be deemed to have been delivered on the fifth day following deposit in
the United States Mail. In the event that the certified mail notice is returned
marked “unclaimed” or “refused” and the regular mail notice is returned by the
postal authorities marked “undeliverable,” the Code Enforcement Officer shall
attempt delivery by personal service on the owner or manager, if applicable.
      (2)   Upon delivery of the notification of the decision, pursuant to the
provisions hereof, the owner shall have the right to appeal said decision to
the Court of Common Pleas of the county. Upon notice of said appeal, the
borough shall cause to be filed with the Court a true and correct record of all
proceedings before Borough Council and said appeal shall proceed before that
Court in accordance with the provisions of the local agency law.
   (E)   Violations and remedies.
      (1)   Violations. It shall be unlawful for any person, as either owner or
manager of a rental unit for which a license is required, to operate without a
valid current license issued by the borough authorizing such operation. In
addition, it shall be unlawful for any person, either owner or manager, to
violate any other provision of this chapter.
      (2)   Nonexclusive remedies. The penalty provisions and the license
nonrenewal, suspension, and revocation procedures provided in this chapter
shall be independent, non-mutually exclusive separate remedies, all of which
shall be available to the borough as may be deemed appropriate for carrying out
the purposes of this chapter. The remedies and procedures provided in this
chapter for violation hereof are not intended to supplant or replace to any
degree the remedies and procedures available to the borough in case of a
violation of any other code or ordinance of the borough, whether or not such
other code or ordinance is referenced in this chapter, and whether or not an
ongoing violation of such other code or ordinance is cited as the underlying
ground for a finding of a violation of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 325.05) (Ord. 684, passed 10-19-2009) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.06 MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Notices.
      (1)   For purposes of this chapter, any notice required hereunder to be
given to a manager shall be deemed as notice given to the owner.
      (2)   There shall be a rebuttable presumption that any notice required to
be given to the owner under this chapter shall have been received by such owner
if the notice was given to the owner in the manner provided by this chapter.
      (3)   A claimed lack of knowledge by the owner of any violation hereunder
cited shall be no defense to license nonrenewal, suspension, or revocation
proceedings as long as all notices prerequisite to institution of such
proceedings have been given and deemed received in accordance with the
applicable provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   Changes in ownership. It shall be the duty of each owner of a rental
unit to notify the borough in writing of any change in ownership of the
premises or of the number of rental units in the premises. It shall also be the
duty of the owner to notify the borough in writing of any increase in the
number of occupants in any rental unit or of the changing of a dwelling unit
from owner occupied to non-owner occupied which thereby transforms the dwelling
into a rental unit for purposes of this chapter.
   (C)   Owners severally responsible. If any rental unit is owned by more than
one person in any form of joint tenancy, tenancy by the entireties, as a
partnership, or otherwise, each person shall be jointly and severally
responsible for the duties imposed under the terms of this chapter and shall be
severally subject to prosecution for the violation of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 325.06) (Ord. 684, passed 10-19-2009)
§ 113.07 SUITS FOR COLLECTION.
   (A)   In the event that any tax under this chapter remains due or unpaid for
30 days after the due date above set forth, the Tax Collector may sue for the
recovery of any such tax due or unpaid under this chapter, together with
interest and penalty.
   (B)   If the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate of 6% per annum
shall be calculated, beginning with the due date of the tax, and a penalty of
$15 shall be added to the flat rate of the tax for the non-payment thereof.
Where suit is brought for the recovery of this tax, the individual liable
therefor shall, in addition, be responsible and liable for the costs of
collection and reasonable attorney fees.
(Prior Code, § 325.07) (Ord. 698, passed 10-10-2011)
§ 113.99 PENALTY.
   Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this code
of ordinances or fails to comply therewith or with any of the requirements
thereof, upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a Magisterial
District Judge in the manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses
under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a
fine of not less than $100, nor more than $1,000, plus costs, including
reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred by the borough and, in default of payment
of said fines and costs, to a term of imprisonment to the extent permitted by
law for the punishment of summary offenses. A separate offense shall arise for
each day or portion thereof in which a violation of this code of ordinances is
found to exist or for each section of this code of ordinances found to have
been violated. The borough may also commence appropriate actions in equity to
prevent, restrain, correct, enjoin or abate violations of this code of
ordinances. All fines and penalties collected for violation of this code of
ordinances shall be paid to the borough.
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
      
130.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE AND MORALS
      
131.   FIREARMS AND EXPLOSIVES
CHAPTER 130: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC
PEACE AND MORALS
Section
General Provisions
   
130.01   Engine brakes
   
130.02   Curfew for minors
Noises
   
130.15   Unreasonable noise prohibited
   
130.16   Noises enumerated
   
130.17   Use of loudspeakers and the like; permit required
   
130.18   Exempted activities
 
   
130.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 130.01 ENGINE BRAKES.
   (A)   This section shall be known as the Borough Engine Brake Ordinance.
   (B)   This section is established pursuant to the policy established by the
Commonwealth Department of Transportation regarding brake retarder
prohibitions, a study having been performed pursuant to said procedure by the
Department of Transportation on State Route 128 within the borough and the
authority to enact an appropriate ordinance prohibiting the use of engine
retarders pursuant to said procedure as evidenced by correspondence from the
Commonwealth Department of Transportation, District Engineer of Engineering
District 10.
   (C)   The Borough Council finds it a fact that the operation of an engine
brake on a gasoline powered or diesel powered motor vehicle so as to create
excessive noise through the use of said engine brake on State Route 128 within
the borough adversely affects the public health, safety, and welfare of the
residents of the borough and, therefore, is a nuisance in fact.
   (D)   No gasoline powered or diesel powered motor vehicles shall be operated
on State Route 128 within the borough utilizing in said operations an engine
brake which permits excessive noise to be created by said motor vehicle.
   (E)   This section shall not apply to emergency driving situations requiring
the utilization of an engine brake to protect the safety and property of the
residents of the borough, other motor vehicle operators, pedestrians, and the
operator and passengers of motor vehicle in said emergency situation.
   (F)   Pursuant to the procedures of the Commonwealth Department of
Transportation, and pursuant to regulations of the Department with respect to
signs on highways, the Borough shall cause to be erected, upon the roadways
herein specified, signs regarding the prohibition of the use of said engine
brake on the designated roadways.
   (G)   This section, as per procedure of the Commonwealth Department of
Transportation, shall be enforceable by the Borough Police Department.
(Prior Code, § 705.13) (Ord. 643, passed 4-1-2002) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.02 CURFEW FOR MINORS.
   (A)   No child under the age of 18 years shall loiter on the streets or
elsewhere out of doors in the Borough, after 10:00 p.m., year-round, January 1
through December 31 of each calendar year, unless accompanied by a parent or
other adult guardian or having a newly written signed and dated statement from
such parent or guardian that such child is on an emergency errand.
   (B)   Any child found after the time appointed shall be warned by any police
officers to go home, and if after such warning the child is found loitering on
the streets, such child may be taken by such police officer to his or her home.
   (C)   No parent or guardian shall permit his or her child or ward to
habitually violate this section, after having been warned in writing.
(Prior Code, § 713.04)
   (D)   It is an exemption to a violation under this section that the person
engaged in the prohibited conduct while:
      (1)   Accompanied by the minor’s parent or guardian;
      (2)   On an errand at the direction of the minor’s parent or guardian,
without any detour or stop;
      (3)   In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;
      (4)   Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home
from an employment activity, without any detour or stop;
      (5)   Involved in an emergency;
      (6)   On the sidewalk abutting the minor’s residence or abutting the
residence of a next-door neighbor if the neighbor did not complain to the
Police Department about the minor’s presence;
      (7)   Attending an official school, religious or other recreational
activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the borough, a civic
organization or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor,
or going to or returning home from, without any detour or stop, an official
school, religious or other recreational activity supervised by adults and
sponsored by the borough, a civic organization or another similar entity that
takes responsibility for the minor;
      (8)   Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States
Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech and the
right of assembly; or
      (9)   Married or had been married or had disabilities of minority removed
in accordance with state law.
(Ord. 464, passed 7-7-1969; Ord. 599, passed 11-20-1990) Penalty, see §
130.99
NOISES
§ 130.15 UNREASONABLE NOISE PROHIBITED.
   Any unreasonably loud, disturbing, and unnecessary noise of such character,
intensity, and duration as to be detrimental to the life, health, peace, or
welfare of any individual is hereby declared to be a nuisance and is
prohibited.
(Prior Code, § 705.01) (Ord. 399, passed 1-14-1961) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.16 NOISES ENUMERATED.
   (A)   The following acts are hereby prohibited, but the list is not to be
deemed exclusive.
   (B)   Any other acts contemplated by §
130.15 are also prohibited although not specifically listed below:
      (1)   The sounding of any horn or signal device on any automobile,
motorcycle, bus, boat, or other vehicle, except as a danger signal in the
interests of safe operation of such vehicle;
      (2)   The operation of any radio, television, phonograph, juke box, or
any musical instrument in such a manner or with such volume as to annoy or
disturb the quiet comfort or repose of persons in any dwelling, hotel, rooming
house, or any type of residence;
      (3)   The keeping of any animal or bird which, by causing frequent or
long continuing noise, disturbs the comfort or repose of any person in the
vicinity;
      (4)   The use of any automobile or a vehicle of any kind to create any
loud or unnecessary noise such as grating, grinding, rattling, or screeching;
      (5)   The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine,
internal combustion engine, outboard motor, lawn mower, tractor, or motor
vehicle, except through a muffler or device which will prevent loud or
explosive noises therefrom;
      (6)   The creation of any excessive noise on any street, adjacent to any
church or school or any other institution of learning while the same is in
session, which noise unreasonably interferes with the working and activities of
the same, provided that conspicuous signs are displayed indicating the nature
of the institution;
      (7)   The creation of any unreasonably loud and excessive noise in the
loading or unloading of any vehicle or in the opening or destruction of bales,
boxes, crates, and cartons;
      (8)   The unreasonable shouting and crying of peddlers, hawkers, and
vendors, so as to disturb the peace and quiet of the community;
      (9)   The use of any drum, loudspeaker, or any other instrument or device
for the purpose of attracting attention to any performance, show, exhibition,
special event, sale, or display of merchandise or any other activity, subject
to the licensing provisions of §
130.17;
      (10)   The use of mechanical or electrical loudspeakers or amplifiers on
motor vehicles, boats, or aircraft for advertising or for any other purpose,
subject to the licensing provisions of §
130.17; and
      (11)   Any other unreasonable, loud, or excessive noise which disturbs
the peace, quiet, and welfare of the community.   
(Prior Code, § 705.02) (Ord. 399, passed 1-14-1961) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.17 USE OF LOUDSPEAKERS AND THE LIKE; PERMIT REQUIRED.
   Subject to the provisions of this subchapter and to other applicable laws,
persons desiring to use loudspeakers, musical instruments, bands, and the like,
either on motor or other vehicles or otherwise, at reasonable times and places,
may apply to the Borough Manager and/or his or her designee, or to the Chief of
Police when authorized by the Borough Manager and/or his or her designee, for a
permit to carry on such activity. Such permit shall be issued in the discretion
of the Borough Manager and/or his or her designee subject to reasonable
limitations and conditions in conformity with this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 705.03) (Ord. 399, passed 1-14-1961) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.18 EXEMPTED ACTIVITIES.
   The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply and are not intended to
apply to any church or school in carrying on its normal activities in the use
of an organ, radio, bell, chimes, or other instruments, apparatus, or devices
at reasonable times and in a manner so as not to disturb the peace and quiet of
the community.
(Prior Code, § 705.04) (Ord. 399, passed 1-14-1961)
§ 130.99 PENALTY.
   Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this code
of ordinances or fails to comply therewith or with any of the requirements
thereof, upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a Magisterial
District Judge in the manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses
under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a
fine of not less than $100, nor more than $1,000, plus costs, including
reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred by the borough and, in default of payment
of said fines and costs, to a term of imprisonment to the extent permitted by
law for the punishment of summary offenses. A separate offense shall arise for
each day or portion thereof in which a violation of this code of ordinances is
found to exist or for each section of this code of ordinances found to have
been violated. The borough may also commence appropriate actions in equity to
prevent, restrain, correct, enjoin or abate violations of this code of
ordinances. All fines and penalties collected for violation of this code of
ordinances shall be paid to the borough.
CHAPTER 131: FIREARMS AND EXPLOSIVES
Section
   
131.01   Discharging firearms and other weapons
   
131.02   Throwing missiles
   
131.03   Fireworks
   
131.04   Storage of explosives
 
   
131.99   Penalty
§ 131.01 DISCHARGING FIREARMS AND OTHER WEAPONS.
   No person shall discharge or fire any gun or other firearm, airgun, flobert
rifle, sling shot, or other instrument propelling solid substances, unless in
defense of person or property.
(Prior Code, § 725.01) (Ord. 227, passed 12-4-1944) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.02 THROWING MISSILES.
   No person shall throw or cause to be thrown on any streets, alleys, or other
public places of the borough shot, bullets, pebbles, stones, bricks, or other
missiles.
(Prior Code, § 725.02) (Ord. 1, passed 12-29-1898) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.03 FIREWORKS.
   (A)   General prohibition. No person shall manufacture, sell, offer to sell,
expose for sale, distribute, give or otherwise transfer any fireworks or other
flammable article containing explosive materials within the borough, except as
expressly permitted in this section.
   (B)   Use and discharge prohibited. No person shall use, ignite, discharge
or cause to be used, ignited or discharged within the borough any fireworks or
any other flammable article containing explosives of any kind, except as
provided in division (C) below.
   (C)   Borough-approved special events. Aerial fireworks or other airborne
pyrotechnic displays may be permitted only for borough-approved special events,
subject to all of the following requirements.
      (1)   Application. An event organizer must submit a written application
to the borough at least 30 days before the proposed event. The application must
identify the operator, location, date, type of aerial display, proposed safety
zone, insurance coverage and all permits required under the Pennsylvania
Fireworks Law and any applicable state or federal regulations.
      (2)   Licensed pyrotechnician. All aerial fireworks displays must be
conducted by a pyrotechnician licensed and certified under state law.
      (3)   Insurance. The applicant shall provide proof of liability insurance
in an amount set by Borough Council, naming the borough as an additional
insured.
      (4)   Safety measures. The applicant shall comply with all requirements
of NFPA 1123 or successor standards, including safety zones, fallout areas and
crowd separation distances. The borough may impose additional conditions to
protect persons or property.
      (5)   Borough approval required. No aerial fireworks display may occur
unless Borough Council issues written approval. Council may deny an application
for any reason related to public health, safety or welfare.
      (6)   Revocation. The borough may revoke a previously issued approval if
conditions of approval are violated or new information indicates a risk to the
public.
   (D)   Private use not permitted. Nothing in division (C) above authorizes
private individuals to use aerial fireworks for personal purposes. All consumer
fireworks remain prohibited unless part of a borough-approved special event
under division (C) above.
   (E)   Violation and penalties. Any person violating this section shall be
subject to the penalty provisions set forth in §
131.99. The borough may also commence appropriate actions in equity to prevent,
restrain, correct, enjoin or abate violations of this section. The initial
determination of violation is hereby delegated to the Borough Manager, Borough
Police, the Borough Code Enforcement Officer and to any other officer or agent
that the Borough Manager to the Borough Council shall deem appropriate.
§ 131.04 STORAGE OF EXPLOSIVES.
   (A)   No person shall store any dynamite, gunpowder, or other explosives or
explosive substances in the borough, except as provided in division (B) below.
   (B)   Persons engaged in the domestic manufacture of shotgun shells are
permitted to store gunpowder for such purposes in quantities of 50 pounds or
less, provided they obtain a permit for such storage from the Borough
Secretary. There shall be no charge for such permit.
(Prior Code, § 725.04) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.99 PENALTY.
   Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this code
of ordinances or fails to comply therewith or with any of the requirements
thereof, upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a Magisterial
District Judge in the manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses
under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a
fine of not less than $100, nor more than $1,000, plus costs, including
reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred by the borough and, in default of payment
of said fines and costs, to a term of imprisonment to the extent permitted by
law for the punishment of summary offenses. A separate offense shall arise for
each day or portion thereof in which a violation of this code of ordinances is
found to exist or for each section of this code of ordinances found to have
been violated. The borough may also commence appropriate actions in equity to
prevent, restrain, correct, enjoin or abate violations of this code of
ordinances. All fines and penalties collected for violation of this code of
ordinances shall be paid to the borough.
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   STREETS AND SIDEWALK AREAS
      
151.   BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES
      
152.   ZONING CODE
CHAPTER 150: STREETS AND SIDEWALK AREAS
Section
Sidewalks, Curbs, and Gutters
   
150.01   Sidewalk pavement and repair; responsibility of owners
   
150.02   Borough’s remedy for nonperformance
   
150.03   Driveway construction
Street Excavations
   
150.15   Purpose
   
150.16   Definitions
   
150.17   Permit required
   
150.18   Permits generally
   
150.19   Duties of permittee
   
150.20   General requirements
   
150.21   Pavement cut, excavation and backfill
   
150.22   Restoration of bituminous pavement
   
150.23   Restoration of other surfaces
   
150.24   Standards for the installation of pipe and other utilities
 
   
150.99   Penalty
SIDEWALKS, CURBS, AND GUTTERS
§ 150.01 SIDEWALK PAVEMENT AND REPAIR; RESPONSIBILITY OF OWNERS.
   It shall be the duty of the owner of any lot or ground fronting on any
avenue within the borough to cause the sidewalks in front of such ground to be
paved with flagstone or cement, and on any side street within the borough to
cause sidewalks in front of such ground to be paved with flagstone, cement, or
other material as directed by Council. Such pavement shall be not less than
five feet in width and in conformity with the grades and lines established by
the borough. It shall be the duty of the owner to keep such sidewalks in
complete and constant repair.
(Prior Code, § 901.01) (Ord. 29, passed 6-6-1906) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.02 BOROUGH’S REMEDY FOR NONPERFORMANCE.
   Should any owner neglect or refuse to pave his or her respective sidewalks
or footways as provided in §
150.01, within 60 days after having been notified by Council or the Public
Works Director, Borough Manager and/or their designee to do so, then it shall
become the duty of Council or the Public Works Director, Borough Manager and/or
their designee to cause the same to be done speedily, after notice, at the
expense of the borough. The borough, by its proper officers, shall then
proceed, as provided in the Borough Code, being 8 Pa.C.S. §§ 101 et seq., to
recover the amount so expended, with 10% added thereto as a penalty for such
neglect or refusal, which sum shall be paid into the Borough Treasury for the
use of the borough.
(Prior Code, § 901.02)
§ 150.03 DRIVEWAY CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   Damage to sidewalk and curb; consent required. No person shall build
or construct a private driveway from any street, avenue, or alley into his or
her lot whereby the street curb on the sidewalk is crossed, molested, or
defaced, without first having obtained the consent of Council or of the Street
Committee thereof.
(Prior Code, § 1721.01)
   (B)   Supervision of Council or representative. Anyone desiring to build or
construct a private driveway from any street, avenue, or alley into his or her
lot shall make application to Council or the Street Committee thereof for the
privilege, and, consent having been first obtained, shall build and construct
the same under the direction and to the satisfaction of Council or its Street
Committee or a person designated to oversee the work.
(Prior Code, § 1721.02)
   (C)   Repair of curb and sidewalk; borough’s remedy for noncompliance.
      (1)   No person shall fail, within five days after receiving notice to do
so from Council or the Street Committee thereof, to replace the curb and
sidewalk in the same condition as it was before starting to build and construct
such driveway.
      (2)   If any person neglects or refuses to replace the curbing and
sidewalk as required by division (C)(1) above, the borough shall have the same
done by its officers and employees and shall recover the cost thereof, together
with a 10% penalty and all charges and expenses, from such owner, and may file
a municipal claim therefor or collect the same by action in assumpsit. This
remedy shall be in addition to the penalty provided for in §
150.99(B).
(Prior Code, § 1721.03)
(Ord. 55, passed 9-12-1911) Penalty, see §
150.99
STREET EXCAVATIONS
§ 150.15 PURPOSE.
   These regulations are adopted and implemented to achieve the following
general purposes and objectives:
   (A)   To regulate the opening, excavation and tunneling under streets and
right-of-way of the borough;
   (B)   To require a permit and payment of a fee;
   (C)   To provide for the protection, refilling, resurfacing and repairing of
excavations;
   (D)   To prescribe insurance and deposit requirements; and
   (E)   To prescribe penalties for violations.
§ 150.16 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly requires a different meaning.
   APPLICANT. Any person, partnership or corporation who makes application for
a permit.
   BACKFILL. Approved material used to fill a trench or other excavation or the
process of doing so.
   BOROUGH. The Borough of Ford City, its officers, employees and officials.
   BOROUGH STREET. Any road which has been dedicated to and accepted by the
borough for use as a public street. See CARTWAY.
   CARTWAY. Paved area of the street within which vehicles are permitted,
including, curbs and shoulders.
   DEGRADATION FEE. A fee established from time to time by resolution of
Borough Council. This fee is imposed on any person, partnership or corporation
which obtains a street excavation permit, and the work to be performed includes
open cutting any borough street.
   DRIVEWAY. Private roadway providing access for vehicles to a parking space,
garage, dwelling or other structure.
   EMERGENCY SITUATION. A situation or event, such as breakage of a utility
line, which presents an imminent hazard to the public health, safety and
welfare. Not included in this definition is the routine replacement or
replacement of service facilities which are being constructed or replaced as
part of normal expansion or routine maintenance activities.
   EXCAVATION. Removal of soil, rocks, sidewalk, driveway or cartway material
for the purpose of installing, replacing, repairing or removing underground
facilities.
   NORMAL FLOW. The direction, intensity and volume of stormwater runoff
typically present during various precipitation events.
   PAVEMENT CUTS. Open cutting of a cartway, sidewalk or driveway.
   PENNDOT. The Pennsylvania Department of Transportation.
   PERMIT FEE. Fee established by Borough Council for the purpose of
administration costs in issuing permits.
   PERMITTEE. Any person, partnership or corporation to whom a permit is
issued.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. Land under the control of the borough which contains borough
streets, sidewalks, driveways, driveway aprons and other nonpaved portions of
land which may or may not contain aboveground or underground utilities.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY OCCUPANCY PERMIT. A permit which, when issued, permits the
permittee to install facilities within a borough right-of-way. The work
permitted under this permit shall not include any work authorized by a street
excavation permit.
   SIDEWALK. A paved, surfaced or level area, paralleling and usually separated
from the cartway used as a pedestrian walkway, to include curb.
   SITE PLAN. A plan of the area to be worked upon which shows all pertinent
information including, but not limited to, right-of-way lines, street
locations, sidewalk locations and any existing sub-surface and aboveground
utilities which may be impacted by the work to be performed.
   STREET EXCAVATION PERMIT. A permit which, when issued, permits the permittee
to open cut any borough street, sidewalk or driveway or tunnel under any
borough street, sidewalk or driveway.
   SUBSURFACE FACILITIES. Any public utility or private transmission lines
which are located below grade.
§ 150.17 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to make any tunnel, opening or
excavation of any kind in or under the surface of any street without first
securing a permit from the Public Works Director or Borough Manager for each
separate undertaking; provided, however, any person maintaining pipes, lines or
other underground facilities in or under the surface of any street may proceed
with an opening without a permit when emergency circumstances demand the work
to be done immediately; provided, the permit could not reasonably and
practically have been obtained beforehand.
   (B)   In such cases where emergency openings are necessary, the borough
shall be notified prior to such opening via telephone, electronic mail or fax
notification. The person shall thereafter apply for a permit on the first
regular business day on which the borough is open for business and said permit
shall be retroactive to the date when the work was begun.
§ 150.18 PERMITS GENERALLY.
   (A)   Street excavation permit application. A street excavation permit shall
be obtained before any person, partnership or corporation may open/cut, disturb
or replace any borough street, sidewalk, curb or driveway, or utilize any type
of device or equipment which tunnels under any borough street, sidewalk,
driveway or driveway apron.
      (1)   Application for a street excavation permit shall be accompanied by:
         (a)   A completed and signed application form;
         (b)   The required permit and inspection fee;
         (c)   The required degradation fee, if necessary;
         (d)   The required performance guarantee;
         (e)   A site plan as defined in “site plan;”
         (f)   A location plan which generally indicates the distance the
street excavation will occur from the nearest intersecting street;
         (g)   A profile indicating the elevation(s) of the subsurface
facilities which are being removed, repaired or constructed. This profile shall
indicate the depth below the roadway surface at which the work is going to be
performed;
         (h)   Each applicant shall provide the borough with an acceptable
certificate of insurance naming the borough as an additional insured and
indicating the applicant is insured against claims for damages for personal
injury, as well as claims for property damage which may arise from or out of
the performance of the work, whether by it, his or her subcontractor, or any
one directly or indirectly employed by the applicant. Such insurance shall
cover collapse, explosive hazards and underground work by equipment on the
street, and shall include protection against liability arising from all
operations whether completed or in progress. The amount of liability insurance
for bodily injury in effect shall not be less than $1,000,000 for each person,
and for property damages not less than $1,000,000 with an aggregate of not less
than $2,000,000 for each occurrence. Such certificates may be filed with the
borough on an annual basis; and
         (i)   Additional documents as the borough may require.
      (2)   The granting of any street excavation permit shall confer a right
upon the permittee, subject to the terms and conditions of the permit, to
temporarily occupy and use the street surface during the course of construction
work covered by the permit, and to thereafter occupy the space within which the
work is to be located, subject in every case to the specific right to the
borough to require temporary or permanent relocation or removal of any of the
facilities entirely at the permittee’s expense in the event said facilities are
in conflict with the borough’s interest or the public interest in the use of
the street.
   (B)   Right-of-way occupancy permit application. A right-of-way occupancy
permit shall be obtained before any person, partnership or corporation shall
perform work in any borough right-of-way which does not include activity which
requires a street excavation permit.
      (1)   Application for a right-of-way occupancy permit shall be
accompanied by:
         (a)   A completed and signed application form;
         (b)   Required permit and inspection fee;
         (c)   A site plan which clearly shows where the right-of-way work will
occur;
         (d)   Each applicant shall provide the borough with an acceptable
certificate of insurance naming the borough as an additional insured and
indicating the applicant is insured against claims for damages for personal
injury, as well as claims for property damage which may arise from or out of
the performance of the work, whether by it, his or her subcontractor, or any
one directly or indirectly employed by the applicant. Such insurance shall
cover collapse, explosive hazards and underground work by equipment on the
street, and shall include protection against liability arising from all
operations whether completed or in progress. The amount of liability insurance
for bodily injury in effect shall not be less than $1,000,000 for each person,
and for property damages not less than $1,000,000 with an aggregate of not less
than $2,000,000 for each occurrence. Such certificates may be filed with the
borough on an annual basis; and
         (e)   Additional documentation as the borough may require.
      (2)   The granting of a right-of-way occupancy permit shall confer a
right upon the permittee, subject to the terms and conditions of the permit, to
temporarily occupy and use the street right-of-way during the course of
construction work covered by the permit, and to thereafter occupy the space
within which the work is to be located, subject in every case to the specific
right of the borough to require temporary or permanent relocation or removal of
any of the facilities entirely at the permittee’s expense in the event said
facilities are in conflict with the borough’s interest or the pubic interest in
the use of the right-of-way. The right-of-way occupancy permit does not
authorize the permittee to perform any work which is governed by the
requirements of a street excavation permit. The permittee shall be responsible
for the repair of any and all facilities damaged during the excavation. The
permittee shall immediately inform the Borough Engineer when damage to a sewer
or other utility occurs. All repairs to damaged facilities shall be made as per
the requirements of the Borough Engineer.
   (C)   General permitting process.
      (1)   The completed application shall be submitted to the borough at the
Borough Building. Upon receipt, the Public Works Director or Borough Manager
shall:
         (a)   Review all documentation for completeness and accuracy; and
         (b)   Review and render a decision regarding the application within
ten working days of his or her receipt of said application.
      (2)   Upon approval of an application, the borough shall provide the
applicant with two signed copies of the permit. The applicant must maintain one
copy of the approved application at the job site.
      (3)   In granting any permit, the borough may attach such special
conditions thereto as may be reasonably necessary to protect public and private
property.
      (4)   By accepting the permit, the permittee agrees to perform the work
in accordance with the terms and conditions of the permit, and of any special
conditions which may be attached thereto, and to save and hold harmless the
borough, its officers, employees and agents from any costs, damages and
liabilities which may accrue by reason of the work.
      (5)   Every permit issued hereunder shall expire 30 days after it is
issued. If the permittee shall be unable to complete the work within the
specific time, he or she shall, prior to expiration of the permit, present in
writing to the borough a request for an extension of time, setting forth
therein the reasons for the requested extension. If, in the opinion of the
borough, such an extension is necessary, the permittee may be granted
additional time for the completion of the work.
      (6)   The applicant must notify the Public Works Department at least 24
hours before work is commenced and shall not backfill any open cut before the
Public Works Director or Borough Manager has inspected the site.
      (7)   The borough may revoke any permit issued under the provisions of
this subchapter if it deems that the terms of the permit are being violated
upon revocation of the permit, the borough shall provide the permittee with a
written explanation of the terms of the permit which are being violated and
establish a time framed under which the permittee must complete all necessary
reparations to bring the job into compliance with the provisions of the permit.
      (8)   If final paving repairs are not completed to the satisfaction of
the borough, the borough reserves the right, after notice to the permittee, to
complete final paving repairs, including the removal of substandard work. These
repairs will be funded by the performance guarantee which the permittee must
provide. Upon the satisfactory completion of all work, the borough shall issue
a final completion certificate and return the required performance guarantee or
portion thereof.
      (9)   Upon the satisfactory completion of all work, the borough shall
issue a final completion certificate.
      (10)   By accepting the permit, the permittee agrees to perform the work
in accordance with PennDOT’s Publication 213, “Work Zone Traffic Control
Guidelines.”
   (D)   Permit fees, inspection fees, degradation fees, performance guarantees
and maintenance guarantees.
      (1)   A permit fee and an inspection fee shall be charged for each
application under this subchapter. The fees shall be established by resolution
of Borough Council, as amended from time to time.
      (2)   Performance guarantees shall be provided for street excavations in
the following manner:
         (a)   A bond, letter of credit, or cashiers check of $10,000 or the
actual cost as confirmed by the Borough Engineer if elected by the borough
shall be provided at the date of the first application for a street excavation
permit in a calendar year. This guarantee will be returned when all the work is
done satisfactorily;
         (b)   A bond, letter of credit or cashiers check in the amount of
$10,000 or the actual cost as confirmed by the Borough Engineer if elected by
the borough shall be provided to the borough on the date of the second street
excavation permit application for that calendar year. This guarantee shall be
good for the entire year in which it is issued. The guarantee will cover all
additional street excavation activities during that calendar year. This
guarantee will be returned when all jobs started in that calendar year are
completed satisfactorily;
         (c)   A degradation fee shall be charged to any party which was duly
notified of the borough’s intention to reconstruct or repave a cartway and when
a notified party applies for a permit to excavate a trench of over 30 feet in
length in a cartways that was repaved within five calendar years from the date
of notification. This fee shall be established by resolution of Borough
Council, as amended from time to time; and
         (d)   These fees and the amount of performance guarantees may be
changed by resolution of Borough Council.
   (E)   Enforcement procedures. The Borough Engineer, Borough Code Enforcement
Officer, Public Works Director or Borough Manager, Borough Police or other
official designated by the Borough Manager may prevent or restrain any work
which is proceeding without benefit of a street excavation permit or right-of-
way occupancy permit.
 
§ 150.19 DUTIES OF PERMITTEE.
   It shall be the duty of any person or entity obtaining a permit:
   (A)   To confine such opening or excavation to the portion of the street and
to the dimensions generally indicated on the permit;
   (B)   To commence such work of opening or excavation on the date indicated
in such permit, or as soon as practical thereafter, and to complete such work,
along with the refilling of the excavation and the restoration of the street
surface as required, on or before the date of expiration of such permit;
   (C)   To notify the Public Works Director or Borough Manager before such
opening or excavation is to be refilled, and thereupon to complete such work of
refilling and resurfacing to the satisfaction of the Public Works Director or
Borough Manager or designee and in strict conformity with the requirements of
this subchapter;
   (D)   While such work is underway, and at all times prior to the completion
of the resurfacing of the street, to keep in place sufficient barricades,
warning signs and warning lights or flares to guard the opening or excavation
and to warn the traveling public of its location at all times between sunset
and sunrise and at all other times when visibility is such as to make their use
necessary; and/or
   (E)   To refill the opening or excavation and to resurface the portion of
the street excavated in accordance with the requirements set forth in §
150.22. The resurfacing shall be done in such a manner as to connect with the
existing street surface adjacent to the new resurfacing at the same level so
that there are no uneven portions of the street where the existing surface
joins the newly resurfaced portion of the street.
§ 150.20 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Unless specifically permitted by the borough:
      (1)   No street opening shall extend more than one-half of the cartway at
one time;
      (2)   Two-way traffic shall be maintained;
      (3)   Access to driveways and/or buildings abutting the street shall be
maintained;
      (4)   Not more than 250 lineal feet of any street shall be opened at any
time; and/or
      (5)   No excavated materials or backfill materials shall be stockpiled on
the cartway or sidewalk.
   (B)   The permittee shall locate in advance of excavation all surface and
subsurface utility lines and structures, as required by 73 P.S. §§ 176 et seq.,
also known as the Pennsylvania One Call System. The permittee shall take all
precautions necessary to avoid damage to other utility lines including loop
detectors, and to public and private property. In the event damage does occur
to the property of others, the permittee shall promptly and satisfactorily
repair all damages and restore the property to a satisfactory condition.
   (C)   Provisions shall be made to accommodate the flow of storm water
drainage, and no excavated material or trench shall be permitted to interfere
with the normal flow of surface water. Erosion and sedimentation controls shall
be installed as needed.
   (D)   Traffic control shall be maintained in accordance with Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation requirements, and the permittee shall furnish and
maintain upon the work site such signs, barricades, lights and flagmen as may
be necessary to insure safe travel for vehicular and pedestrian traffic.
   (E)   No blasting may be performed without a blasting plan approved by the
borough. If blasting activities are performed pursuant to an approved blasting
plan, then such operations shall be performed by persons authorized by all
federal, state, county and local authorities to undertake such activities and
shall be carried out in strict accordance with federal, state, county and
municipal laws or regulations governing the same.
   (F)   Appropriate measures must be taken to provide access for emergency
vehicles and to all properties affected by the work.
§ 150.21 PAVEMENT CUT, EXCAVATION AND BACKFILL.
   (A)   Cuts through bituminous wearing surfaces shall be scored on a neat,
straight line to the full trench width, using either a pneumatic spade or a
concrete saw. Cuts through Portland cement concrete shall be sawed to a
sufficient depth to enable removal of concrete with a clean saw break.
   (B)   Excavated material shall be removed immediately or laid compactly off
the cartway surface to cause as little inconvenience as possible to public
travel. Pedestrian sidewalks shall be kept clean and free of obstruction and,
where necessary, temporary bridging or plank walkways shall be provided.
Excavated material not suitable for backfill shall be immediately removed as
excavation is in progress. Construction material shall not be stored in the
public street, except immediately in advance of installation. Loose earth and
stone shall be promptly cleaned from the streets and sidewalks, and dust shall
be regularly swept up and removed.
   (C)   Sidewalls of a trench under four feet in depth shall be kept as nearly
vertical as possible. When over four feet in depth, the trench shall comply
with the requirements established by Occupational Safety and Health
Administration standards.
   (D)   An opening shall be backfilled by the permittee in accordance with the
following:
      (1)   The opening may first be backfilled with fine aggregate materials,
meeting the requirements of § 703.1 of PennDOT Publication 408, or granular
material to protect the facility, placed to a height not to exceed one foot
over the top of the facility, if the material is compacted to not more than
four-inch loose layers or as authorized under PennDOT Publication 408. To help
protect its facility from future excavations, the permittee is required to
place a permanent ribbon colored under this division (D) at least one foot
above its facility. If the facility is nonmetallic, the permittee is also
required to place a metallic ribbon at a depth from which the ribbon can be
sensed by typical metal locating instruments.
      (2)   The opening shall then be backfilled with select granular material,
unless retained suitable materials, as defined in § 459.1 (relating to
definitions), is authorized or other coarse aggregate material meeting the
requirements of § 703.2 of PennDOT Publication 408 is specified in the permit.
Select granular material or other aggregate material will be required for use
as backfill of openings in pavements, paved shoulders and improved (for
example, oil and chip) shoulders as well as unimproved (for example, stabilized
or earth surface) shoulders within three feet of the edge of pavement. Retained
suitable material will normally be authorized for use as backfill of openings
outside shoulders and in unimproved shoulders more than three feet outside the
edge of pavement and up to within three feet of the surface.
      (3)   Backfill should be compacted as follows.
         (a)   General rule. Except as provided in divisin (D)(2) above,
backfill material shall be placed in loose layers not to exceed eight inches if
vibratory compaction equipment is used or as authorized under PennDOT
Publication 408. Each layer shall be thoroughly compacted to preclude
subsidence, under § 601.3(e) of PennDOT Publication 408.
         (b)   Compaction outside pavement shoulders. At least 15 days prior to
the start of work, the applicant may submit its written compaction plan to the
borough requesting backfill in an opening outside the pavement and shoulder to
be placed in layers thicker than eight inches prior to compaction. The
compaction plan shall include full details of equipment, materials and work
methods as well as the permittee’s acknowledgement of its obligation and
commitment to regularly monitor the restored surface until two years after the
acknowledged completion of the permitted work and to promptly correct failure
or subsidence of the highway.
         (c)   Existing pavement elevation. Compaction shall be completed to
the bottom elevation of the existing pavement.
      (4)   The borough may require the permittee to have material proposed for
use as backfill and compacted material tested, at the expense of the permittee,
for conformance to the applicable gradation and compaction requirements of
PennDOT Publication 408.
      (5)   Test holes shall be backfilled, as soon as safely possible, with
existing type material or other material authorized by the borough and sealed.
The borough may authorize test holes in the pavement or shoulder to be restored
without a one-foot cutback of the surrounding surface.
   (E)   All cuts, excavation and backfill shall be performed to the
satisfaction of the Public Works Director or Borough Manager, who may in
consultation with Borough Engineer, develop additional work standards.
§ 150.22 RESTORATION OF BITUMINOUS PAVEMENT.
   (A)   Temporary repairs to bituminous pavement shall consist of the trench
being backfilled with select granular material and topped with at least three
and one-half inches of cold patch. In all cases, the permittee is responsible
to maintain temporary pavement repairs in good condition, free of chuck-holes
and soft spots, and to clean the street surface of any debris or earth which
may be carried over the street.
   (B)   Final pavement restoration shall be made only between April 1 and
October 31 each year. If, because of weather conditions or time of year,
temporary paving and natural stone or gravel are utilized, these temporary
materials must be removed to a depth of at least 13 inches below finished
street paving grade. All temporary materials shall be removed and replaced with
permanent repairs as soon as weather conditions permit. All permanent repairs
shall be made as follows.
      (1)   If the trench does not cross the center line of the cartway, the
entire disturbed lane shall be milled to a depth of one and one-half inches and
repaved after the trench has been properly backfilled and binder installed as
per the borough’s trench restoration detail(s). In areas where the trench runs
along or crosses the center line of the cartway, the entire pavement width
(curb-to-curb width) of the affected street shall be milled (as needed) and
repaved with wearing. All paving shall run a length of at least ten feet in
excess of trench length on each side of the disturbed area and be properly
keyed in and sealed.
      (2)   All restoration of bituminous pavement shall be performed to the
satisfaction of the Public Works Director or Borough Manager, who may in
consultation with Borough Engineer to develop additional work standards.
§ 150.23 RESTORATION OF OTHER SURFACES.
   (A)   Requirements for permanent repairs to surfaces other than bituminous
pavement will be determined by the Public Works Director or Borough Manager,
who may in consultation with the Borough Engineer and Borough Council develop
additional work standards. In general, final restorations in any case shall be
equal to the original surface.
   (B)   Sidewalks must be replaced to meet criteria in this subchapter prior
to pouring the concrete. The sidewalk subbase and forms must be inspected and
approved.
   (C)   Where an excavation or disturbance occurs within a brick street, the
brick surface shall not be reinstalled or re-laid. Instead, the disturbed area
shall be restored to the established street grade and resurfaced with
bituminous pavement in full accordance with the pavement restoration
requirements, including milling, paving limits and trench restoration details.
The permittee shall restore the full lane width or full cartway width, as
directed by the Borough Manager or Director of Public Works, to ensure a
uniform, safe and durable paved surface over the former brick area. All brick
removed during construction shall be collected, stockpiled and delivered to the
borough at a location designated by the borough.
   (D)   This section shall not apply to any brick street laid after January 1,
2000. In such case, brick pavement shall be restored to good condition as per
the borough’s brick pavement specifications and details.
§ 150.24 STANDARDS FOR THE INSTALLATION OF PIPE AND OTHER UTILITIES.
   All work shall be completed as per the standards approved by the Borough
Engineer and be in conformance with PennDOT Publication 408, the Pennsylvania
Public Utility Commission and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection Standards.
§ 150.99 PENALTY.
   Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this code
of ordinances or fails to comply therewith or with any of the requirements
thereof, upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a Magisterial
District Judge in the manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses
under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a
fine of not less than $100, nor more than $1,000, plus costs, including
reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred by the borough and, in default of payment
of said fines and costs, to a term of imprisonment to the extent permitted by
law for the punishment of summary offenses. A separate offense shall arise for
each day or portion thereof in which a violation of this code of ordinances is
found to exist or for each section of this code of ordinances found to have
been violated. The borough may also commence appropriate actions in equity to
prevent, restrain, correct, enjoin or abate violations of this code of
ordinances. All fines and penalties collected for violation of this code of
ordinances shall be paid to the borough.
CHAPTER 151: BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES
Section
General Provisions
   
151.01   Fire limits
   
151.02   Emergency demolition of dangerous buildings
   
151.03   Occupancy permits
   
151.04   Business and commercial occupancy permits
   
151.05   Smoke detectors
Uniform Construction Code
   
151.20   Election to administer
   
151.21   Adoption
   
151.22   Manner of administration, enforcement
   
151.23   Board of Appeals
   
151.24   Prior ordinances continue in effect
   
151.25   Fees
   
151.26   Effective date
International Property Maintenance Code
   
151.40   Adoption
   
151.41   Amendments
   
151.42   Conflicts
   
151.43   Suits and proceedings
 
   
151.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 151.01 FIRE LIMITS.
   Fire limits for the borough are hereby established as follows: beginning at
a point being the intersection of the center line of Ninth Street and Third
Avenue; thence north 36°20’ east being the center line of Third Avenue, a
distance of 688.0 feet to the intersection of the center line of a 13-foot
alley; thence south 53° 40’ east along the center line of such alley, a
distance of 317 feet to the center line of Fourth Avenue; thence north 36°20’
east along the center line of Fourth Avenue 138.0 feet to the center line of
O’Connor Street; thence south 53° 40’ east along the center line of O’Connor
Street a distance of 178.0 feet to the center line of Birch Alley; thence north
36° 20’ east along the center line of Birch Alley, a distance of 137 feet to
the center line of another alley; thence south 53° 40’ east along the center
line of such alley, a distance of 178.0 feet to the center line of Fifth
Avenue; thence south 36° 20’ west along the center line of Fifth Avenue, a
distance of 413 feet to the center line of Tenth Street; thence south 53° 40’
east along the center line of Tenth Street, a distance of 178.0 feet to the
center line of Cypress Alley; thence south 36° 20’ west along the center line
of Cypress Alley, a distance of 1,100 feet to the center line of Eighth Street,
thence north 53°40’ west along the center line of Eighth Street for a distance
of 534 feet to the center line of Fourth Avenue; thence north 36°20’ east along
the center line of Fourth Avenue, 550 feet to the center line of Ninth Street;
thence north 53° 40’ west along the center line of Ninth Street, a distance of
317 feet to the point of beginning.
(Prior Code, § 1723.01) (Ord. 425, passed 12-5-1963)
§ 151.02 EMERGENCY DEMOLITION OF DANGEROUS BUILDINGS.
   (A)   Criteria for emergency demolition. The borough may cause any building
or structure to be immediately demolished if the building or structure meets
one or more of the following criteria and is deemed by the Borough Building
Code Official, in his or her sole judgment after review, to be at risk of
imminent collapse:
      (1)   Buildings or structures that are so deteriorated or dilapidated or
have become so out of repair as to be dangerous, unsafe, insanitary, or
otherwise unfit for human habitation or occupancy, as these terms are defined
under § 108 of the 2015 International Property Maintenance Code, such that it
is unreasonable to repair the structure;
      (2)   Buildings or structures whose interior walls or other vertical
structural members lean or buckle to such an extent that their longitudinal
dimension is 3% or more from being vertically plumb or horizontally straight;
      (3)   Buildings or structures which, exclusive of the foundation, show
30% or more damage or deterioration to their supporting member(s) or 50% or
more damage or deterioration to their non-supporting interior or outside walls
or coverings;
      (4)   Buildings or structures which have been damaged by fire, wind, or
other causes and have become, in the Borough Building Code Official’s sole
judgment after review, dangerous to the life, safety, morals, or the general
health and welfare of the occupants or others; or
      (5)   Buildings or structures which are so decayed or dilapidated that
all or parts of the buildings or structures may fall and injure members of the
public or cause damage to adjacent property.
   (B)   Investigation and report of dangerous or unsafe conditions/risk of
imminent collapse. The Borough Building Code Official shall immediately cause
an investigation and examine any building or structure existing, or in the
process of being construction, which is in a dangerous or unsafe condition and
at risk of imminent collapse. If necessary, the Borough Building Code Official
shall obtain an administrative search warrant to permit said inspection if he
or she is not able to inspect the property from a lawful vantage point.
Following his or her investigation, the Borough Building Code Official will
immediately provide written confirmation of the findings of the examination to
the Borough Manager and Borough Solicitor.
   (C)   Declaration of nuisance. All unsafe or dangerous buildings or
structures at risk of imminent collapse, as herein defined, are declared to be
public nuisances.
   (D)   Demolition by borough; recovery of costs. The Borough Building Code
Official is empowered to take any and all necessary steps to cause an unsafe or
dangerous building or structure at risk of imminent collapse to be demolished
and removed, either through an available public agency or by contract or
arrangement with private persons, and the Borough shall collect the cost of
removal, together with a penalty of 10% of the costs, in the manner provided by
law for the collection of municipal claims, or by action of assumpsit or bill
in equity.
(Ord. 747, passed 7-13-2020)
§ 151.03 OCCUPANCY PERMITS.
   (A)   Occupancy permit required.
      (1)   This section shall apply only to dwellings or other living quarters
not occupied by the owner of the dwelling or living quarters. Except for a
change in occupancy to the owner of the dwelling or living quarters, there
shall be no change in the occupancy of any non-owner occupied dwelling, or
other non-owner occupied living quarters, in the borough, unless and until such
time as the owner thereof, or his or her agent, has secured an occupancy permit
to be issued by the Borough Secretary.
      (2)   The initial occupancy permit fee shall be as established by
resolution of the Borough Council from time to time. This fee may be changed
from time to time by resolution of the Borough Council.
(Prior Code, § 1903.01)
   (B)   Application. Application for an occupancy permit shall be made upon
the forms provided by the borough.
(Prior Code, § 1903.02)
(Ord. 701, passed 5-14-2012) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.04 BUSINESS AND COMMERCIAL OCCUPANCY PERMITS.
   (A)   Definition. The definition of the term OCCUPANCY shall include the
occupant of a premises and/or the use of the premises.
(Prior Code, § 1905.01)
   (B)   Permit required for change in occupancy. There shall be no change in
the occupancy of any commercial property and business in the borough until such
time as the owner, lessee, or agent thereof has secured an occupancy permit to
be issued by the Borough Secretary, for the fee as established by resolution of
the Borough Council from time to time.
(Prior Code, § 1905.02)
   (C)   Application. The application for the occupancy permit shall disclose
the following information:
      (1)   Address and identification of the premises to be occupied;
      (2)   Name and address of the owner(s);
      (3)   Number of rooms;
      (4)   Bathroom facilities;
      (5)   General condition of premises;
      (6)   Proposed use of premises;
      (7)   Name or prior tenant(s) or occupant(s); and
      (8)   Name(s) of prospective occupant(s).
(Prior Code, § 1905.03)
   (D)   Certification by Building Inspector. No permit shall be issued until
such time as the premises are deemed to be in compliance with all applicable
codes and ordinances as certified in writing by the Building Inspector.
(Prior Code, § 1905.04)
   (E)   Valid only for specified occupant. The permit is only valid for the
occupancy of the premises as stated on the permit and must be reapplied for by
each succeeding occupancy.
(Prior Code, § 1905.05)
   (F)   Revocation of permit. The borough reserves the right to revoke the
permit of any commercial property or business, upon the recommendation of the
Building Inspector, if the occupancy is found not in compliance with borough
safety and health standards, or in violation of this or any other building code
or ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 1905.06)
(Ord. 609, passed 6-18-1991) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.05 SMOKE DETECTORS.
   (A)   Definitions.    For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      DWELLING UNIT. A structure or portion thereof, building or portion
thereof, arranged for the use of one or more individuals living together as a
housekeeping unit on a permanent, temporary, or transient basis which may or
may not include sanitary facilities or facilities for preparation, storage, or
serving of food.
      OWNER. Any person or entity who, alone, or jointly or severally with
other persons or entities, has legal title to any premises. This includes, but
is not limited to, any person who has charge, care, or control over any
premises. This includes, but is not limited to, any person who has charge,
care, or control over any premises as: an agent, officer, fiduciary, or
employee of the owners; the committee, conservator, or legal guardian of an
owner who is incompetent, a minor or otherwise under a disability; a trustee,
elected or appointed, or a person required by law to act as a trustee, other
than a trustee under a Deed of Trust to secure the payment of money; or an
executor, administrator, receiver, fiduciary, officer appointed by any court,
attorney in fact, or other similar representative of the owner or his or her
estate. This includes a lessee, a sublessee, or other person who has the right
to occupy or possess the premises.
      SMOKE DETECTOR. An automatic device which detects visible or invisible
particles of combustion and is capable of providing a suitable audible alarm of
at least 85 decibels at ten feet, either ionization or photo-electric type. It
shall have Underwriters Laboratories approval.
(Prior Code, § 1907.01)
   (B)   Required in dwelling units. In each dwelling unit or individual
apartment within buildings used as multiple dwellings, there shall be provided
by the owner of the real estate a minimum of one smoke detector sending device,
installed in accordance with National Fire Protection Standard No. 74, as
hereafter supplemented or amended.
(Prior Code, § 1907.02)
   (C)   Alarm requirements. Said smoke detector sensing device shall provide
an alarm suitable to warn occupants within individual dwelling units in the
event of fire.
(Prior Code, § 1907.03)
   (D)   Installation and inspection.
      (1)   The smoke detector sensing device shall be installed as above in
all multiple dwellings immediately and shall be installed, by the owner, in all
other buildings within the borough not later than upon change of ownership of
real estate upon which the building is erected.
      (2)   The Fire Chief of the borough may inspect each smoke detector
sensing device installed within a dwelling unit at least one time per year, or
in the case of fire within the dwelling unit, immediately thereafter to
ascertain that such smoke detector fulfills the requirements of this section
and is in operable condition.
(Prior Code, § 1907.04)
   (E)   Maintenance.
      (1)   It shall be the owner’s responsibility and duty to:
         (a)   Install the required smoke detectors;
         (b)   Periodically inspect the smoke detectors to ensure working
condition;
         (c)   Maintain each smoke detector in proper working condition; and
         (d)   Inform all persons residing in each dwelling unit of the
presence and purpose of the smoke detector.
      (2)   It shall be the occupant’s responsibility and duty to:
         (a)   Periodically inspect the smoke detectors to ensure working
condition;
         (b)   Maintain each smoke detector in proper working condition; and
         (c)   Inform all persons residing in each dwelling unit of the
presence and purpose of the smoke detector.
(Prior Code, § 1907.05)
(Ord. 619, passed 5-17-1994) Penalty, see §
151.99
UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE
§ 151.20 ELECTION TO ADMINISTER.
   This municipality hereby elects to administer and enforce the provisions of
the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act, Act 45 of 1999, being 35 P.S. §§
7210.101 through 7210.1103, as amended from time to time, and its regulations.
(Prior Code, § 1707.01) (Ord. 657, passed 6-28-2004)
§ 151.21 ADOPTION.
   The Uniform Construction Code, contained in 34 Pa. Code, Chapters 401
through 405, as amended from time to time, is hereby adopted and incorporated
herein by reference as the municipal building code of this municipality.
(Prior Code, § 1707.02) (Ord. 657, passed 6-28-2004)
§ 151.22 MANNER OF ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT.
   Administration and enforcement of the code within this municipality shall be
undertaken in any of the following ways as determined by the governing body of
this municipality from time to time by resolution:
   (A)   By the designation of an employee of the municipality to serve as the
Municipal Code Official to act on behalf of the municipality;
   (B)   By the retention of one or more construction code officials or third-
party agencies to act on behalf of the municipality;
   (C)   By agreement with one or more other municipalities for the joint
administration and enforcement of this Act through an intermunicipal agreement;
   (D)   By entering into a contract with another municipality for the
administration and enforcement of this Act on behalf of this municipality; and
   (E)   By entering into an agreement with the Pennsylvania Department of
Labor and Industry for plan review, inspections, and enforcement of structures
other than one-family or two-family dwelling units and utility and
miscellaneous use structures.
(Prior Code, § 1707.03) (Ord. 657, passed 6-28-2004)
§ 151.23 BOARD OF APPEALS.
   A Board of Appeals shall be established by resolution of the governing body
of this municipality in conformity with the requirements of the relevant
provisions of the code, as amended from time to time, and for the purposes set
forth therein. If at any time enforcement and administration is undertaken
jointly with one or more other municipalities, said Board of Appeals shall be
established by joint action of the participating municipalities.
(Prior Code, § 1707.04) (Ord. 657, passed 6-28-2004)
§ 151.24 PRIOR ORDINANCES TO CONTINUE IN EFFECT.
   (A)   All building code ordinances or portions of ordinances which were
adopted by this municipality on or before July 1, 1999, and which equal or
exceed the requirements of the code, shall continue in full force and effect
until such time as such provisions fall to equal or exceed the minimum
requirements of the Code, as amended from time to time.
   (B)   All building code ordinances or portions of ordinances which are in
effect as of the effective date of this subchapter and whose requirements are
less than the minimum requirements of the code are hereby amended to conform
with the comparable provisions of the code.
   (C)   All relevant ordinances, regulations and policies of this municipality
not governed by the code shall remain in full force and effect.
(Prior Code, § 1707.05) (Ord. 657, passed 6-28-2004)
§ 151.25 FEES.
   Fees assessable by the municipality for the administration and enforcement
undertaken pursuant to this subchapter and the code shall be established by the
governing body by resolution from time to time.
(Prior Code, § 1707.06) (Ord. 657, passed 6-28-2004)
§ 151.26 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This subchapter shall be effective July 8, 2004.
(Prior Code, § 1707.07) (Ord. 657, passed 6-28-2004)
INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
§ 151.40 ADOPTION.
   A certain document, a copy of which is on file in the Borough Office, being
marked and designated as the International Property Maintenance Code, 2015
Edition, as published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby
adopted as the Property Maintenance Code of the borough for regulating and
governing the conditions and maintenance of all property, buildings, and
structures; by providing the standards for supplied utilities and facilities
and other physical things and conditions essential to ensure that structures
are safe, sanitary, and fit for occupation and use; and the condemnation of
buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy and use, and the demolition
of such existing structures as herein provided; providing for the issuance of
permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations,
provisions, penalties, conditions, and terms of said Property Maintenance Code
on file in the Borough Office are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part
hereof, as if fully set out in this ordinance, with the additions, insertions,
deletions, and changes, if any, prescribed herein.
(Ord. 742, passed 7-8-2019)
§ 151.41 AMENDMENTS.
   The following sections and subsections of the International Property
Maintenance Code, 2015 Edition, as published by the International Code Council,
and as hereby adopted as the Property Maintenance Code of the borough are
hereby added, inserted, deleted, restated, or changed as set forth below:
   (A)   Section 101.1 is restated as follows: these regulations shall be known
as the Property Maintenance Code of the Borough of Ford City (hereinafter
referred to as “this code”);
   (B)   Section 102.3 is restated as follows: repairs, additions, or
alterations to a structure, or changes of occupancy, shall be done in
accordance with the procedures and provisions of the 2003 International
Building Code (including Appendices A, B, C, E, F, G, H, I, J) as adopted and
modified by the Borough on March 1, 2004 pursuant to Ordinance No. 656. Nothing
in this code shall be construed to cancel, modify, or set aside any provisions
of the Borough Zoning Ordinance, as amended;
   (C)   Section 103.5 is restated as follows: the fees for applications and
permits referenced in this code and for the activities and services performed
by the code official in carrying out his or her responsibilities under this
code shall be established, from time to time, by resolution of the Borough
Council;
   (D)   Section 104.3 is restated as follows: the code official shall have the
right and the power to enter
upon and inspect any structure or premises at all reasonable hours and in a
reasonable manner for the administration and enforcement of this code. If such
structure or premises is occupied, the code official shall present credentials
to the occupant and request entry. If such structure or premises is unoccupied,
the code official shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or
other person having charge or control of the structure or premises and request
entry. In the event that entry upon any structure or premises is refused by an
owner, an agent of an owner or a tenant, the code official shall obtain an
administrative search warrant from any magisterial district judge within the
judicial district where the structure or premises to be inspected is located.
It shall be sufficient to support the issuance of a warrant for the code
official to provide to the Magisterial District Judge evidence of any of the
following:
      (1)   Reasonable standards and an administrative plan for conducting
inspections;
      (2)   The condition of the structure, premises, or general area and the
passage of time since the last inspection; and/or
      (3)   Facts, supported by oath or affirmation, alleging that probable
cause exists that a law, regulation, or ordinance subject to enforcement by the
code official has been violated.
   (E)   Section 106.3 is restated as follows: if a notice of violation or
order is not complied with, the code official shall institute the appropriate
proceedings at law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate such violation,
or to require removal or termination of the unlawful occupancy of the structure
in violation of the provisions of this code or of the order or direction made
pursuant thereto. Any person failing to comply with a notice of violation or
order served in accordance with § 107 shall be prosecuted by action brought
before a magisterial district judge in the same manner provided for the
enforcement of summary offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal
Procedure. The Borough Solicitor may assume charge of the prosecution without
the consent of the District Attorney as required under 234 Pa.R.Crim.P. No. 454
(relating to trial in summary cases);
   (F)   Section 106.4 is restated as follows: any person who shall violate any
provision of this code, or fail to comply therewith, or with any of the
requirements thereof, shall be guilty of a summary offense, punishable by a
fine not to exceed $1,000 per violation, plus court costs and reasonable
attorney fees incurred by the borough in the enforcement proceedings, and in
default of payment of such fine and costs to imprisonment to the extent
permitted by law for the punishment of summary offenses. A separate offense
shall arise for each day or portion of a day in which a violation is found to
exist or for each section of this code which is found to have been violated.
All fines, costs, penalties, and fees collected for the violation of this
subchapter shall be paid to the Borough Treasurer;
   (G)   Section 106.5 is amended by adding a last sentence as follows: any
action taken by the borough in the prosecution or abatement of any violation
shall be charged against the real estate upon which the violation exists and
shall be a municipal claim and lien upon such real estate;
   (H)   Section 110.3 is restated as follows: if the owner of a premises fails
to comply with a demolition order within the time prescribed, the code official
shall cause the structure to be demolished and removed, either through an
available public agency or by contract or arrangement with private persons, and
the borough shall collect the cost of removal, together with a penalty of 10%
of the cost, in the manner provided by law for the collection of municipal
claims, or by action of assumpsit, or may seek relief by bill in equity;
   (I)   Section 111.1 is restated as follows: any person directly aggrieved by
a notice or order issued by the code official under the authority of §§ 108 or
109 shall have the right to appeal to the Property Maintenance Code Board of
Appeals (hereinafter referred to as the “board of appeals”) established herein
provided that a written application for an appeal on a form provided by the
borough is filed within 20 days after the day the decision, notice, or order
was served, along with the payment of an appeal hearing fee in an amount set
from time to time by resolution of the Borough Council. An application for
appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this code or the rules
legally adopted hereunder has been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of
this code do not fully apply, or the requirements of this code are adequately
satisfied by other means;
   (J)   Section 112.4 is amended to insert “$600” in the first reference of
[AMOUNT] and “$1,000” in the second reference of [AMOUNT];
   (K)   Section 301 is amended by inserting a new § 301.4 as follows: lead-
based paint with a lead content of more than 0.5% shall not be applied to any
interior or exterior surface of a dwelling, dwelling unit, or child care
facility, including fences and outbuildings at these locations. Existing
interior and exterior painted surfaces of dwelling units and child care
facilities that contain lead paint with a lead content of more than 0.5% shall
be removed or remediated in compliance with 40 C.F.R. part 745, as amended;
   (L)   Section 302.4 is restated as follows.
      (1)   No person owning or occupying any property containing a structure
within the borough shall permit any grass, weeds, or any vegetation whatsoever,
not edible or maintained for some useful or ornamental purpose, to grow or
remain upon such property so as to exceed a height of six inches, or to throw
off any unpleasant or noxious odor, or to conceal any filthy deposit. No person
owning any premises within the borough shall permit any grass, weeds or other
vegetation included on the noxious weed control list contained within state
law, as amended, to grow or remain upon any premises. Any such conduct is
hereby declared to be a nuisance and detrimental to the health, safety,
cleanliness, and comfort of the inhabitants of the borough.
      (2)   The owner or occupant, as the case may be, shall remove, trim, or
cut all grass, weeds, or other vegetation growing or remaining upon such
property in violation of the provisions of this section.
      (3)   The code official is hereby authorized to give notice to the owner
of any property whereon grass, weeds or other vegetation is growing or
remaining in violation of the provisions of this section, directing and
requiring such owner to remove, trim, or cut such grass, weeds, or vegetation
so as to conform to the requirements of this section within five days after the
issuance of said notice.
      (4)   If the structure on the property is vacant, service of such notice
shall be made by posting a copy thereof in a conspicuous place on the structure
and mailing a copy of such notice by certified mail to the owner of such
property at the owner’s last known post office address.
      (5)   In case any person shall neglect, fail, or refuse to comply with
such notice, the borough or its agents may remove, trim, or cut such grass,
weeds, or vegetation, and the cost thereof, together with a penalty of 10%
thereof, may be collected by the borough from such person in the manner
provided by law. The borough may also pursue the fines and penalties authorized
in § 106.4.
      (6)   Except for any property in violation of the Noxious Weed Control
Law, 3 P.S. §§ 255.1 through 255.11, as amended, the six-inch height limitation
in this section shall not apply to property, or any portion thereof, that
exhibits one or more of the following characteristics:
         (a)   Property devoted to agricultural use or otherwise actively
cultivated;
         (b)   Wetlands;
         (c)   Any undeveloped property, undisturbed open space, or
conservation area;
         (d)   Areas of any property that, by reason of slope, steepness, or
terrain, or other geographic features, render the property inaccessible. The
code official shall make the initial determination of inaccessibility, subject
to review by the Borough Council; or
         (e)   Areas of any property undergoing a directed process of natural
succession. The code official shall make the initial determination of natural
succession, subject to review by the Borough Council.
   (M)   Section 302.8 is restated as follows: no person in charge of or in
control of premises or private property, whether as owner, lessee, tenant,
occupant, or otherwise, shall allow any inoperable motor vehicle to remain on
such property longer than 15 days; and no person shall leave any inoperable
motor vehicle on any property within the borough for a longer time than 15
days; provided, nevertheless, that this section shall not be construed to apply
to any vehicle in an enclosed building or so located upon the premises as not
to be readily visible from any public place or from any surrounding private
property; and provided, further, that this section shall not be construed to
apply with regard to any vehicle on the premises of a business enterprise
operating in a lawful place and operated in a lawful manner when the keeping or
maintenance of such vehicle is necessary to the operation of such business
enterprise; or with regard to a vehicle in an appropriate storage place or
depository maintained in a lawful place and manner by the borough or any other
public agency or entity;
   (N)   Section 304.14 is amended to insert “June 1” for the first reference
of [DATE] and “September 30” for the second reference of [DATE];
   (O)   Section 308, Rubbish and Garbage, is deleted in its entirety and
restated as follows: § 308.1 Unlawful conditions and deposits. From and after
the effective date of this code, it shall be unlawful for any person to
maintain any condition or use of premises or private property or of building
exteriors which is detrimental to the property of others or which causes or
tends to cause substantial diminution in the value of other property in the
neighborhood in which such premises are located. This included, but is not
limited to, the keeping or the depositing on or the scattering over the
premises or private property of any of the following:
      (1)   Lumber, junk, trash, debris, building material, mounds of dirt,
weeds, or any other deleterious materials;
      (2)   Abandoned, discarded, or unused objects or equipment such as
automobiles, furniture, stoves, refrigerators, freezers, cans, or containers;
      (3)   Any compost pile which is of such a nature as to spread or harbor
disease, emit unpleasant odors or gas, or attract rodents, vermin, or other
disease-carrying pests, animals, or insects; provided, nevertheless, that the
presence of earthworms in a compost pile shall not be construed as a violation
hereof; or
      (4)    Any unsanitary matter.
   (P)   Section 602.3 is amended to insert “October 1” for the first reference
of [DATE] and “May 1” for the second reference of [DATE]; and
   (Q)   Section 602.4 is amended to insert “October 1” for the first reference
of [DATE] and “May 1” for the second reference of [DATE].
(Ord. 742, passed 7-8-2019)
§ 151.42 CONFLICTS.
   When the provisions of this code are in conflict with other borough
ordinances or any other applicable codes, the more stringent code, ordinance,
or regulation shall apply.
(Ord. 742, passed 7-8-2019)
§ 151.43 SUITS AND PROCEEDINGS.
   Nothing in this subchapter or in the Property Maintenance Code hereby
adopted shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding impeding in any
court, or any rights acquired, or liability incurred, or any cause or causes of
action acquired or existing, under any act or ordinance hereby repealed as
cited in §
151.42; nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of any character be lost,
impaired, or affected by this subchapter.
(Ord. 742, passed 7-8-2019)
§ 151.99 PENALTY.
   Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this code
of ordinances or fails to comply therewith or with any of the requirements
thereof, upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a Magisterial
District Judge in the manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses
under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a
fine of not less than $100, nor more than $1,000, plus costs, including
reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred by the borough and, in default of payment
of said fines and costs, to a term of imprisonment to the extent permitted by
law for the punishment of summary offenses. A separate offense shall arise for
each day or portion thereof in which a violation of this code of ordinances is
found to exist or for each section of this code of ordinances found to have
been violated. The borough may also commence appropriate actions in equity to
prevent, restrain, correct, enjoin or abate violations of this code of
ordinances. All fines and penalties collected for violation of this code of
ordinances shall be paid to the borough.
CHAPTER 152: ZONING CODE
Section
   
152.01   Zoning code adopted by reference
§ 152.01 ZONING CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The zoning code is hereby adopted by reference as if incorporated fully
herein.
(Ord. 746, passed 1-13-2020; Ord. 749, passed 11-23-2020; Ord. 754, passed 11-
27-2023)
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
   Table
      
I.   LAND TRANSACTIONS; CONVEYANCES
      
II.   ANNEXATIONS
      
III.   CONTRACTS, AGREEMENTS, AND FRANCHISES
      
IV.   STREET OPENINGS AND VACATIONS
      
V.   STREET NAMING
      
VI.   INDEBTEDNESS
      
VII.   BUDGETS AND TAX RATES
TABLE I: LAND TRANSACTIONS; CONVEYANCES
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
32            6-10-1907   Authorizing sale of land.
                        (Prior Code, TSO Table I)
411           4-18-1962   Transferring property in Manor Township to the
                          Municipal Sewage Disposal Authority.
                        (Prior Code, TSO Table I)
                          Conveying sewers and plant site and easements,
412           5-7-1962    franchises, licenses, and rights to Municipal Sewage
                          Disposal Authority.
                        (Prior Code, TSO Table I)
                          Conveying to Municipal Sewage Disposal Authority
504           6-5-1976    rights-of-way for construction and operation of
                          sanitary sewer system.
                        (Prior Code, TSO Table I)
                         
 
TABLE II: ANNEXATIONS
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
                          Annexing lots in Manor Township belonging to the
46            6-6-1910    Pittsburgh Plate Glass Company and the Fawcus Machine
                          Company.
                        (Prior Code, TSO Table II)
-             8-7-1922    Annexing lots in Manor Township belonging to the
                          Pittsburgh Plate Glass Company.
                        (Prior Code, TSO Table II)
164           7-2-1928    Annexing property in Manor Township, beginning at the
                          centerline of Seventh Street.
                        (Prior Code, TSO Table II)
                          Annexing property in Manor Township, beginning at the
246           7-12-1948   intersection of the centerlines of Neale Avenue and
                          Seventh Street.
                        (Prior Code, TSO Table II)
                          Annexing property in Manor Township beginning at the
247           7-12-1948   intersection of the centerlines of Neale Avenue and
                          the water works property.
                        (Prior Code, TSO Table II)
254           8-8-1949    Annexing property in Manor Township, known as
                          Bellwood Gardens.
                        (Prior Code, TSO Table II)
255           8-8-1949    Annexing property in Manor Township, known as South
                          McGrann.
                        (Prior Code, TSO Table II)
267           1-8-1951    Annexing property in Manor Township, known as the
                          Plan of Bellwood Gardens.
                        (Prior Code, TSO Table II)
                          Annexing property in Manor Township, beginning at a
332           7-5-1955    point in the centerline of Neale Avenue at the
                          intersection with Hobson Street.
                        (Prior Code, TSO Table II)
                          Annexing property in Manor Township, beginning at a
370           10-17-1957  point on the western edge of State Highway Route 66
                          at the intersection of the line between Lots Nos. 12
                          and 13 in the Kitty Chaplin Plan of Lots.
                        (Prior Code, TSO Table II)
                          Annexing property in Manor Township, beginning at a
371           12-9-1957   point on the western edge of State Highway Route 66
                          at the intersection of the line between Lots Nos. 12
                          and 13 in the Kitty Chaplin Plan of Lots.
                        (Prior Code, TSO Table II)
                          Annexing property of the Municipal Sewage Disposal
419           11-19-1962  Authority, beginning at a point on the northern
                          boundary of Seventeenth Street.
                        (Prior Code, TSO Table II)
                         
 
TABLE III: CONTRACTS, AGREEMENTS, AND FRANCHISES
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
Ord./Res. Date       Description
No.       Passed
                     Granting easement to Ford City Electric Light, Heat, and
5         6-30-1899  Power Co. to construct, operate, and maintain an electric
                     plant.
                   (Prior Code, TSO Table III)
7         8-4-1899   Contract with Pittsburgh Plate Glass for purchase of water
                     works.
                   (Prior Code, TSO Table III)
15        10-6-1900  Granting a contract/franchise to Kittanning Telephone
                     Company for poles and wires.
                   (Prior Code, TSO Table III)
16        1-4-1901   Granting a contract with Central Printing District and
                     Telegraph Company for construction and operation of poles.
                   (Prior Code, TSO Table III)
18        7-17-1901  Granting a gas pipe franchise to Ford Natural Gas Co.
                   (Prior Code, TSO Table III)
19        8-2-1901   Granting a gas pipe franchise to Garrett’s Run Gas Co.
                   (Prior Code, TSO Table III)
20        9-25-1901  Granting to Kittanning and Leechburg Railway Co. right to
                     enter streets, rate regulations.
                   (Prior Code, TSO Table III)
21        9-25-1901  Granting a contract to Pittsburgh Plate Glass Co. to grant
                     a right-of-way to Kittanning and Leechburg Railways Co.
                   (Prior Code, TSO Table III)
47        10-3-1910  Granting a contract to Pittsburgh Plate Glass Co. to
                     repair/replace cast iron water pipe.
                   (Prior Code, TSO Table III)
57        7-26-1913  Agreement with Kittanning and Leechburgh Railways Co. for
                     relocation of its tracks.
                   (Prior Code, TSO Table III)
71        11-25-1914 Granting an easement to Kittanning Electric Light Co. for
                     power distribution system.
                   (Prior Code, TSO Table III)
87        4-7-1919   Grant to Pittsburgh Plate Glass, right to construct and
                     maintain power line.
                   (Prior Code, TSO Table III)
88/89     7-7-1919   Authorizing contract with Kittanning & Leechburg Railways
                     Company to move a portion of its track.
                   (Prior Code, TSO Table III)
141       12-1-1924  Authorizing execution of agreement with Penn. Railroad Co.
                     regarding sewer southeast of passenger station.
                   (Prior Code, TSO Table III)
                     Amending franchise to Kittanning & Leechburg Street
156       6- -1925   Railways Company, now Kittanning and Leechburg Railways
                     Company, for street railway line.
                   (Prior Code, TSO Table III)
157       12-10-1925 Granting an easement to West Penn Power.
                   (Prior Code, TSO Table III)
161       2-7-1927   Granting to West Penn Power Co, an easement for
                     electricity distribution.
                   (Prior Code, TSO Table III)
R. 198    6-24-1936  Granting release to Kittanning and Leechburg Railways from
                     all obligations regarding street railways.
                   (Prior Code, TSO Table III)
249       2-7-1949   Granting a natural gas franchise to People’s Natural Gas
                     Co.
                   (Prior Code, TSO Table III)
268       2-5-1951   Granting electricity franchise to West Penn Power Company.
                   (Prior Code, TSO Table III)
300       8-17-1953  Granting an easement for electric transmission system
                     right-of-way to West Penn Power Company.
                   (Prior Code, TSO Table III)
413       5-7-1962   Granting franchise to Municipal Sewage Disposal Authority
                     for construction of sewer lines.
                   (Prior Code, TSO Table III)
414       5-7-1962   Authorizing lease agreement with Municipal Sewage Disposal
                     Authority.
                   (Prior Code, TSO Table III)
422       5-23-1963  Authorizing first supplemental lease agreement with
                     Municipal Sewage Disposal Authority.
                   (Prior Code, TSO Table III)
                     Providing for lease surrender agreement for agreement of
437       10-21-1964 lease dated May 1, 1962, and new lease agreement with
                     Municipal Sewage Disposal Authority.
                   (Prior Code, TSO Table III)
                     Providing for execution of joint agreement for the
463       4-28-1969  consolidation of Ford City Borough and Ford Cliff Borough
                     into one new borough.
                   (Prior Code, TSO Table III)
                     Certifying the establishment of the Mid-County Transit
                     Authority, between Township of East Franklin, Borough of
497       7-23-1975  Ford City, Borough of Ford Cliff, Borough of West
                     Kittanning, Borough of Kittanning, and Borough of
                     Manorville; articles of incorporation.
                   (Prior Code, TSO Table III)
505       6-8-1976   Authorizing sewage service agreement with Municipal Sewage
                     Disposal Authority.
                   (Prior Code, TSO Table III)
                     Authorizing management agreement with Municipal Sewage
506       - -        Disposal Authority for operation and management of the
                     sanitary sewer system.
                   (Prior Code, TSO Table III)
590       3-21-1989  Authorizing agreement with West Penn Power Company for
                     electric lighting of streets, alleys, and public places.
                   (Prior Code, TSO Table III)
608       6-18-1991  Authorizing Municipal Drug Task Force Agreement with the
                     Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Office of Attorney General.
                   (Prior Code, TSO Table III)
                     Authorizing Municipal Drug Task Force Agreement with the
610       7-16-1991  Commonwealth Office of Attorney. General, and Municipal
                     Police Cooperation Agreement with other Pennsylvania
                     municipalities.
                   (Prior Code, TSO Table III)
611       8-20-1991  Authorizing entrance into a Municipal Police Service
                     cooperative agreement with other state municipalities.
                   (Prior Code, TSO Table III)
                     Authorizing execution of a cable franchise agreement
R. 705    1-15-2013  between the Borough and Comcast of Colorado/Pennsylvania /
                     West Virginia, LLC.
                   (Prior Code, TSO Table III)
                     Amending the articles of incorporation of the Municipal
748       11-9-2020  Sewage Disposal Authority to extend its term of existence
                     by 50 years.
756       12-11-2023 Authorizing creation of Borough Stormwater Authority.
762       9-11-2024  Adopting an amendment to the articles of incorporation of
                     the Mid-County Transit Authority.
                    
 
TABLE IV: STREET OPENINGS AND VACATIONS
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
Ord./ Date
Res.  Passed Description
No.
      9-22-  Establishing the width of Third Avenue and vacating such portions thereof as
8     1899   lie between the western line of Third Avenue as herein and the western line of
             Third Avenue as heretofore established.
           (Prior Code, TSO Table IV)
9     10-6-  Vacating a portion of an alley beginning on Fourth Avenue and thence by Lot
      1899   No. 755 to the southeast corner of said lot.
           (Prior Code, TSO Table IV)
10    10-6-  Opening and dedicating to public use a portion of certain lots, beginning at a
      1899   point on the northern line of Lot No. 740.
           (Prior Code, TSO Table IV)
      1-22-  Establishing the width of Third Avenue and vacating such portions thereof as
13    1900   lie between the western line of Third Avenue as herein and the western line of
             Third Avenue as heretofore established.
           (Prior Code, TSO Table IV)
             Vacating 284 feet of the southern end of the alley running north and south,
38    7-13-  midway between Fourth and Fifth Avenues between Eleventh and Twelfth Streets;
      1908   and also vacating that alley at right angles with Fifth Avenue running
             westerly from the northeastern corner of Lot No. 754.
           (Prior Code, TSO Table IV)
      9-14-  Opening a public alley from Fifth Avenue westerly through the northern 16 feet
41    1908   of Lot No. 1154, to intersection with a public alley running southerly from
             Twelfth Street, between Fourth and Fifth Avenues.
           (Prior Code, TSO Table IV)
53    7-3-   Extending Sixth Avenue through land owned by the Pittsburgh Plate Glass
      1911   Company.
           (Prior Code, TSO Table IV)
      1-5-   Opening and dedicating to public use certain land, and widening Third Avenue,
59    1914   specifically all of Lot Nos. 278, 303, and 304, and as further described
             herein.
           (Prior Code, TSO Table IV)
60    1-6-   Vacating part of the 13-foot alley lying between Tenth Street and O’Conner
      1914   Street.
           (Prior Code, TSO Table IV)
      1-6-   Vacating four portions of Third Avenue from the southerly line of First Street
61    1914   on the south and midway between Eleventh Street and Twelfth Street on the
             north.
           (Prior Code, TSO Table IV)
137   7-7-   Vacating four certain portions of Third Avenue from the northerly line of said
      1924   borough on the north, to the southerly line of First Street on the south.
           (Prior Code, TSO Table IV)
151   4-6-   Widening Third Avenue.
      1925
           (Prior Code, TSO Table IV)
152   5-4-   Vacating portions of Third Avenue.
      1925
           (Prior Code, TSO Table IV)
162   4-4-   Vacation of Thirteenth Street Extension.
      1927
           (Prior Code, TSO Table IV)
172   12-2-  Widening Third Avenue.
      1930
           (Prior Code, TSO Table IV)
178   11-7-  Vacating a portion of Hill Road.
      1932
           (Prior Code, TSO Table IV)
212   6-3-   Widening Third Avenue north of Ninth Street near the Pittsburgh Plate Glass
      1940   Co. Plant No. 6.
           (Prior Code, TSO Table IV)
213   6-3-   Widening Third Avenue and Ninth Street and relocating sidewalks.
      1940
           (Prior Code, TSO Table IV)
239   12-16- Revoking, annulling and canceling the Thirteenth Street Extension, as
      1947   established by Ordinance 163, passed April 4, 1927.
           (Prior Code, TSO Table IV)
      12-16- Opening and dedicating a certain strip of land, beginning at a point south 36
240   1947   degrees west 35 feet of the southern line of Fourteenth Street, to be known as
             the Fourteenth Street extension.
           (Prior Code, TSO Table IV)
      2-2-   Relocating the centerline of Sixth Avenue, extending between the southerly
287   1953   line of Seventeenth Street southerly to the northerly line of the ten-foot
             alley north of Fourteenth Street.
           (Prior Code, TSO Table IV)
      5-5-   Widening Fifth Avenue between Fourth Street and Fifth Street, beginning at a
379   1958   point on the western line of the present Fifth Avenue at the southeast corner
             of Lot No. 872 and fixing the grade thereof.
           (Prior Code, TSO Table IV)
382   10-6-  Widening Sixth Avenue between Sixth Street and Seventh Street and fixing the
      1958   grade thereof.
           (Prior Code, TSO Table IV)
389   5-4-   Accepting portion of State Highway Route No. 378 on Third and Fifth Avenues
      1959   after improvements, opening, and dedication as public street.
           (Prior Code, TSO Table IV)
      9-12-  Laying out, opening and adopting as a public street a street to be known as
549   1983   Second Avenue, beginning at a point at the intersection of Second Avenue and
             Pennsylvania Traffic Route 128; and fixing the width and grade thereof.
           (Prior Code, TSO Table IV)
             Laying out, opening and ordaining as a public street a street beginning at a
      11-6-  point S37º04'30"W a distance of 25 feet from the centerline of Eljer railroad
570   1987   crossing and N52º54'00"W a distance of 15 feet from the centerline of Conrail
             railroad main line, to be known as Second Avenue, and fixing the grade
             thereof.
           (Prior Code, TSO Table IV)
578   2-16-  Amending Ordinance 570, changing the name of the street laid out, opened, and
      1988   adopted to Eljer Way.
           (Prior Code, TSO Table IV)
      8-16-  Adopting Borough property for use as part of a street, to be designated as
583   1988   River Street, containing 0.737 acre, more or less, to connect First Avenue and
             Second Avenue.
           (Prior Code, TSO Table IV)
671   8-13-  Laying out and opening Sixth Street Extension.
      2007
           (Prior Code, TSO Table IV)
284   12-8-  Providing for the naming of certain streets heretofore known as alleys.
      1952
           (Prior Code, TSO Table V)
690   10-11- Providing for the naming of unnamed alleys, signage, effective date, and
      2010   repeal all of all inconsistent ordinances.
           (Prior Code, TSO Table V)
741   6-24-  Naming an alley.
      2019
            
 
TABLE V: STREET NAMING
 
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
284           12-8-1952   Providing for the naming of certain streets
                          heretofore known as alleys.
                        (Prior Code, TSO Table V)
                          Providing for the naming of unnamed alleys, signage,
690           10-11-2010  effective date, and repeal all of all inconsistent
                          ordinances.
                        (Prior Code, TSO Table V)
741           6-24-2019   Naming an alley.
                         
 
TABLE VI: INDEBTEDNESS
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
4             8-11-1899   Bond issuance for outstanding obligations.
                        (Prior Code, TSO Table VI)
11            11-14-1899  Bond issuance for outstanding obligations.
                        (Prior Code, TSO Table VI)
26            8-10-1903   Authorizing indebtedness of city for water plant.
                        (Prior Code, TSO Table VI)
27            6-24-1904   Increasing borough indebtedness and levying tax for
                          water plant (bond issuance).
                        (Prior Code, TSO Table VI)
42            11-2-1908   Authorizing increase in indebtedness for purchase of
                          Ford City Light, Heat, and Power Co. plant.
                        (Prior Code, TSO Table VI)
92            8-2-1920    Authorizing increase in indebtedness for water
                          filtration plant.
                        (Prior Code, TSO Table VI)
93            9-9-1920    Increasing indebtedness for the purpose of
                          constructing a water filtration plant.
                        (Prior Code, TSO Table VI)
96            12-4-1922   Levying tax to cover indebtedness; bond issuance.
                        (Prior Code, TSO Table VI)
138           7-7-1924    Bond issuance for water filtration plant.
                        (Prior Code, TSO Table VI)
150           3-2-1925    Increasing indebtedness, bond issuance.
                        (Prior Code, TSO Table VI)
                          Authorizing increase in bonded indebtedness for the
153           5-4-1925    purpose of paying off or refunding the floating
                          indebtedness, amending ordinance passed March 3,
                          1925.
                        (Prior Code, TSO Table VI)
                          Increasing indebtedness and issuance of general
281           9-3-1952    obligation bonds, for the construction of sanitary
                          and storm sewers in Bellwood Gardens and integrating
                          with the borough sewer systems.
                        (Prior Code, TSO Table VI)
                          Increasing indebtedness for the purpose of sewer
427           4-6-1964    construction and incurring a Certificate of
                          Indebtedness.
                        (Prior Code, TSO Table VI)
                          Authorizing the borrowing of money for the purpose of
488           10-22-1973  a sewer project and issuing general obligation bonds
                          or notes.
                        (Prior Code, TSO Table VI)
                          Authorizing the borrowing of money for the purpose of
489           12-1-1973   a new municipal building, for Police Department, Fire
                          Department, and other borough offices, and issuing
                          general obligation bonds or notes.
                        (Prior Code, TSO Table VI)
500           12-15-1975  Authorizing the incurrence of lease rental debt for
                          capital improvements to the sewage treatment plant.
                        (Prior Code, TSO Table VI)
                          Increasing indebtedness for emergency sanitary sewer
509           8-10-1976   repair and relocation of water pipelines by issuance
                          of a general obligation note.
                        (Prior Code, TSO Table VI)
512           6-14-1977   Refunding borough indebtedness by issuance of general
                          obligation note.
                        (Prior Code, TSO Table VI)
537           1-19-1981   Funding unfunded indebtedness by issue of general
                          obligation note.
                        (Prior Code, TSO Table VI)
                          Increasing indebtedness by issuance of general
553           6-30-1984   obligation note for the renovation and repair of the
                          water treatment plant.
                        (Prior Code, TSO Table VI)
588           1-4-1989    Authorizing a Pennvest loan payment fund to make
                          payments on loan for water plant improvements.
                        (Prior Code, TSO Table VI)
589           3-21-1989   Increasing indebtedness by the issuance of a special
                          obligation revenue note, for sundry purposes.
                        (Prior Code, TSO Table VI)
630           4-9-1996    Increasing indebtedness by the issue of a guaranteed
                          revenue note for sundry purposes.
                        (Prior Code, TSO Table VI)
631           9-9-1996    Increasing indebtedness by the issue of a general
                          obligation note for sundry purposes.
                        (Prior Code, TSO Table VI)
658           8-25-2004   Increasing indebtedness by issue of a general
                          obligation note for unfunded debt.
                        (Prior Code, TSO Table VI)
715           8-1-2015    Increasing indebtedness by issuance of guaranteed
                          revenue bonds.
729           5-23-2016   Increasing indebtedness by issuance of bonds.
732           7-5-2016    Replacing Ord. 729; increasing indebtedness by
                          issuance of general revenue bonds.
752           1-25-2021   Increasing indebtedness by issuance of a general
                          obligation note.
759           7-1-2024    Increasing indebtedness by issuance of general
                          obligation notes.
760           7-1-2024    Increasing indebtedness by issuance of guaranteed
                          revenue bonds.
763           12-23-2024  Increasing indebtedness by issuance of general
                          obligation notes.
                         
 
TABLE VII: BUDGETS AND TAX RATES
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
R. 393-A      - -         Adopting budget for 1960.
                        (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
168           5-5-1930    Property tax for 1930.
                        (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
177           5-12-1932   Property tax for 1932.
                        (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
183           3-5-1934    Property taxes for 1934.
                        (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
194           4-1-1935    Tax millage for 1935.
                        (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
199           3-6-1936    Tax millage for 1936.
                        (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
204           4-5-1937    Property taxes for 1937.
                        (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
210           1-16-1939   Property tax for 1939.
                        (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
224           2-7-1944    Tax rate on property and occupations for fiscal year
                          1944.
                        (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
225           3-7-1944    Adopting budget.
                        (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
229           2-5-1945    Tax rate on property and occupations for fiscal year
                          1945.
                        (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
233           2-4-1946    Tax rate on property and occupations for fiscal year
                          1946.
                        (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
236           3-3-1947    Tax rate on assessable property for fiscal year 1947.
                        (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
237           3-3-1947    Adopting budget.
                        (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
242           3-1-1948    Tax millage for 1948.
                        (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
243           3-1-1948    Budget adoption for 1948.
                        (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
250           2-7-1949    Tax millage for 1949.
                        (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
259           2-6-1950    Tax rate on assessable property for fiscal year 1950.
                        (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
260           3-6-1950    Budget adoption for 1950.
                        (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
271           3-5-1951    Tax rate on assessable property for 1951.
                        (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
270           3-6-1951    Budget adoption for 1951.
                        (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
277           3-11-1952   Tax rate on assessable property for 1952.
                        (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
276           3-13-1952   Budget adoption for 1952.
                        (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
R. 290        4-6-1953    Adopting budget for 1953.
                        (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
291           4-6-1953    Tax rate on assessable property for fiscal year 1953.
                        (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
308           3-1-1954    Tax rate on assessable property for fiscal year 1954.
                        (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
R. 309        3-1-1954    Adopting budget for 1954.
                        (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
325           2-7-1955    Tax rate on assessable property for fiscal year 1955.
                        (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
R. 347        3-5-1956    Adopting budget for 1956.
                        (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
348           3-5-1956    Tax rate on property and occupations for fiscal year
                          1956.
                        (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
R. 361        3-4-1957    Adopting budget for 1957.
                        (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
362           3-4-1957    Tax on salaries, wages, commissions, and other
                          compensation for 1957.
                        (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
363           3-4-1957    Tax rate on property and occupations for fiscal year
                          1957.
                        (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
377           4-7-1958    Tax rate on property and occupations for fiscal year
                          1958.
                        (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
387           3-9-1959    Tax rate on property and occupations for fiscal year
                          1959.
                        (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
394           3-7-1960    Tax rate on property and occupations for fiscal year
                          1960.
                        (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
403           5-17-1961   Tax rate on property and occupations for fiscal year
                          1961.
                        (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
415           5-23-1962   Tax rate on property and occupations for fiscal year
                          1962.
                        (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
424           7-5-1963    Tax rate on property and occupations for fiscal year
                          1963.
                        (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
432           - -1964     Occupation privilege tax for fiscal year 1964.
                        (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
434           7-6-1964    Tax rate on property and occupations for fiscal year
                          1964.
                        (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
441           6-7-1965    Tax rate on property and occupations for fiscal year
                          1965.
                        (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
442           12-6-1965   Occupation privilege tax for fiscal year 1966.
                        (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
443           4-4-1966    Tax rate on property and occupations for fiscal year
                          1966.
                        (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
451           4-3-1967    Tax rate on property and occupations for fiscal year
                          1967.
                        (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
455           12-18-1967  Tax rate on property and occupations for fiscal year
                          1968.
                        (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
462           12-23-1968  Tax rate on property and occupations for fiscal year
                          1969.
                        (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
467           1-19-1970   Tax rate on property and occupations for fiscal year
                          1970.
                        (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
468           2-1-1971    Tax rate on property and occupations for fiscal year
                          1971.
                        (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
475           5-1-1972    Tax rate on property and occupations for fiscal year
                          1972.
                        (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
484           12-12-1972  Tax rate on property and occupations for fiscal year
                          1973.
                        (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
490           12-1-1973   Tax rate on property and occupations for fiscal year
                          1974.
                        (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
494           12-30-1974  Tax rate on property and occupations for fiscal year
                          1975.
                        (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
495           1-30-1975   Tax on salaries, wages, commissions, and other
                          compensation for 1975.
                        (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
501           2-10-1976   Tax on property and occupations for fiscal year 1976.
                        (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
510           1-11-1977   Tax rate on property and occupations for fiscal year
                          1977.
                        (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
519           12-19-1977  Tax rate on property and occupations for fiscal year
                          1978.
                        (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
526           1-8-1979    Real estate tax rate for fiscal year 1979.
                        (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
531           12-28-1979  Real estate tax rate for fiscal year 1980.
                        (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
536           1-17-1981   Real estate tax rate for fiscal year 1981.
                        (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
540           12-28-1981  Real estate tax rate for fiscal year 1982.
                        (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
545           12-30-1982  Real estate tax rate for fiscal year 1983.
                        (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
551           12-31-1983  Real estate tax rate for fiscal year 1984.
                        (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
554           12-17-1984  Real estate tax rate for fiscal year 1985.
                        (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
558           12-16-1985  Real estate tax rate for fiscal year 1986.
                        (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
562           12-30-1986  Real estate tax rate for fiscal year 1987.
                        (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
572           12-15-1987  Real estate tax rate for fiscal year 1988.
                        (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
585           11-15-1988  Real estate tax rate for fiscal year 1989.
                        (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
593           11-27-1989  Real estate tax rate for fiscal year 1990.
                        (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
600           12-7-1990   Real estate tax rate for fiscal year 1991.
                        (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
612           12-18-1991  Real estate tax rate for fiscal year 1992.
                        (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
615           12-31-1992  Real estate tax rate for fiscal year 1993.
                        (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
616           12-30-1993  Real estate tax rate for fiscal year 1994.
                        (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
617           2-15-1994   Amending real estate tax rate for fiscal year 1994.
                        (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
621           12-31-1994  Real estate tax rate for fiscal year 1995.
                        (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
628           12-30-1995  Real estate tax rate for fiscal year 1996.
                        (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
632           12-30-1996  Real estate tax rate for fiscal year 1997.
                        (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
637           12-30-1999  Real estate tax rate for fiscal year 2000.
                        (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
638           12-30-2000  Real estate tax rate for fiscal year 2001.
                        (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
650           12-9-2002   Real estate tax rate for fiscal year 2003.
                        (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
655           12-18-2003  Real estate tax rate for fiscal year 2004.
                        (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
659           12-20-2004  Real estate tax rate for fiscal year 2005.
                        (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
668           12-4-2006   Tax rate for 2007.
675           12-27-2007  Tax rate for 2008.
682           12-22-2008  Tax rate for 2009.
688           12-7-2009   Tax rate for 2010.
691           12-29-2010  Tax rate for 2011.
700           12-27-2011  Real estate tax rate for fiscal year 2012.
                        (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
706           2-11-2013   Real estate tax rate for fiscal year 2013.
                        (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
                          Authorizing exemptions, deductions, abatements, and
R. 706-R3     8-12-2013   credits for real property earned income tax, net
                          profits, mercantile and business privilege taxes
                          within a specific geographic area.
                        (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
707           12-19-2014  Tax rate for 2014.
713           12-29-2014  Tax rate for 2015.
723           1-25-2016   Tax rate for 2016.
726           2-8-2016    Revised tax rate for 2016.
733           12-12-2016  Tax rate for 2017.
738           12-11-2017  Tax rate for 2018.
739           12-10-2018  Tax rate for 2019.
745           12-16-2019  Tax rate for 2020.
750           12-14-2020  Tax rate for 2021.
755           12-11-2023  Tax rate for 2024.
                         
 
 
   R. 393-A   - -   Adopting budget for 1960.
         (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
         (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
         (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
         (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
         (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
         (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
         (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
         (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
         (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
         (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
         (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
         (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
         (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
         (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
         (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
         (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
         (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
         (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
         (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
         (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
         (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
         (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
         (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
   R. 290   4-6-1953   Adopting budget for 1953.
         (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
         (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
         (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
   R. 309   3-1-1954   Adopting budget for 1954.
         (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
         (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
   R. 347   3-5-1956   Adopting budget for 1956.
         (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
         (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
   R. 361   3-4-1957   Adopting budget for 1957.
         (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
         (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
         (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
         (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
         (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
         (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
         (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
         (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
         (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
         (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
         (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
         (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
         (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
         (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
         (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
         (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
         (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
         (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
         (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
         (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
         (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
         (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
         (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
         (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
         (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
         (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
         (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
         (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
         (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
         (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
         (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
         (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
         (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
         (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
         (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
         (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
         (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
         (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
         (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
         (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
         (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
         (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
         (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
         (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
         (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
         (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
         (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
         (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
         (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
         (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
         (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
         (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
         (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
         (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
   R. 706-R3   8-12-2013   Authorizing exemptions, deductions, abatements, and
credits for real property earned income tax, net profits, mercantile and
business privilege taxes within a specific geographic area.
         (Prior Code, TSO Table VII)
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Pennsylvania Statutes
References to Pennsylvania Code
References to Pennsylvania Consolidated Statutes
References to Pennsylvania Consolidated Statutes Annotated
References to Prior Code
References to Resolutions
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO PENNSYLVANIA STATUTES
P.S. Cite Code Section
P.S. Cite                          Code Section
3 P.S. 255.1 through 255.11        151.41
16 P.S. 11011-6                    34.061
35 P.S. 780-101 et seq.            113.03
35 P.S. 6018.101 et seq.           53.03
35 P.S. 7210.101 through 7210.1103 151.20
47 P.S. 1-101 et seq.              113.03
53 P.S. 767 et seq.                32.40
53 P.S. 4000.101 et seq.           53.02;
                                   53.03
53 P.S. 6901 et seq.               34.028
                                   34.001;
                                   34.012;
53 P.S. 6924.101 et seq.           34.026;
                                   34.028;
                                   34.053
53 P.S. 7101 et seq.               34.053;
                                   34.064
68 P.S. 250.101 et seq.            113.02
72 P.S. 806                        34.053
72 P.S. 8101-C et seq.             34.066
72 P.S. 8101-D et seq.             34.051;
                                   34.053
72 P.S. 8102-D                     34.053
73 P.S. 176 et seq.                150.20
                                   
 
 
REFERENCES TO PENNSYLVANIA CODE
 
Pa. Code Cite                    Code Section
34 Pa. Code, Ch. 401 through 405 151.21
                                 
 
REFERENCES TO PENNSYLVANIA CONSOLIDATED STATUTES
Pa.C.S. Cites Code Section
Pa.C.S. Cites              Code Section
                           10.02;
                           30.02;
8 Pa.C.S. 101 et seq.      31.01;
                           32.01;
                           150.02
8 Pa.C.S. 1172             32.37
8 Pa.C.S. 1202             90.30
8 Pa.C.S. 3301.5           10.01
17 Pa.C.S. 101 et seq.     113.03
35 Pa.C.S. 8101 et seq.    31.02
53 Pa.C.S. 2301 to 2317    32.39
                           32.20;
53 Pa.C.S. 5601 et seq.    32.21;
                           32.22
53 Pa.C.S. 8421 et seq.    34.010
                           70.01;
                           70.21;
75 Pa.C.S. 101 et seq.     70.22;
                           70.99;
                           72.01;
                           73.01
75 Pa.C.S. 3352(a) and (b) 71.37
                           
 
 
REFERENCES TO PENNSYLVANIA CONSOLIDATED STATUTES ANNOTATED
 
Pa.C.S.A. Cites              Code Section
53 Pa.C.S.A. §§ 5601 et seq32.22
75 Pa.C.S.A. § 3362         Ch. 74, Schd. I
75 Pa.C.S.A. § 3365(b)      Ch. 74, Schd. I
75 Pa.C.S.A. § 6109(a)(6)   Ch. 74, Schd. IV
75 Pa.C.S.A. § 6124         Ch. 74, Schd. IV
                             
 
REFERENCES TO PRIOR CODE
Prior Code 2025 Code
Prior Code   2025 Code
105.01       30.01
111.01       30.15
127.01       31.01
143.01       32.01
143.02       32.01
153.01       32.02
157.01       32.20
157.03       32.21
191.01       33.15
191.02       33.16
191.03       33.17
191.04       33.18
191.99       33.99
193.01       33.01
313.01       111.01
313.02       111.02
313.03       111.03
313.04       111.04
313.05       111.05
325.01       113.01
325.02       113.02
325.03       113.03
325.04       113.04
325.05       113.05
325.06       113.06
325.07       113.07
345.01       34.001
345.02       34.002
345.03       34.003
345.04       34.004
345.05       34.005 
345.06       34.006
345.07       34.007
345.08       34.008
345.09       34.009
345.10       34.010
345.11       34.011
345.12       34.012
345.13       34.013
345.99       34.999
353.01       34.025
353.02       34.026
353.03       34.027
353.04       34.028
353.04A      34.029 
353.05       34.030
353.06       34.031
353.07       34.032
353.08       34.033
353.09       34.034
353.10       34.035 
353.11       34.036
353.12       34.037
353.99       34.999
359.01       34.050
359.02       34.051
359.03       34.052
359.04       34.053
359.05       34.054
359.06       34.055
359.07       34.056
359.08       34.057
359.09       34.058
359.10       34.059
359.11       34.060
359.12       34.061
359.13       34.062
359.14       34.063
359.15       34.064
359.16       34.065
359.17       34.066
359.99       34.999
363.01       34.080
363.02       34.081 
363.03       34.082
363.04       34.083
363.05       34.084
363.06       34.085
363.07       34.086
501.01       70.01
503.01       70.15
503.02       70.16
503.03       70.17
503.04       70.18
503.05       70.19
503.06       70.20
503.07       70.21
503.08       70.22
503.99       70.99
511.01       71.01
511.02       71.02
511.03       71.03
511.04       Ch. 74, Schd. III
511.05       71.04
511.06       71.05
511.07       71.06
511.08       Ch. 74, Schd. IV
513.01       71.20
513.02       71.21
513.03       71.22
515.01       71.35
515.02       71.36
515.03       71.37
515.04       71.38
515.05       71.39
515.06       71.40
515.99       71.99
521.01       72.15
521.02       72.16
521.03       72.17
521.04       72.18
521.05       72.19
521.06       72.20
521.99       72.99
523.01       72.01
523.99       Ch. 74, Schd. I
525.01       72.35
525.02       72.36
525.03       72.37
525.04       72.38
525.05       72.39
525.06       72.40
527.01       Ch. 74, Schd. II
527.02       Ch. 74, Schd. II
527.03       Ch. 74, Schd. II
527.04       Ch. 74, Schd. II
531.01       72.02
551.01       73.01
551.02       73.02
551.03       73.03
551.04       73.04
551.05       73.05
551.06       73.06
551.07       73.07
551.08       73.08
551.09       73.09
551.10       73.10
551.11       73.11
551.12       Ch. 74, Schd. V
553.01       73.25
553.02       73.26
553.03       73.27
553.04       73.28
553.05       73.29
553.06       73.30
553.07       73.31
553.08       73.32
555.01       Ch. 74, Schd. VI
555.02       Ch. 74, Schd. VI
555.03       Ch. 74, Schd. VI
555.04       Ch. 74, Schd. VI
555.99       Ch. 74, Schd. VI
701.01       90.01
701.02       90.02
701.03       90.03
703.01       91.01
703.02       91.01
705.01       130.15
705.02       130.16
705.03       130.17
705.04       130.18
705.13       130.01
707.01       90.15
707.02       90.16
707.03       90.17
707.04       90.18
713.04       130.02
721.02       91.04
721.03       91.05
721.06       91.06
721.07       91.07
725.01       131.01
725.02       131.02
725.04       131.04
729.01       110.01
729.02       110.02
729.03       110.03
729.04       110.04
729.05       110.05
731.01       91.15
731.02       91.16
731.03       91.17
901.01       150.01
901.02       150.02
921.10       52.21
923.01       52.01
923.02       52.02
923.03       52.03
923.04       52.04
923.05       52.05
923.06       52.06
923.07       52.07
931.01       51.20
931.02       51.21
931.03       51.22
931.04       51.23
931.05       51.24
933.01       51.01
933.02       51.02
933.04       51.03
933.05       51.04
933.06       51.05
933.07       51.06
933.08       51.07
933.09       51.08
933.10       51.09
941.01       50.20
941.02       50.21
941.03       50.22
941.04       50.23
953.01       53.25
953.02       53.26
953.03       53.27
953.04       53.28
953.05       53.29
953.06       53.30
953.08       53.31
961.01       50.01
961.03       50.03
961.04       50.04
961.05       50.05
961.06       50.06
961.07       50.07
961.08       50.08
961.09       50.09
1103.02      91.30
1103.03      91.31
1103.04      91.32
1109.01      91.02
1109.02      91.02
1111.01      91.45
1111.02      91.46
1111.03      91.47
1707.01      151.20
1707.02      151.21
1707.03      151.22
1707.04      151.23
1707.05      151.24
1707.06      151.25
1707.07      151.26
1721.01      150.03
1721.02      150.03
1721.03      150.03
1723.01      151.01
1903.01      151.03
1903.02      151.03
1905.01      151.04
1905.02      151.04
1905.03      151.04
1905.04      151.04
1905.05      151.04
1905.06      151.04
1907.01      151.05
1907.02      151.05
1907.03      151.05
1907.04      151.05
1907.05      151.05
SO Table I   TSO Table I
SO Table II  TSO Table II
SO Table III TSO Table III
SO Table IV  TSO Table IV
SO Table V   TSO Table V
SO Table VI  TSO Table VI
SO Table VII TSO Table VII
             
 
REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS
Res. No. Date Passed Code Section
Res. No.  Date Passed Code Section
393-A     - -         TSO Table VII
198       6-24-1936   TSO Table III
290       4-6-1953    TSO Table VII
296       7-6-1953    Ch. 74, Schd. V
304       1-18-1954   Ch. 74, Schd. V
309       3-1-1954    TSO Table VII
315       6-7-1954    Ch. 74, Schd. V
319       9-13-1954   Ch. 74, Schd. III
334       7-5-1955    Ch. 74, Schd. V
336       8-1-1955    Ch. 74, Schd. V
337       9-12-1955   Ch. 74, Schd. V
343       12-5-1955   Ch. 74, Schd. V
346       3-5-1956    Ch. 74, Schd. V
347       3-5-1956    TSO Table VII
361       3-4-1957    TSO Table VII
7-11-2011 7-11-2011   33.01
705       1-15-2013   TSO Table III
706-R3    8-12-2013   TSO Table VII
712R-1    7-28-2014   33.02
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
506      - -         TSO Table III
-        9-21-1898   30.01
1        12-29-1898  30.15;
                     131.02
5        6-30-1899   TSO Table III
7        8-4-1899    TSO Table III
4        8-11-1899   TSO Table VI
8        9-22-1899   TSO Table IV
9        10-6-1899   TSO Table IV
10       10-6-1899   TSO Table IV
11       11-14-1899  TSO Table VI
13       1-22-1900   TSO Table IV
15       10-6-1900   TSO Table III
16       1-4-1901    TSO Table III
18       7-17-1901   TSO Table III
19       8-2-1901    TSO Table III
20       9-25-1901   TSO Table III
21       9-25-1901   TSO Table III
24       4-22-1903   91.04
26       8-10-1903   TSO Table VI
27       6-24-1904   TSO Table VI
29       6-6-1906    150.01
32       6-10-1907   TSO Table I
38       7-13-1908   TSO Table IV
41       9-14-1908   TSO Table IV
42       11-2-1908   TSO Table VI
46       6-6-1910    TSO Table II
47       10-3-1910   TSO Table III
53       7-3-1911    TSO Table IV
55       9-12-1911   150.03
57       7-26-1913   TSO Table III
59       1-5-1914    TSO Table IV
60       1-6-1914    TSO Table IV
61       1-6-1914    TSO Table IV
63       2-2-1914    91.05
                     90.01;
                     90.02;
67       8-4-1914    91.04;
                     91.30 
                     91.32
71       11-25-1914  TSO Table III
                     70.01;
                     71.01;
                     71.02;
                     72.01;
                     72.16;
74       6-5-1917    72.38 
                     72.40;
                     73.01;
                     73.07;
                     73.09;
                     73.11;
                     Ch. 74, Schd. V
87       4-7-1919    TSO Table III
88/89    7-7-1919    TSO Table III
92       8-2-1920    TSO Table VI
93       9-9-1920    TSO Table VI
-        8-7-1922    TSO Table II
96       12-4-1922   TSO Table VI
137      7-7-1924    TSO Table IV
138      7-7-1924    TSO Table VI
141      12-1-1924   TSO Table III
150      3-2-1925    TSO Table VI
151      4-6-1925    TSO Table IV
152      5-4-1925    TSO Table IV
153      5-4-1925    TSO Table VI
156      6- -1925    TSO Table III
157      12-10-1925  TSO Table III
                     51.01;
                     51.02;
                     51.04;
159      2-3-1926    51.05;
                     51.07;
                     51.20;
                     51.21;
                     51.23
160      4-5-1926    91.07
161      2-7-1927    TSO Table III
162      4-4-1927    TSO Table IV
164      7-2-1928    TSO Table II
168      5-5-1930    TSO Table VII
171      6-2-1930    50.20 
                     50.23
172      12-2-1930   TSO Table IV
177      5-12-1932   TSO Table VII
178      11-7-1932   TSO Table IV
183      3-5-1934    TSO Table VII
191      3-5-1935    71.21
194      4-1-1935    TSO Table VII
199      3-6-1936    TSO Table VII
204      4-5-1937    TSO Table VII
210      1-16-1939   TSO Table VII
212      6-3-1940    TSO Table IV
213      6-3-1940    TSO Table IV
224      2-7-1944    TSO Table VII
225      3-7-1944    TSO Table VII
227      12-4-1944   91.04;
                     131.01
229      2-5-1945    TSO Table VII
                     70.01;
                     70.15 
                     70.22;
                     71.03 
                     71.06;
                     71.20 
                     71.22;
                     72.02;
232      8-21-1945   72.16 
                     72.20;
                     72.35 
                     72.37;
                     73.01 
                     73.05;
                     73.08;
                     73.10;
                     Ch. 74, Schd. III;
                     Ch. 74, Schd. V
232      8-21-1945   90.03
233      2-4-1946    TSO Table VII
236      3-3-1947    TSO Table VII
237      3-3-1947    TSO Table VII
238      6-2-1947    73.26 
                     73.30
239      12-16-1947  TSO Table IV
240      12-16-1947  TSO Table IV
242      3-1-1948    TSO Table VII
243      3-1-1948    TSO Table VII
246      7-12-1948   TSO Table II
247      7-12-1948   TSO Table II
248      9-14-1948   90.02;
                     91.02
249      2-7-1949    TSO Table III
250      2-7-1949    TSO Table VII
254      8-8-1949    TSO Table II
255      8-8-1949    TSO Table II
259      2-6-1950    TSO Table VII
260      3-6-1950    TSO Table VII
267      1-8-1951    TSO Table II
268      2-5-1951    TSO Table III
271      3-5-1951    TSO Table VII
270      3-6-1951    TSO Table VII
277      3-11-1952   TSO Table VII
276      3-13-1952   TSO Table VII
281      9-3-1952    TSO Table VI
284      12-8-1952   TSO Table V
287      2-2-1953    TSO Table IV
291      4-6-1953    TSO Table VII
300      8-17-1953   TSO Table III
303      1-18-1954   73.06
308      3-1-1954    TSO Table VII
317      7-15-1954   91.06
325      2-7-1955    TSO Table VII
                     111.01;
326      3-2-1955    111.03;
                     111.04
329      3-7-1955    32.01
332      7-5-1955    TSO Table II
348      3-5-1956    TSO Table VII
356      8-10-1956   Ch. 74, Schd. II
362      3-4-1957    TSO Table VII
363      3-4-1957    TSO Table VII
370      10-17-1957  TSO Table II
371      12-9-1957   TSO Table II
372      2-3-1958    32.20
377      4-7-1958    TSO Table VII
379      5-5-1958    TSO Table IV
381      8-22-1958   32.20
382      10-6-1958   TSO Table IV
387      3-9-1959    TSO Table VII
389      5-4-1959    TSO Table IV
394      3-7-1960    TSO Table VII
399      1-14-1961   130.15 
                     130.18
403      5-17-1961   TSO Table VII
408      3-16-1962   73.25
411      4-18-1962   TSO Table I
412      5-7-1962    TSO Table I
413      5-7-1962    TSO Table III
414      5-7-1962    TSO Table III
415      5-23-1962   TSO Table VII
419      11-19-1962  TSO Table II
420      3-15-1963   52.21
421      3-15-1963   52.01 
                     52.06
422      5-23-1963   TSO Table III
424      7-5-1963    TSO Table VII
425      12-5-1963   31.01;
                     151.01
427      4-6-1964    TSO Table VI
432      - -1964     TSO Table VII
434      7-6-1964    TSO Table VII
437      10-21-1964  TSO Table III
438      1-4-1965    32.01
441      6-7-1965    TSO Table VII
442      12-6-1965   TSO Table VII
443      4-4-1966    TSO Table VII
451      4-3-1967    TSO Table VII
455      12-18-1967  TSO Table VII
458      8-19-1968   51.06;
                     51.24
459      11-4-1968   111.02
462      12-23-1968  TSO Table VII
463      4-28-1969   TSO Table III
464      7-7-1969    130.02
467      1-19-1970   TSO Table VII
468      2-1-1971    TSO Table VII
475      5-1-1972    TSO Table VII
476      5-1-1972    90.15 
                     90.18
477      5-1-1972    72.15;
                     72.99
481      5-1-1972    91.01
484      12-12-1972  TSO Table VII
488      10-22-1973  TSO Table VI
489      12-1-1973   TSO Table VI
490      12-1-1973   TSO Table VII
491      3-12-1974   111.02
494      12-30-1974  TSO Table VII
495      1-30-1975   TSO Table VII
497      7-23-1975   32.21;
                     TSO Table III
                     34.025 
                     34.028;
499      12-9-1975   34.030 
                     34.037;
                     34.999
500      12-15-1975  TSO Table VI
501      2-10-1976   TSO Table VII
504      6-5-1976    TSO Table I
505      6-8-1976    TSO Table III
509      8-10-1976   TSO Table VI
510      1-11-1977   TSO Table VII
512      6-14-1977   TSO Table VI
                     34.025;
                     34.027;
514      9-13-1977   34.028;
                     34.030;
                     34.999
515      10-11-1977  34.999
518      12-13-1977  51.24
519      12-19-1977  TSO Table VII
521      11-13-1978  91.15 
                     91.17
523      1-8-1979    111.02
526      1-8-1979    TSO Table VII
531      12-28-1979  TSO Table VII
536      1-17-1981   TSO Table VII
537      1-19-1981   TSO Table VI
539      11-23-1981  51.08
540      12-28-1981  TSO Table VII
541      12-28-1981  53.25 
                     53.29
545      12-30-1982  TSO Table VII
544      1-10-1983   111.03
549      9-12-1983   TSO Table IV
551      12-31-1983  TSO Table VII
553      6-30-1984   TSO Table VI
554      12-17-1984  TSO Table VII
557      11-21-1985  51.20
558      12-16-1985  TSO Table VII
562      12-30-1986  TSO Table VII
564      2-17-1987   111.02
566      3-17-1987   34.050 
                     34.066
568      6-16-1987   73.25 
                     73.32
570      11-6-1987   TSO Table IV
569      11-17-1987  Ch. 74, Schd. I
572      12-15-1987  TSO Table VII
573      12-15-1987  Ch. 74, Schd. V
576      12-15-1987  53.30
578      2-16-1988   TSO Table IV
580      5-17-1988   53.30
583      8-16-1988   TSO Table IV
585      11-15-1988  TSO Table VII
588      1-4-1989    TSO Table VI
589      3-21-1989   TSO Table VI
590      3-21-1989   TSO Table III
591      6-20-1989   53.26
                     34.999;
592      7-18-1989   72.99;
                     Ch. 74, Schd. I
593      11-27-1989  TSO Table VII
595      12-9-1989   34.030;
                     34.033
597      5-15-1990   53.30
599      11-20-1990  130.02
600      12-7-1990   TSO Table VII
602      12-7-1990   53.30
603      12-18-1990  34.029 
608      6-18-1991   TSO Table III
609      6-18-1991   151.04
610      7-16-1991   TSO Table III
611      8-20-1991   TSO Table III
612      12-18-1991  TSO Table VII
613      12-30-1991  53.30
615      12-31-1992  TSO Table VII
616      12-30-1993  TSO Table VII
617      2-15-1994   TSO Table VII
618      4-19-1994   Ch. 74, Schd. V
619      5-17-1994   151.05
621      12-31-1994  TSO Table VII
622      7-1-1995    Ch. 74, Schd. IV
624      7-1-1995    91.45 
                     91.47
623-B    9-19-1995   Ch. 74, Schd. V
627      10-17-1995  110.01 
                     110.05
628      12-30-1995  TSO Table VII
630      4-9-1996    TSO Table VI
630-A    6-3-1996    Ch. 74, Schd. III
631      9-9-1996    TSO Table VI
632      12-30-1996  TSO Table VII
                     71.35 
633      3-3-1997    71.40;
                     71.99
637      12-30-1999  TSO Table VII
638      12-30-2000  TSO Table VII
639      1-8-2001    Ch. 74, Schd. V
641      1-15-2002   53.30
643      4-1-2002    130.01
644      4-1-2002    Ch. 74, Schd. V
645      9-9-2002    73.25
650      12-9-2002   TSO Table VII
652      5-5-2003    Ch. 74, Schd. V
653      5-5-2003    Ch. 74, Schd. IV
                     50.01;
                     50.03 
                     50.09;
                     51.03;
654      11- -2003   51.06;
                     51.09;
                     51.22;
                     51.24;
                     53.30
655      12-18-2003  TSO Table VII
657      6-28-2004   151.20 
                     151.26
658      8-25-2004   TSO Table VI
659      12-20-2004  TSO Table VII
659-2    4-4-2005    Ch. 74, Schd. V
                     33.15 
661      11-7-2005   33.18;
                     33.99
662      12-29-2005  51.22;
                     53.30
667      11-6-2006   Ch. 74, Schd. IV
668      12-4-2006   TSO Table VII
670      6-18-2007   Ch. 74, Schd. V
671      8-13-2007   TSO Table IV
672      9-26-2007   34.053
673      10-1-2007   Ch. 74, Schd. III
                     34.001 
674      12-17-2007  34.013;
                     34.999
675      12-27-2007  TSO Table VII
676      5-19-2008   53.30;
                     53.31
679      11-21-2008  34.080 
                     34.086
682      12-22-2008  TSO Table VII
683      7-6-2009    Ch. 74, Schd. IV
684      10-19-2009  113.01 
                     113.07
688      12-7-2009   TSO Table VII
690      10-11-2010  TSO Table V
691      12-29-2010  TSO Table VII
692      12-29-2010  51.22
693      12-29-2010  53.30
696      10-10-2011  51.22
697      10-10-2011  111.05
699      12-12-2011  52.21
700      12-27-2011  TSO Table VII
701      5-14-2012   151.03
704      12-27-2012  51.22
706      2-11-2013   TSO Table VII
707      12-19-2014  TSO Table VII
713      12-29-2014  TSO Table VII
715      8-1-2015    TSO Table VII
723      1-25-2016   TSO Table VII
726      2-8-2016    TSO Table VII
729      5-23-2016   TSO Table VI
731      7-2-2016    51.22
732      7-5-2016    TSO Table VI
733      12-12-2016  TSO Table VII
736      1-9-2017    31.03
738      12-11-2017  TSO Table VII
737      10-8-2018   31.03
739      12-10-2018  TSO Table VII
740      4-8-2019    31.02
741      6-24-2019   TSO Table V
742      7-8-2019    151.40 
                     151.43
743      11-25-2019  31.15 
                     31.19
                     92.01 
744      12-16-2019  92.06;
                     92.99
745      12-16-2019  TSO Table VII
746      1-13-2020   152.01
747      7-13-2020   151.02
748      11-9-2020   TSO Table III
749      11-23-2020  152.01
750      12-14-2020  TSO Table VII
751      1-11-2021   31.03
752      1-25-2021   TSO Table VI
753      12-28-2022  32.35 
                     32.39
754      11-27-2023  152.01
755      12-11-2023  TSO Table VII
756      12-11-2023  32.22;
                     TSO Table III
757      12-11-2023  53.01 
                     53.13
758      2-26-2024   32.40
759      7-1-2024    TSO Table VI
760      7-1-2024    TSO Table VI
761      8-26-2024   30.02
762      9-11-2024   TSO Table III
763      12-23-2024  TSO Table VI
                    
 
 
 
