OKLAHOMA BOROUGH, PENNSYLVANIA
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2025 S-1 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through December 8, 2025
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE NO. 2 OF 2025
AN ORDINANCE ENACTING A CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR THE BOROUGH OF OKLAHOMA,
WESTMORELAND COUNTY, PENNSYLVANIA, REVISING, AMENDING, RESTATING, CODIFYING AND
COMPILING CERTAIN EXISTING GENERAL ORDINANCES OF THE POLITICAL SUBDIVISION
DEALING WITH SUBJECTS EMBRACED IN SUCH CODE OF ORDINANCES AND DECLARING AN
EMERGENCY.
WHEREAS, the present general and permanent ordinances of the Political
Subdivision are inadequately arranged and classified and are insufficient in
form and substance for the complete preservation of the public peace, health,
safety and general welfare of the municipality and for the proper conduct of
its affairs; and
WHEREAS, the Acts of the Legislature of the State of Pennsylvania empower and
authorize the Political Subdivision to revise, amend, restate, codify and
compile any existing ordinances and all new ordinances not heretofore adopted
or published and to incorporate such ordinances into one ordinance in book
form; and
WHEREAS, the Legislative Authority of the Political Subdivision has authorized
a general compilation, revision and codification of the ordinances of the
Political Subdivision of a general and permanent nature and publication of
ordinance in book form; and
WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of the
municipality and for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health,
safety and general welfare of the municipality that this ordinance take effect
at an early date.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE LEGISLATIVE AUTHORITY OF THE POLITICAL
SUBDIVISION OF THE BOROUGH OF OKLAHOMA:
Section 1.   The general ordinances of the Political Subdivision as revised,
amended, restated, codified, and compiled in book form are hereby adopted as
and shall constitute the "Code of Ordinances of the Borough of Oklahoma,
Westmoreland County, Pennsylvania."
Section 2.   Such Code of Ordinances as adopted in Section 1 shall consist of
the following Titles:
OKLAHOMA BOROUGH, PENNSYLVANIA
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Chapter
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
         10.   General Provisions
      
         TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
         30.   Elected and Appointed Officials
         31.   Boards and Commissions
         32.   Finances and Revenue
         TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
         50.   Solid Waste
         51.   Sewers and Sewage Disposal
         TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
         70.   General Provisions
         71.   Traffic Regulations
         72.   Parking Regulations
         73.   Recreational Vehicles
         74.   Traffic Schedules
         75.   Parking Schedules
         TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
         90.   Animals
         91.   Health and Safety; Nuisances
         92.   Fire Prevention and Protection
         93.   Parks and Recreation
         TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
         110.   Peddlers, Solicitors, and Transient Merchants
         111.   Adult-Oriented Businesses
         112.   Amusements and Amusement Devices
         113.   Junk Dealers and Junkyards
         TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
         130.   Offenses Against People and Public Safety
         131.   Offenses Against Property
         TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
         150.   Buildings and Construction
         151.   Housing
         152.   Streets and Sidewalks
         153.   Floodplain Management
         154.   Stormwater Management
         155.   Subdivision and Land Development
         156.   Zoning
         TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
         I.      Bonds and Loans
         II.      Franchises and Services
         III.      Governmental and Intergovernmental Affairs
         IV.      Sewers
         V.      Streets and Sidewalks
         VI.      Zoning
         VII.   Property
         PARALLEL REFERENCES
         References to Pennsylvania Statutes
         References to Pennsylvania Code
         References to Pennsylvania Consolidated Statutes
         References to Pennsylvania Consolidated Statutes Annotated
         References to Prior Code
         References to Ordinances
         INDEX
Section 3.   All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated in such
Code of Ordinances shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date
of this ordinance except as they are included and reordained in whole or in
part in such Code; provided, such repeal shall not affect any offense committed
or penalty incurred or any right established prior to the effective date of
this ordinance, nor shall such repeal affect the provisions of ordinances
levying taxes, appropriating money, annexing or detaching territory,
establishing franchises, or granting special rights to certain persons,
authorizing public improvements, authorizing the issuance of bonds or borrowing
of money, authorizing the purchase or sale of real personal property, granting
or accepting easements, plat or dedication of land to public use, vacating or
setting the boundaries of streets or other public places; nor shall such repeal
affect any other ordinance of a temporary or special nature or pertaining to
subjects not contained in or covered by the Code.
Section 4.   Such Code shall be deemed published as of the day of its adoption
and approval by the Legislative Authority and the Clerk of the Political
Subdivision is hereby authorized and ordered to file a copy of such Code of
Ordinances in the Office of the Clerk.
Section 5.   Such Code shall be in full force and effect as provided in Section
6, and such Code shall be presumptive evidence in all courts and places of the
ordinance and all provisions, sections, penalties and regulations therein
contained and of the date of passage, and that the same is properly signed,
attested, recorded, and approved and that any public hearings and notices
thereof as required by law have been given.
Section 6.   This ordinance is declared to be an emergency measure necessary
for the immediate preservation of the peace, health, safety and general welfare
of the people of this municipality, and shall take effect at the earliest date
provided by law.
PASSED AND ADOPTED by the Legislative Authority of the Political Subdivision on
this 13th day of October, 2025.
ATTEST:                              BOROUGH OF OKLAHOMA
Alecia Sherbondy /s/       Joseph Cali /s/
Alecia Sherbondy                        Joseph Cali
Borough Secretary                        Council President
 
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
10.01   Approval, adoption and title of code
   
10.02   Rules of interpretation and definitions
   
10.03   Effect of code on previous provisions
   
10.04   Sections and ordinances repealed
   
10.05   Exemptions from repeal
   
10.06   Application to future ordinances
   
10.07   Changes and revisions in previously adopted ordinances
   
10.08   Interpretation of provisions
   
10.09   Headings, editor’s notes, statutory references
   
10.10   Amendments to the code; code books to be kept up-to-date
   
10.11   Severability
   
10.12   Reference to other sections
   
10.13   Errors and omissions
   
10.14   Section histories; statutory references
   
10.15   Altering or tampering with the code; penalties for violation
 
   
10.99   General penalty
§ 10.01 APPROVAL, ADOPTION AND TITLE OF CODE.
   (A)   Pursuant to 8 Pa.C.S. § 3301.5, the codification of all ordinances of
a permanent and general nature for the Borough of Oklahoma, Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, as revised, codified, rearranged, renumbered and consolidated
into component codes, titles, chapters and sections, are approved, adopted,
ordained and enacted as a single ordinance of the Borough of Oklahoma and shall
be known and designated as the Borough of Oklahoma Code, for which designation
“code of ordinances,” “codified ordinances” or “code” may be substituted.
   (B)   Code title, chapter and section headings do not constitute any part of
the law as contained in the code.
§ 10.02 RULES OF INTERPRETATION AND DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   Rules of interpretation.
      (1)   Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain, ordinary and usual
sense. Technical words and phrases having a peculiar and appropriate meaning in
law shall be understood according to their technical import.
      (2)   Words imputing joint authority to three or more persons shall be
construed as imputing authority to a majority of the persons unless otherwise
declared in the section giving the authority.
      (3)   Where a section requires an act to be done which, by law, an agent
or deputy may perform in addition to the principal, the performance of the act
by an authorized deputy or agent is valid.
      (4)   Words denoting the masculine gender shall be deemed to include the
feminine and neuter genders; words in the singular shall include the plural and
words in the plural shall include the singular; the use of a verb in the
present tense shall include the future, if applicable.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this code, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICE. All departments and the personnel thereof
established by the Borough Code or by ordinance.
      AND. May be read OR, and OR may be read AND, if the sense requires it.
      AUTHORITY. Whenever in this code authority is given to an officer or an
act is required to be performed, the authority may be exercised and the act may
be performed, at the instance of the officer, by a deputy or subordinate unless
contrary to law or to the clear intent of any particular provision.
      BOROUGH and MUNICIPALITY. The Borough of Oklahoma, Pennsylvania.
      BOROUGH CODE. Public Law 432 of 2014, No. 37, effective June 17, 2014,
being 8 Pa.C.S. §§ 101 et seq., as amended.
      BUDGET. The annual budget of the borough.
      CALENDAR/COMPUTATION OF TIME. The terms MONTH and YEAR mean the CALENDAR
MONTH or YEAR. The time expressed in days within which an act is to be done or
a period is to expire shall be computed by excluding the first and including
the last day, unless the last day is a Sunday, in which case, it shall be
excluded. If time is expressed in hours, the whole of Sunday shall be excluded.
      CONTRACT ADMINISTRATION. The management of the execution of contracts
between the borough and any individual, partnership, association, corporation
or governmental body.
      COUNCIL. The Council of the Borough of Oklahoma, Pennsylvania.
      COUNTY. The County of Westmoreland, Pennsylvania.
      ENGINEER. The Engineer of the borough.
      KEEPER and PROPRIETOR. Persons, firms, associations, corporations, clubs
and copartnerships, whether acting by themselves or as a servant, agent or
employee.
      LAND/REAL ESTATE. Includes rights and easements of an incorporeal nature.
      LAW. All applicable laws and ordinances of the United States of America,
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and the County of Westmoreland.
      MANAGER or BOROUGH MANAGER. The chief administrative officer as appointed
by the Borough Council.
      OATH. Includes AFFIRMATION. When an oath is required or authorized by
law, an affirmation in lieu thereof may be taken by a person having
conscientious scruples about taking an oath. An AFFIRMATION shall have the same
effect as an OATH.
      ORDINANCE. Any ordinance of the Borough of Oklahoma, including this code.
      OWNER. When applied to property, includes a part owner, joint owner or
tenant in common of the whole or any part of the property.
      PERSON. An individual, association, club, corporation, firm, partnership,
body politic or any other legal entity.
      PREMISES. When used as applicable to property, extends to and includes
land and buildings.
      PROPERTY. Includes real and personal property and any mixed and lesser
estates or interests therein. PERSONAL PROPERTY includes every kind of property
except real property. REAL PROPERTY includes lands, tenements and
hereditaments.
      REASONABLE TIME. In all cases where provision is made for an act to be
done or notice to be given within a REASONABLE TIME, it shall be deemed to mean
the time only as may be necessary for the prompt performance of the act or the
giving of the notice.
      SIDEWALK. Any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent
property line intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding parkways.
      SOLICITOR. The Solicitor of the borough.
      STATE or COMMONWEALTH. The Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
      STREET. Alleys, avenues, boulevards, lanes, roads, streets, state
highways and other public ways in the borough.
      TENANT or OCCUPANT. As applied to buildings or land, shall extend and be
applied to any person holding a written or oral lease of, or who occupies the
whole or any part of, a building or land, alone or with others.
      TIME. Whenever any time established in the codified ordinances for the
taking of any action expires on a Sunday or legal holiday, the time shall not
expire on the day but shall expire on the next weekday.
§ 10.03 EFFECT OF CODE ON PREVIOUS PROVISIONS.
   (A)   The provisions of this code, insofar as they are substantially the
same as those of ordinances and resolutions in force immediately prior to the
enactment of this code, are intended as a continuation of the ordinances and
resolutions and not as new enactments, and the effectiveness of the provisions
shall date from the date of adoption of the prior ordinance or resolution.
   (B)   All the provisions are hereby continued in full force and effect and
are hereby reaffirmed as to their adoption by the Borough Council, and it is
the intention of the Borough Council that each provision contained within the
code is hereby reenacted and reaffirmed as it appears in the code.
§ 10.04 SECTIONS AND ORDINANCES REPEALED.
   All ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict with the provisions of
this code are hereby repealed.
§ 10.05 EXEMPTIONS FROM REPEAL.
   The repeal provided for in §
10.04 of this chapter shall not affect the following ordinances, resolutions,
rights and obligations which are hereby expressly saved from repeal; provided,
however, that the repeal of ordinances or parts thereof in §
10.04 or the saving from repeal of ordinances or parts thereof pursuant to this
section shall not be construed so as to revive an ordinance or part thereof
previously repealed, superseded or no longer of any effect:
   (A)   Any offense or act committed or done, or any penalty or forfeiture
incurred, or any contract or right established or accruing, before the adoption
of these codified ordinances;
   (B)   Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of
money by or to the borough, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the
borough, or any evidence of the borough’s indebtedness, or any contract or
obligation assumed by the borough;
   (C)   Any ordinance or resolution of the Council not in conflict or
inconsistent with the provisions of these codified ordinances;
   (D)   Any right, license or franchise conferred by any ordinance or
resolution of the Council or any other person or corporation;
   (E)   Any ordinance establishing, naming, relocating or vacating any street
or other public way;
   (F)   Any ordinance or part thereof providing for the establishment of
positions, for salaries or for compensation;
   (G)   Any prosecution, suit or other proceeding pending, or any judgment
rendered, on or prior to the adoption of these codified ordinances;
   (H)   Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes or assessments;
   (I)   Any ordinance establishing or changing the boundaries of the borough;
or
   (J)   Any ordinance or resolution adopted by the Council after adoption of
the codified ordinances.
§ 10.06 APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.
   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall apply to
ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code unless
otherwise specifically provided.
§ 10.07 CHANGES AND REVISIONS IN PREVIOUSLY ADOPTED ORDINANCES.
   (A)   Nonsubstantive grammatical changes. In compiling and preparing the
ordinances and resolutions of the borough for adoption and revision as part of
the code, certain nonsubstantive grammatical and style changes were made in one
or more of the ordinances. It is the intention of the Borough Council that all
the changes be adopted as part of the code as if the ordinances and resolutions
so changed had been previously formally amended to read as such.
   (B)   Substantive changes and revisions. In addition to the changes and
revisions in division (A) above, changes and revisions of a substantive nature
are hereby made to various ordinances and resolutions included in the code.
These changes are enacted to bring provisions into conformity with the desired
policies of the Borough Council, and it is the intent of the Borough Council
that all the changes be adopted as part of the code as if the ordinances and
resolutions so changed have been previously formally amended to read as such.
All changes and revisions shall be deemed to be in effect as of the effective
date of this code.
§ 10.08 INTERPRETATION OF PROVISIONS.
   (A)   In interpreting and applying the provisions of the code, they shall be
held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health,
safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare.
   (B)   Where the provisions of the code impose greater restrictions or
requirements than those of any state statute, other ordinance, resolution or
regulation, the provisions of the code shall control.
   (C)   Where the provisions of any statute, other ordinance, resolution or
regulation impose greater restrictions or requirements, the provisions of the
statute, other ordinance, resolution or regulation shall control.
§ 10.09 HEADINGS, EDITOR’S NOTES, STATUTORY REFERENCES.
   (A)   Headings of titles, chapters, sections and divisions in the code, or
in supplements to the code, are inserted into the code, and may be inserted
into the supplements to the code, for the convenience of persons using the code
and are not part of the legislation.
   (B)   Editors’s notes and/or statutory references indicating sources of
sections, giving other information or referring the statutes, or to other parts
of the code, are inserted in the code, and may be inserted in supplements to
the code, for the convenience of persons using the code and are not part of the
legislation.
§ 10.10 AMENDMENTS TO THE CODE; CODE BOOKS TO BE KEPT UP-TO-DATE.
   (A)   (1)   Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to
the code, when passed and adopted so as to indicate the intention of the
Borough Council to be a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated into
the code so that the references in the code shall be understood and intended to
include the changes.
      (2)   When any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to
the code shall be adopted, they shall be printed and inserted into the bound
code book as amendments and supplements to it.
   (B)   (1)   Amending the code of ordinances. The procedure for amending the
code of ordinances shall include the citation of the chapter, section and
division to be amended, revised, repealed or added as follows:
         (a)   Amendment or revision. “Chapter ____, Section ___, Division ____
is hereby amended [revised] to read as follows...”;
         (b)   Additions. “Chapter ____, Section ___, Division ____ is hereby
amended by the addition of the following...”; or
         (c)   Repeal. “Chapter ____, Section ___, Division ____ is hereby
repealed in its entirety.”
      (2)   Responsibility for code of ordinances. It shall be the
responsibility of the Borough Secretary to maintain an up-to-date certified
copy of the code of ordinances. This copy shall be the official copy of the
Borough of Oklahoma Code of Ordinances and shall be available for public
inspection.
(Ord. 2015-04, passed 12-14-2015)
§ 10.11 SEVERABILITY.
   (A)   If any title, chapter, section, division or part thereof of this code
now enacted or subsequently amended, or its application to any person or
circumstances, is held to be illegal, invalid or unconstitutional by a court of
competent jurisdiction, that determination shall not affect, impair or
invalidate the remainder thereof but is confined in its operation and
application to the title, chapter, section, division or part thereof determined
illegal, invalid or unconstitutional.
   (B)   It is the intent of the Borough Council to declare that this code
would have been adopted if the illegal, invalid or unconstitutional title,
chapter, section, division or part thereof would not have been included.
§ 10.12 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof, the
reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified or renumbered unless the subject matter is changed
or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
§ 10.13 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   If a manifest error is discovered consisting of the misspelling of any
words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention of
the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning can be
attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was clearly
intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be corrected and the word or
words supplied, omitted or substituted as will conform with the manifest
intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though the correct
words were contained in the text as originally published. No alteration shall
be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or extent of
the error.
§ 10.14 SECTION HISTORIES; STATUTORY REFERENCES.
   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and passage
date of the original ordinance, and amending ordinances, if any, are listed
following the text of the code section. Example:
      (Ord. 10, passed 5-13-1960; Ord. 15, passed 1-1-1970; Ord. 20, passed 1-
1-1980; Ord. 25, passed 1-1-1985)
   (B)   If a statutory cite is included in the history, this indicates that
the text of the section reads substantially the same as the statute. Example:
      (65 P.S. § 67.101)
   (C)   If a statutory cite is set forth as a “statutory reference” following
the text of the section, this indicates that the reader should refer to that
statute for further information. Example:
      § 39.01 CODIFICATION.
         This code book consists of all ordinances and resolutions of the
borough and shall be known as the codified ordinances of the borough.
      Statutory reference:
         Authority to codify ordinances, see 65 P.S. §§ 67.101 et seq.
   (D)   If a section of this code is derived from the previous code of
ordinances of the borough published in a previous year and subsequently
amended, the previous code section number shall be indicated in the history by
“(Prior Code, §      ).”
§ 10.15 ALTERING OR TAMPERING WITH THE CODE; PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION.
   It shall be unlawful for anyone to change, alter or tamper with the code of
ordinances in any manner which will intentionally misrepresent the laws of the
borough. Whosoever shall violate this section shall be guilty of an offense
under § 4911, “Tampering with Public Records or Information,” of the Crimes
Code, 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 4911, and shall be prosecuted under that section of the
law.
(Ord. 2015-04, passed 12-14-2015)
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   (A)   Whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of
these codified ordinances, including a provision of any technical or other code
adopted in these codified ordinances by reference, and including a rule or
regulation promulgated pursuant to any provision of these codified ordinances
or of any technical or other code adopted in these codified ordinances by
reference, and including any order made under authority, express or implied, of
any provision of these codified ordinances or of any technical or other code
adopted in these codified ordinances by reference, having to do with building,
housing, property maintenance, health, fire or public safety codes or
ordinances, or with water, air or noise pollution violations, for which no
penalty is otherwise provided, shall be fined not more than $1,000 or
imprisoned for not more than 90 days, or both, for each offense. Unless
otherwise stated, a separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during
or on which a violation or noncompliance occurs or continues.
   (B)   Whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of
these codified ordinances, including a provision of any technical or other code
adopted in these codified ordinances by reference, and including a rule or
regulation promulgated pursuant to any provision of these codified ordinances
or of any technical or other code adopted in these codified ordinances by
reference, and including any order made under authority, express or implied, of
any provision of these codified ordinances or of any technical or other code
adopted in these codified ordinances by reference, for which no penalty is
otherwise provided, shall be fined not more than $600 or imprisoned not more
than 90 days, or both, for each offense. Unless otherwise stated, a separate
offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation
occurs or continues.
   (C)   The penalty provided for herein shall be in addition to any fee,
deposit, charge, surcharge, interest, insurance or bond requirement or
equitable remedy provided in these codified ordinances, or in any standard,
technical or other code adopted by reference in these codified ordinances, or
in any rule or regulation promulgated under authority of the standard,
technical or other code adopted by reference in these codified ordinance, or
under authority of any other provision of these codified ordinances, or under
authority of state law.
Statutory reference:
   Collection of penalties, amounts, prosecution of violators, disposition of
fines, see 8 Pa.C.S. §§ 3321 to 3324
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   ELECTED AND APPOINTED OFFICIALS
      
31.   BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
      
32.   FINANCES AND REVENUE
CHAPTER 30: ELECTED AND APPOINTED OFFICIALS
Section
Independent Auditor
   
30.01   Borough Auditor position abolished
   
30.02   Independent auditor appointed
Tax Collector
   
30.15   Tax Collector appointed
INDEPENDENT AUDITOR
§ 30.01 BOROUGH AUDITOR POSITION ABOLISHED.
   The office of elected Borough Auditor is abolished effective at the close of
the fiscal year ending December 31, 1989.
(Prior Code, § 1-201) (Ord. 204B, passed 12-11-1989)
§ 30.02 INDEPENDENT AUDITOR APPOINTED.
   (A)   For the fiscal year beginning January 1, 1989, and for each fiscal
year thereafter, unless changed by ordinance, an independent auditor shall be
appointed to make an independent examination of the accounting records of the
borough for that fiscal year. The independent auditor shall be a certified
public accountant, registered in the state, a firm of certified public
accountants, so registered, or a competent public accountant or a competent
firm of public accountants.
   (B)   The independent auditor shall be appointed annually by resolution of
the Council before the end of the fiscal year for which that independent
auditor is to examine the accounts. The independent auditor shall perform the
duties and exercise the powers conferred upon him or her by law.
   (C)   The compensation of the independent auditor shall be determined by the
Council and paid out of borough funds.
   (D)   Elected auditors of the borough holding office at the time of
enactment of this subchapter shall continue to hold that office during the term
for which elected, but those elected auditors shall not audit, settle or adjust
the accounts audited by the independent auditor, but shall perform the other
duties of their office.
(Prior Code, § 1-202) (Ord. 204B, passed 12-11-1989)
TAX COLLECTOR
§ 30.15 TAX COLLECTOR APPOINTED.
   Effective immediately, the borough hereby appoints the locally elected Tax
Collector as the municipal officer authorized to provide tax certifications and
duplicate bills upon request by the public, and hereby authorizes said Tax
Collector to assess, collect and retain, as compensation for providing such
additional service, a fee in an amount as established from time to time by
resolution of the Borough Council for tax certification and a fee in an amount
as established from time to time by resolution of the Borough Council for a
duplicate bill.
(Prior Code, § 1-211) (Res. 2002-1, passed 1-7-2002; Ord. 2015-04, passed 12-
14-2015)
CHAPTER 31: BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
Section
   
31.01   Planning Commission
§ 31.01 PLANNING COMMISSION.
   (A)   Under the authority of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code,
53 P.S. § 10201, there is hereby created in the borough a Planning Commission
which shall be comprised of five members appointed by the Borough Council, and
which Planning Commission shall be the planning agency for the borough.
   (B)   The Borough Council hereby assigns to the Planning Commission all the
powers and duties conferred on planning agencies by the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code.
   (C)   The engineer for the borough or an engineer appointed by the Borough
Council shall serve the Planning Commission as engineering advisor. The
solicitor for the borough, or an attorney appointed by the Borough Council,
shall serve the Planning Commission as legal advisor.
CHAPTER 32: FINANCES AND REVENUE
Section
Earned Income Tax
   
32.001   Imposition of tax
   
32.002   Section 13 of Enabling Act adopted by reference; options
   
32.003   Income Tax Officer
Per Capita Tax
   
32.015   Per capita tax imposed
   
32.016   Collection of per capita tax
   
32.017   Tax Collector’s bond
   
32.018   Duplicate constitutes warrant for collection
   
32.019   Expenses of collection; compensation of Tax Collector
   
32.020   Notice to taxpayers
   
32.021   Addition of names to duplicate
   
32.022   Authority of Tax Collector; local tax collection law applicable
Realty Transfer Tax Under Local Tax Enabling Act
   
32.035   Definitions
   
32.036   Imposition of tax
   
32.037   Payment of tax evidenced by affixing stamp
   
32.038   Special Tax Collector
   
32.039   Stamp to be affixed to document before document recorded or has
certain legal status
   
32.040   Document to set forth full, complete consideration or value or be
accompanied by affidavit
   
32.041   Interest added to unpaid tax
   
32.042   Penalty added to unpaid tax
   
32.043   Recovery of taxes, interest and penalties
   
32.044   Taxes, interest and penalties constitute lien on property
Tax Reform Code Realty Transfer Tax
   
32.055   Short title
   
32.056   Imposition of tax; rate; applicability; scope and intent
   
32.057   Certain provisions of Tax Reform Code, as amended, incorporated by
reference
   
32.058   Administration, collection and enforcement
Real Estate Tax Discounts, Waivers and Penalties
   
32.070   Real estate tax discount rate
   
32.071   Real estate tax penalty rate
   
32.072   Real estate tax penalty waiver
 
   
32.999   Penalty
EARNED INCOME TAX
§ 32.001 IMPOSITION OF TAX.
   A tax for general revenue purposes of 1% is hereby imposed on:
   (A)   Earned income earned on and after January 1, 1966, by residents of the
borough;
   (B)   Earned income earned on and after January 1, 1966, by nonresidents of
the said borough for work done or services performed or rendered in the
borough;
   (C)   Net profits earned on and after January 1, 1966, by residents of the
borough; and
   (D)   Net profits earned on and after January 1, 1966, from the operation of
businesses, professions or other activity, except corporations, conducted in
the said borough by nonresidents of the borough.
(Prior Code, § 24-101) (Ord. 96, passed 11-3-1965; Ord. 116, passed 8-19-1966)
§ 32.002 SECTION 13 OF ENABLING ACT ADOPTED BY REFERENCE; OPTIONS.
   (A)   This section is enacted under the authority of the Local Tax Enabling
Act, 53 P.S. §§ 6924.101 et seq., and amendments thereto, and, is hereby
adopted and incorporated by reference and made a part of this chapter.
   (B)   In the case of net profits, taxpayers shall declare and pay income
taxes as outlined 53 P.S. § 6924.502(C), and amendments thereto, of the Local
Tax Enabling Act, thereby requiring an annual declaration of estimated net
profits and quarterly payments thereof.
   (C)   Pursuant to 53 P.S. § 6924.502(c)(3), every taxpayer who receives any
other taxable income not subject to withholding under § 512(3) shall make and
file with the resident Tax Officer a quarterly return on or before April 15 of
the current year, July 15 of the current year, October 15 of the current year
and January 15 of the succeeding year, setting forth the aggregate amount of
taxable income not subject to withholding by the taxpayer during the three-
month periods ending March 31 of the current year, June 30 of the current year,
September 30 of the current year, and December 31 of the current year,
respectively, and subject to income tax, together with such other information
as the Department may require. Every taxpayer filing a return shall, at the
time of filing the return, pay to the resident Tax Officer the amount of income
tax due. The Department shall establish criteria under which the Tax Officer
may waive the quarterly return and payment of the income tax and permit a
taxpayer to file the receipt of taxable income on the taxpayer’s annual return
and pay the income tax due on or before April 15 of the succeeding year.
   (D)   Provided, the Income Tax Officer may provide by regulation for the
making, and filing of adjusted declarations of estimated net profits, and for
the payment of the estimated tax on net profits in cases where a taxpayer who
has previously made a declaration of estimated net profits anticipates
additional net profits not previously declared or finds that he or she has
overestimated his or her anticipated net profits.
(Ord. 96, passed 11-3-1965; Ord. 116, passed 8-19-1966)
§ 32.003 INCOME TAX OFFICER.
   The Borough Council may from time to time appoint and designate a person to
serve as the Income Tax Officer, and the bond of the Income Tax Officer shall
be filed with the Borough Solicitor.
(Prior Code, § 24-103) (Ord. 96, passed 11-3-1965; Ord. 116, passed 8-19-1966)
PER CAPITA TAX
§ 32.015 PER CAPITA TAX IMPOSED.
   A per capita tax of $5 per annum (subject to change via resolution) be and
the same is hereby levied and assessed upon each resident or inhabitant of the
borough over 21 years of age, which tax shall be in addition to all other taxes
levied and assessed by the borough pursuant to any other laws of the
commonwealth.
(Prior Code, § 24-201) (Ord. 118, passed 11-7-1966; Ord. 121, passed 12-12-
1967)
§ 32.016 COLLECTION OF PER CAPITA TAX.
   Said tax shall be collected in the manner as approved by Pennsylvania law,
including third-party tax collectors as authorized for the borough whereby the
borough has the power to appoint or hire a third-party tax collecting entity to
exclusively collect the per capita tax as levied by the borough and, from time
to time hereafter, may assign the obligations and duties of the collection of
said per capita tax in a manner as provided by law without further ordinance or
resolution.
(Prior Code, § 24-202) (Ord. 118, passed 11-7-1966; Ord. 4 of 2025, passed 11-
10-2025)
§ 32.017 TAX COLLECTOR’S BOND.
   The Tax Collector shall give bond, secured and conditioned for the
collection and payment of such taxes as provided by law for other borough
taxes.
(Prior Code, § 24-203) (Ord. 118, passed 11-7-1966)
§ 32.018 DUPLICATE CONSTITUTES WARRANT FOR COLLECTION.
   The entry of the per capita tax in the tax duplicate and the issuance of
such duplicate to the Tax Collector shall constitute his or her warrant for the
collection of the per capita tax hereby levied and assessed.
(Prior Code, § 24-204) (Ord. 118, passed 11-7-1966)
§ 32.019 EXPENSES OF COLLECTION; COMPENSATION OF TAX COLLECTOR.
   The expense of collection and compensation of the Tax Collector shall be
paid and allowed pursuant to 8 Pa.C.S. § 1086 of the Pennsylvania Borough Code,
and the Local Tax Collection Law, 72 P.S. §§ 5511.1 et seq., as amended and
supplemented.
(Prior Code, § 24-205) (Ord. 118, passed 11-7-1966)
§ 32.020 NOTICE TO TAXPAYERS.
   The Tax Collector shall give notice to the taxpayers of the amount of per
capita tax due under this subchapter at the same time and in the same manner
pursuant to 8 Pa.C.S. § 1086 of the Pennsylvania Borough Code, and the Local
Tax Collection Law, 72 P.S. §§ 5511.1 et seq., as amended and supplemented.
(Prior Code, § 24-206) (Ord. 118, passed 11-7-1966)
§ 32.021 ADDITION OF NAMES TO DUPLICATE.
   In case the Tax Collector shall at any time find within the borough any
resident or inhabitant above the age of 21 years whose name does not appear
upon the tax duplicate, he or she shall report the name of such person
forthwith to the assessor, who shall thereupon certify the same unto the
Borough Council, which shall promptly certify the same to the Tax Collector
reporting such name, whereupon the Tax Collector shall add such name and the
assessment of this per capita tax against such person to the duplicate of the
borough and shall proceed to collect the same.
(Prior Code, § 24-207) (Ord. 118, passed 11-7-1966)
§ 32.022 AUTHORITY OF TAX COLLECTOR; LOCAL TAX COLLECTION LAW APPLICABLE.
   The Tax Collector shall give notice to the taxpayers; shall have the power
to collect said taxes by distress; shall have the power and authority to demand
and receive said tax from the employer of any person owing any per capita tax,
or whose spouse owes any per capita tax; shall remit such taxes to the Borough
Treasurer by separate statement at the same time as other taxes are remitted to
the borough; shall allow discounts and add penalties; and shall generally be
subject to all the duties and shall have all the rights and authority conferred
upon him or her pursuant to 8 Pa.C.S. § 1086 of the Pennsylvania Borough Code,
and the Local Tax Collection Law, 72 P.S. §§ 5511.1 et seq., as amended and
supplemented. It is hereby declared to be the intent of the Borough Council, in
enacting this subchapter, to confer upon the Tax Collector, in the collection
of this per capita tax, all the powers, together with all the duties and
obligations, to the same extent and pursuant to 8 Pa.C.S. § 1086 of the
Pennsylvania Borough Code, and the Local Tax Collection Law, 72 P.S. §§ 5511.1
et seq., as amended and supplemented.
(Prior Code, § 24-208) (Ord. 118, passed 11-7-1966)
REALTY TRANSFER TAX UNDER LOCAL TAX ENABLING ACT
§ 32.035 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ASSOCIATION. A partnership, limited partnership, registered partnership,
business operated under a fictitious name or any other form of unincorporated
enterprise owner, or conducted by two or more persons.
   CORPORATION. Any corporation or joint stock association organized under the
laws of the United States, the commonwealth or any other state, territory or
foreign country or dependency, including banking institutions.
   DOCUMENT. Any deed, instrument or writing by which any real estate, lands,
tenements or hereditaments, or any part thereof or interest therein, within the
limits of the borough shall be sold, transferred, granted, bargained or
conveyed to a purchaser or grantee, but shall not include wills or other
testamentary writings, mortgages, sales or transfers between husband and wife,
or parent and child, or transfers to the United States, the commonwealth or to
any agency or political subdivision by any document, or to any other transfers
exempt from tax under the Realty Transfer Tax Act of the commonwealth, Art. XI-
C of the Act of March 4, 1971, P.L. 6, No. 2, as amended, 72 P.S. §§ 8101-C, et
seq., or under the Local Tax Enabling Act, December 31, 1965, P.L. 1257, as
amended.
   PERSONS. Natural persons, copartnerships, associations or corporations, firm
or fiduciary. Whenever used in any clause prescribing or imposing a penalty,
fine or imprisonment, or both, the term PERSON as applied to associations or
copartnerships shall mean the members or partners thereof, and as applied to
corporations, the officers thereof. The singular shall include the plural.
   SPECIAL TAX COLLECTOR. The Recorder of Deeds of the county.
   VALUE. In the case of any document resulting from or being evidence of the
sale or transfer of real estate within the borough transferring, granting or
otherwise conveying any land, tenement or hereditament, or part thereof or
interest therein, the amount of the actual consideration paid therefor,
including liens or other encumbrances thereon; where such document specifically
sets forth a small nominal or sentimental consideration, the VALUE shall be the
total actual consideration or sale price of said real estate; provided further,
however, that if such transfer is in a nature of a gift without actual valuable
consideration, the VALUE of the real estate or interest therein being
transferred shall be considered as the highest valuation for tax purposes
established by the Board of Assessment and Revision of Taxes in and for the
county, from which said Board derives the assessed valuation for the purposes
of taxes, which means the highest valuation established by said Board and not
the tax assessment valuation.
(Prior Code, § 24-301) (Ord. 149, passed 4-11-1977)
§ 32.036 IMPOSITION OF TAX.
   A tax to provide revenue for general borough purposes is hereby levied,
assessed and imposed on every person who makes, executes, delivers, accepts or
presents for recording any document, or in whose behalf any document is made,
executed, delivered, accepted or presented for recording, at the rate of 0.5%
of the value of the real property represented by such document, transaction or
transfer. Said tax shall be payable at the time the transfer is completed or
concluded. Provided that in the case of any lands, tenements or hereditaments,
or any interest therein, located partly within and partly without the
boundaries of the borough, such tax is imposed, assessed and levied upon the
value of that portion of such lands, tenements or hereditaments, or any
interest therein, lying within the boundaries of the borough.
(Prior Code, § 24-302) (Ord. 149, passed 4-11-1977)
§ 32.037 PAYMENT OF TAX EVIDENCED BY AFFIXING STAMP.
   The payment of the tax imposed by this subchapter shall be evidenced by a
stamp of metal or rubber which shall clearly show that the tax assessed under
this subchapter has been paid. The Special Tax Collector shall affix or impress
said stamp mark and collect the tax imposed herein.
(Prior Code, § 24-303) (Ord. 149, passed 4-11-1977)
§ 32.038 SPECIAL TAX COLLECTOR.
   The tax imposed by this subchapter shall be paid to the Special Tax
Collector, who is hereby charged with the collection thereof. The Special Tax
Collector shall account for and pay over to the borough the collections made,
less any commissions provided by law, in accordance with Act of Nov. 1, 1971,
P.L. 495, No. 113.
(Prior Code, § 24-304) (Ord. 149, passed 4-11-1977)
§ 32.039 STAMP TO BE AFFIXED TO DOCUMENT BEFORE DOCUMENT RECORDED OR HAS
CERTAIN LEGAL STATUS.
   No document which represents a sale or transfer involving the transfer of
title to real estate situated in the borough upon which the tax is hereby
levied and assessed shall be recorded in the Office of the Recorder of Deeds of
the county, or any county of the commonwealth, nor shall such document be made
the basis of any action or other legal proceedings, nor shall proof thereof be
offered in evidence in any court of the commonwealth unless and until said
stamp as provided herein shall have been affixed thereto.
(Prior Code, § 24-305) (Ord. 149, passed 4-11-1977)
§ 32.040 DOCUMENT TO SET FORTH FULL, COMPLETE CONSIDERATION OR VALUE OR BE
ACCOMPANIED BY AFFIDAVIT.
   Every such document, when presented to the Recorder of Deeds of the county
or any other county of this commonwealth for recording therein, shall set forth
in said document and as part thereof the true, full and complete consideration
or value of said transfer or, in lieu thereof, shall be accompanied by an
affidavit to be executed by the grantor, grantee or the responsible agent of
either, which said affidavit shall set forth the true, full and complete
consideration or value for the said transfer, or the specific reason why the
said document and the transfer represented thereby is not subject to the tax
imposed by this subchapter if the document, upon its face, does not disclose
said reason.
(Prior Code, § 24-306) (Ord. 149, passed 4-11-1977)
§ 32.041 INTEREST ADDED TO UNPAID TAX.
   In addition to all other fines and other penalties imposed by this
subchapter, all taxes imposed in accordance with the provisions hereof, if not
paid when due, shall bear interest at the rate of 0.5% per month until paid.
(Prior Code, § 24-308) (Ord. 149, passed 4-11-1977) Penalty, see §
32.999
§ 32.042 PENALTY ADDED TO UNPAID TAX.
   A penalty of 5%, in addition to other penalties imposed hereunder, is
imposed upon the amount of any tax imposed under the provisions of this
subchapter which shall remain unpaid for a period of longer than one month from
the date of said transfer.
(Prior Code, § 24-309) (Ord. 149, passed 4-11-1977) Penalty, see §
32.999
§ 32.043 RECOVERY OF TAXES, INTEREST AND PENALTIES.
   All taxes imposed by this subchapter, together with the interest and
penalties provided herein, shall be recoverable as other taxes or debts due and
owing to the borough of like character are now recoverable by law.
(Prior Code, § 24-310) (Ord. 149, passed 4-11-1977) Penalty, see §
32.999
§ 32.044 TAXES, INTEREST AND PENALTIES CONSTITUTE LIEN ON PROPERTY.
   The tax levied and assessed by this subchapter, together with the interest
and penalties imposed herein, shall become a lien upon the lands, tenements,
hereditaments or any part thereof or interest therein within the limits of the
borough transferred or conveyed in accordance with the provisions hereof, which
such liens shall be effective at the time when the taxes are due and payable in
accordance with the provisions of this subchapter and shall continue until
discharged by payment to the borough, and the said borough may file a municipal
or tax claim in the Court of Common Pleas of the county against the transferor
or transferee, or both, on the said lands, tenements or hereditaments concerned
in accordance with the provisions of the laws of the commonwealth covering the
filing of tax claims or municipal claims.
(Prior Code, § 24-311) (Ord. 149, passed 4-11-1977)
TAX REFORM CODE REALTY TRANSFER TAX
§ 32.055 SHORT TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Local Real Estate
Transfer Tax Ordinance of the Borough of Oklahoma.”
(Prior Code, § 24-321) (Ord. 201, passed 2-9-1987)
§ 32.056 IMPOSITION OF TAX; RATE; APPLICABILITY; SCOPE AND INTENT.
   (A)   Imposition. For general revenue purposes, the borough, under authority
of § 1101-D of the Tax Reform Code of 1971(Act of Mar. 4, 1971, P.L. 6 No. 2),
as amended by the Act of July 2, 1986, P.L. No. 77, 72 P.S. § 8102-D, imposes a
tax as prescribed by division (B) below upon the transfer of real estate or an
interest in real estate within the borough.
   (B)   Rate and applicability. Every person who makes, executes, delivers,
accepts or presents for recording any document, or in whose behalf any document
is made, executed, delivered, accepted or presented for recording, shall be
subject to pay for and in respect to the transaction, or any part of the
transaction, a tax at the rate of 1% of the value of the real estate
represented by that document, which tax shall be payable at the earlier of the
time the document is presented for recording, or within 30 days of acceptance
of the document, or within 30 days of becoming an acquired company.
   (C)   Scope and intent. This subchapter does not, is not intended to, nor
shall it be construed in any way to amend, modify, limit, restrict, affect,
supersede, preempt, reenact or restate Ord. 149, the borough’s Real Estate
Transfer Tax Ordinance, as enacted April 11, 1977, being §§
32.035 to
32.044 of this chapter. This subchapter, as hereby enacted, is intended solely
to impose a tax on those classes of transfers and transactions now taxable
under Article XI-C, Realty Transfer Tax, of the Tax Reform Code of 1971(Act of
March 4, 1971 P.L. 6 No. 2), as last amended by the Act of July 2, 1986, P.L.
No. 77, 72 P.S. § 8102-D, and not previously taxable under Ord. 149. To the
extent that a transfer is taxable under Ord. 149, it shall continue to be
taxable under Ord. 149 and shall not be subject to the tax imposed under this
subchapter. Ord. 149 shall remain in full force and effect from and after the
enactment of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 24-322) (Ord. 201, passed 2-9-1987)
§ 32.057 CERTAIN PROVISIONS OF TAX REFORM CODE, AS AMENDED, INCORPORATED BY
REFERENCE.
   Those provisions of Article XI-C of the Tax Reform Code of 1971, as amended
through the Act of July 2, 1986, P.L. 77, 72 P.S. § 8102-D, dealing with the
levy of a real estate transfer tax, and scope, extent and applicability of the
tax, are incorporated into and made a part of this section by reference.
(Prior Code, § 24-323) (Ord. 201, passed 2-9-1987)
§ 32.058 ADMINISTRATION, COLLECTION AND ENFORCEMENT.
   The tax imposed under this subchapter shall be administered, collected and
enforced under the Local Tax Enabling Act (Act of Dec. 31, 1965, P.L. 1257, No.
511, 53 P.S. § 6924.313, as amended). By resolution, the Borough Council shall
designate and appoint a local realty transfer tax administrator, who shall be
charged with enforcement and collection of the tax and who may promulgate and
enforce reasonable regulations for enforcement and collection. Provided, the
regulations which have been promulgated by the Commonwealth Department of
Revenue under 72 P.S. §§ 8101-C et seq. are incorporated into and made a part
of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 24-324) (Ord. 201, passed 2-9-1987)
REAL ESTATE TAX DISCOUNTS, WAIVERS AND PENALTIES
§ 32.070 REAL ESTATE TAX DISCOUNT RATE.
   Every taxpayer subject to the payment of the real estate tax as levied by
the borough shall be entitled to a discount of 2% from the amount of the tax
upon making payment of the whole amount of that tax due from him or her within
two months after the date of the tax notice.
(Prior Code, § 24-401) (Ord. 172, passed 1-4-1982)
§ 32.071 REAL ESTATE TAX PENALTY RATE.
   Every taxpayer who shall fail to make payment of any real estate tax levied
by the borough for four months after the date of the tax notice shall be
charged a penalty of 10%, which penalty shall be added to the taxes by the Tax
Collector and be collected by him or her.
(Prior Code, § 24-402) (Ord. 172, passed 1-4-1982)
§ 32.072 REAL ESTATE TAX PENALTY WAIVER.
   (A)   The Tax Collector of the borough shall comply with the provisions of
Act 57 and this section for tax years beginning on or after January 1, 2023.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section and the Tax Collector’s implementation
of the provisions of Act 57, the following definitions shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      ACT 57. Act of July 11, 2022, P.L. 701, No. 57.
      ADDITIONAL CHARGE. Any interest, fee, penalty or charge accruing to and
in excess of the face amount of the real estate tax as provided in the real
estate tax notice.
      QUALIFYING EVENT.
         (a)   For the purposes of real property, the date of transfer of
ownership; and
         (b)   For manufactured or mobile homes, the date of transfer of
ownership or the date a lease agreement commences for the original location or
relocation of a manufactured or mobile home on a parcel of land not owned by
the owner of the manufactured or mobile home. The term does not include the
renewal of a lease for the same location.
      TAX COLLECTOR. The elected tax collector for the borough, any authorized
or designated delinquent tax collector, the County Tax Claim Bureau or any
alternative collector of taxes as provided for in the Act of July 7, 1947, P.L.
1368, No. 542, 72 P.S. §§ 5860.101 et seq., known as the Real Estate Tax Sale
Law, an employee, agent or assignee authorized to collect the tax, a purchaser
of claim for the tax or any other person authorized by law or contract to
secure the collection of, or take any action at law or in equity against the
person or property of the taxpayer for, the real estate tax or amounts, liens
or claims derived from the real estate tax.
   (C)   The Tax Collector shall, for tax years beginning on and after January
1, 2023, grant a request to waive additional charges for real estate taxes if
the taxpayer does all of the following:
      (1)   Submits a request for a waiver of additional charges on a form
provided by the Commonwealth Department of Community and Economic Development
to the Tax Collector in possession of the claim within 12 months of a
qualifying event;
      (2)   Pays the face value amount of the tax notice for the real estate
tax with the waiver request;
      (3)   Attests that a tax notice was not received; and
      (4)   Provides the Tax Collector in possession of the claim with one of
the following:
         (a)   A copy of the deed showing the date of real property transfer;
or
         (b)   A copy of the title, following the acquisition of a mobile or
manufactured home subject to taxation as real estate, showing the date of
issuance, or a copy of an executed lease agreement between the owner of a
mobile or manufactured home and the owner of a parcel of land on which the
mobile or manufactured home will be situated, showing the date the lease
commences.
   (D)   A taxpayer who has been granted a waiver and pays the real estate tax
as provided in this section shall not be subject to an action at law or in
equity for an additional charge, and any claim existing or lien filed for an
additional charge shall be deemed satisfied.
   (E)   Any Tax Collector that accepts a waiver and payment in good faith in
accordance with this section shall not be personally liable for any amount due
or arising from the real estate tax that is the subject in the waiver.
(Res. 5 of 2022, passed 10-10-2022)
§ 32.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to make, execute, issue, deliver
or accept, or cause of be made, executed, issued, delivered or accepted, any
document transferring title to any real estate situated in the borough, in
accordance with the provisions of §§
32.035 to
32.044 of this chapter, unless and until the full amount of the tax imposed by
§§
32.035 to
32.044 shall have been paid. Any person violating any provision of §§
32.035 to
32.044 shall be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction, shall be sentenced
to pay a fine, the minimum amount thereof and the maximum amount thereof to be
the same as for a violation of the borough’s realty transfer tax levied under
the Act of July 2, 1986, P.L. 318, No. 77, 72 P.S. § 8101-D, and, in default of
payment of fine and costs, to undergo imprisonment for not more than 30 days.
(Prior Code, § 24-307) (Ord. 149, passed 4-11-1977; Ord. 204A, passed 2-13-
1989)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
   Chapter
      
50.   SOLID WASTE
      
51.   SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL
CHAPTER 50: SOLID WASTE
Section
General Provisions
   
50.01   Intent and purpose
   
50.02   Definitions
   
50.03   Awarding of collectors
   
50.04   Accumulation of garbage prohibited
Collection
   
50.15   Containers for weekly collection
   
50.16   Point of collection
   
50.17   Cost
   
50.18   Schedules
   
50.19   Hours and days of operation
   
50.20   Preparation for collection
Collectors
   
50.35   Assignment of contract
   
50.36   Extension of date for obtaining license
   
50.37   Cancellation of license
   
50.38   Collector as an independent contractor
   
50.39   Insurance coverage
   
50.40   Workers’ Compensation and Social Security
   
50.41   Faithful performance
   
50.42   Certified list of customers
   
50.43   Equipment of collector
   
50.44   Evidence of satisfactory equipment
   
50.45   Disposal
   
50.46   Billing procedures
   
50.47   Complaints
 
   
50.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 50.01 INTENT AND PURPOSE.
   (A)   All residential refuse accumulated or stored upon any property within
the borough shall be collected and removed by a responsible person or
collector, who shall be awarded a contract by the borough, and shall be
disposed of in a site designated by the Council in accordance with the Solid
Waste Management Act, §§ 101 et seq., of the Act of July 7, 1980, P.L. 380, 35
P.S. §§ 6018.101 et seq., and the Municipal Waste Planning, Recycling and Waste
Reduction Act, §§ 101 et seq. of the Act of July 28, 1988, P.L. 556, 53 P.S. §§
4000.101 et seq.
   (B)   This amendment is to limit the number of hours that residential refuse
is exposed to the public for collection.
(Prior Code, § 20-101) (Ord. 2012-03, passed 7-9-2012)
§ 50.02 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   In this chapter, the singular shall include the plural; the plural
shall include the singular; and the masculine shall include the feminine and
neuter.
   (B)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      ASHES. Residue from the burning of coal, coke or other combustible
material.
      COLLECTOR or CONTRACTOR. The person, corporation, business entity or firm
who is awarded a contract with the borough to provide refuse-collection
services.
      COMMERCIAL PROPERTY. Any place of business or commercial activity where
refuse is generated from its normal business or commercial activities, or any
apartment building or multi-family residential dwelling units whose refuse
collection requires a dumpster.
      DISPOSAL. The storage, collection, disposal or handling of garbage.
      DWELLING. A place of residence within the borough with one or more
persons where refuse is generated through normal living habits. It shall also
include apartments or buildings devoted to multiple-family occupancy.
      GARBAGE. All animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking or consumption of foods.
      OCCUPANT. The person generally in possession and control of any dwelling.
      PERSON. Any natural person, association, partnership, firm or
corporation.
      REFUSE. All solid waste, except human body wastes, including garbage,
ashes and rubbish.
      RUBBISH. Glass, metal, paper, plant growth, wood or non-putrescible solid
waste.
      SOLID WASTE. Any waste, including, but not limited to, municipal,
residual or hazardous wastes, including solidified liquids, semi-solids or
contained gaseous materials.
(Prior Code, § 20-102) (Ord. 2012-03, passed 7-9-2012; Ord. 2022-1, passed 6-
13-2022)
§ 50.03 AWARDING OF COLLECTORS.
   (A)   No person shall collect, remove, haul or convey any refuse through or
upon any of the streets or alleys of the borough, or dispose of the same in any
manner or place, without being awarded an exclusive contract and entering into
a signed agreement with the borough.
   (B)   Every person who bids for an award of an exclusive contract to
collect, remove, haul or convey any refuse in the borough under this chapter
shall state the type or types of refuse to be collected, the manner of
collection and the place and method of disposal.
   (C)   No award shall be granted if the place and method of disposal fails to
conform to the requirements of this chapter.
   (D)   No awarded collector shall make any change in the arrangements for
disposal of refuse collected without first receiving the approval of the
Council.
   (E)   It shall be unlawful to permit a collector to collect or remove
garbage from any household who has not entered into a signed agreement with the
Borough Council.
(Prior Code, § 20-103) (Ord. 2012-03, passed 7-9-2012; Ord. 2022-1, passed 6-
13-2022) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.04 ACCUMULATION OF GARBAGE PROHIBITED.
   No refuse shall be allowed to accumulate on the ground or be deposited on
highways, vacant lots or other property, nor be thrown in any stream or other
body of water.
(Prior Code, § 20-109) (Ord. 2012-03, passed 7-9-2012) Penalty, see §
50.99
COLLECTION
§ 50.15 CONTAINERS FOR WEEKLY COLLECTION.
   (A)   Residential properties.
      (1)   Every family, household or residential dwelling from which refuse
is collected or removed shall provide and maintain at all times a portable
metal or plastic receptacle. The same must be watertight and equipped with a
tight-fitting cover, and each receptacle shall be kept in a clean and sanitary
condition.
      (2)   Each receptacle shall be placed for collection not more than 24
hours prior to pickup.
   (B)   Commercial properties. Any commercial property from which refuse is
collected or removed shall obtain a dumpster from the collector under contract
with the borough. In the event the collector under contract with the borough
cannot supply a dumpster of sufficient size to accommodate the refuse
collection from the commercial property, the owner of the property may contract
with an independent collector to provide refuse collection services.
   (C)   Exceptions for small commercial properties. The owner or occupant of
any commercial property which does not generate sufficient refuse to justify
the use of a dumpster may request an exception from the Council from the
requirement to use a dumpster. In the event an exception is granted, such owner
or occupant shall follow the collection procedures for residential properties
set forth in division (A) above.
(Prior Code, § 20-104) (Ord. 2012-03, passed 7-9-2012; Ord. 2022-1, passed 6-
13-2022)
§ 50.16 POINT OF COLLECTION.
   The contractor shall pick up all refuse on the property in accordance with
specifications established pursuant to the agreement with the Council.
(Prior Code, § 20-105) (Ord. 2012-03, passed 7-9-2012)
§ 50.17 COST.
   The cost of weekly garbage collections and the responsibility of payment
therefor shall be borne by the owner of premises from which said refuse is
collected or upon which premises said refuse is accumulated and disposed of. No
agreement between an owner and occupant or other person shall relieve the owner
of any premises from liability for payments as set forth hereinafter.
§ 50.18 SCHEDULES.
   (A)   The contractor shall prepare a schedule of refuse pickup for each
household and commercial property on a weekly basis.
   (B)   The contractor shall be responsible to notify residents of the days
collections will be made.
(Prior Code, § 20-107) (Ord. 2012-03, passed 7-9-2012; Ord. 2022-1, passed 6-
13-2022)
§ 50.19 HOURS AND DAYS OF OPERATION.
   (A)   Unless otherwise ordered, the collection of refuse shall not commence
before 6:00 a.m. and shall be completed by 6:00 p.m. on any single day of
collection. All refuse from cans and receptacles of occupants of dwellings and
dumpsters from commercial properties shall be collected, removed and emptied by
the collector at least once each week.
   (B)   The collector shall be permitted to collect, remove and transport
refuse on all days of the week except Sunday and the following holidays: New
Year’s Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day and
Christmas Day.
(Prior Code, § 20-108) (Ord. 2012-03, passed 7-9-2012; Ord. 2022-1, passed 6-
13-2022)
§ 50.20 PREPARATION FOR COLLECTION.
   (A)   (1)   All garbage, before being placed into receptacles for
collection, shall have drained from it, as far as practical, all free liquid.
Garbage shall be wrapped in paper or otherwise contained.
      (2)   Ashes shall be placed in separate, fire-resistant containers.
      (3)   Rubbish shall be placed in approved containers, or cut and baled,
tied, bundled, stacked or packaged, so as to be easily handled by the
collector, and not to exceed 36 inches in length and 50 pounds in weight.
   (B)   All refuse from commercial properties may be placed in a dumpster
provided by the collector under agreement with the borough. In the event the
collector under agreement with the borough does not have a dumpster of
sufficient size or capacity to accommodate the commercial property’s refuse
collection needs, the owner of the commercial property may contract with an
outside collector to remove refuse from the commercial property on at least a
weekly basis.
(Prior Code, § 20-110) (Ord. 2012-03, passed 7-9-2012; Ord. 2022-1, passed 6-
13-2022) Penalty, see §
50.99
COLLECTORS
§ 50.35 ASSIGNMENT OF CONTRACT.
   (A)   The contractor shall not assign their obligations under the agreement
with the borough, in whole or in part, without the written consent of the
Borough. Such consent does not release the contractor from any of his, her or
its obligations and liabilities under the agreement.
   (B)   Any violation of this chapter or specifications shall be sufficient
cause for the immediate termination of the agreement by the borough.
(Prior Code, § 20-115) (Ord. 2012-03, passed 7-9-2012; Ord. 2022-1, passed 6-
13-2022) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.36 EXTENSION OF DATE FOR OBTAINING LICENSE.
   All contract carriers presently operating in the borough who are collecting
refuse from residential properties under an existing agreement with the
borough, or who have entered into a written agreement with the owner or
occupant of a commercial property for the collection of refuse from his or her
property, shall be permitted to continue collecting refuse from residential
properties under such carrier’s agreement with the borough, or from such
commercial properties under a preexisting written agreement for their
commercial properties, until the expiration of those agreements. Thereafter,
the contract carriers, as well as the owners and/or occupants of all
residential or commercial properties, shall be required to comply with the
terms of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 20-123) (Ord. 2012-03, passed 7-9-2012; Ord. 2022-1, passed 6-
13-2022)
§ 50.37 CANCELLATION OF LICENSE.
   Any violation of this chapter shall be sufficient cause for the immediate
revocation of the agreement.
(Prior Code, § 20-119) (Ord. 2012-03, passed 7-9-2012)
§ 50.38 COLLECTOR AS AN INDEPENDENT CONTRACTOR.
   The contractor who is granted the contract shall not in any manner be
construed as an agent, a servant or an employee of the borough, but shall at
all times be considered and remain an independent contractor.
(Prior Code, § 20-117) (Ord. 2012-03, passed 7-9-2012; Ord. 2022-1, passed 6-
13-2022)
§ 50.39 INSURANCE COVERAGE.
   The contractor shall carry an insurance policy providing complete third-
party comprehensive liability and property damage insurance, covering not only
the contractor but also the borough, the limits of which shall be not less than
$500,000 per person and $1,000,000 per occurrence, and shall furnish the proper
certificates of insurance coverage to the borough, naming the borough as an
additional insured.
(Prior Code, § 20-118) (Ord. 2012-03, passed 7-9-2012; Ord. 2022-1, passed 6-
13-2022)
§ 50.40 WORKERS’ COMPENSATION AND SOCIAL SECURITY.
   The Workers’ Compensation Act, Act of June 2, 1915, P.L. 736, No. 338, as
amended, 77 P.S. §§ 1 through 2710, as amended, and Social Security Act, 42
U.S.C. §§ 301 et seq., as amended, are deemed to be a part of the agreement
with the borough. The contractor shall be obliged to provide workers’
compensation coverage for its employees at all times material hereto and
fulfill any wage withholding and contribution provisions required under the
Social Security Act. The contractor also agrees to hold harmless, indemnify and
defend the borough and all its officers, agents and employees, successors and
assigns, jointly and severally, of and from any and losses, suits, actions,
payments, costs, charges, damages, judgments or claims or demands of any
character, name or description brought on account of any injuries or damages
received or sustained by any person, persons or property by reason of any act,
omission, negligence or misconduct of said contractor, his or her agents or
employees in the execution of the agreement conditions.
(Prior Code, § 20-116) (Ord. 2012-03, passed 7-9-2012; Ord. 2022-1, passed 6-
13-2022)
§ 50.41 FAITHFUL PERFORMANCE.
   Faithful performance must be of the essence of the license unless prevented
by unavoidable accident, act of God or public immunity, or any restrictions or
embargoes imposed by the federal government or any agency thereof; and it is
understood and agreed that all material shall be collected, removed and
disposed of in a skillful, workmanlike and businesslike manner satisfactory to
the borough.
(Prior Code, § 20-120) (Ord. 2012-03, passed 7-9-2012; Ord. 2022-1, passed 6-
13-2022)
§ 50.42 CERTIFIED LIST OF CUSTOMERS.
   The contractor shall deliver to the Borough Secretary, at least 15 days
prior to the anniversary date of the license and at least 30 days prior to the
termination date of the license, a certified list of customers. This list shall
become and remain at all times the property of the borough.
(Prior Code, § 20-122) (Ord. 2012-03, passed 7-9-2012)
§ 50.43 EQUIPMENT OF COLLECTOR.
   The collector shall be required to collect and remove refuse in motor-driven
vehicles having enclosed steel bodies with steel covers and watertight and non-
leakable automatic packer-type bodies, and to so conduct the collection,
removal and transportation of the refuse under such agreement so as to assure
general cleanliness and sanitation throughout the entire process and operation
thereof. The collector’s unit shall be equipped with appropriate devices to
handle containers having a maximum capacity of 39 gallons. The collector shall
also be required, at his or her own cost, to dispose of at an approved disposal
area all quantities of garbage collected by him or her, and to furnish, at his
or her own cost, all vehicles, machinery and equipment necessary for the proper
performance of such contract.
(Prior Code, § 20-111) (Ord. 2012-03, passed 7-9-2012)
§ 50.44 EVIDENCE OF SATISFACTORY EQUIPMENT.
   The contractor shall furnish evidence satisfactory to the borough that he or
she has available equipment, by ownership or by valid lease agreement, for
collecting and disposing of materials in the performance of his or her contract
and that all equipment for the transporting of materials will comply with the
sanitary and watertight requirements set forth by the borough.
(Prior Code, § 20-121) (Ord. 2012-03, passed 7-9-2012)
§ 50.45 DISPOSAL.
   Each collector applying for the contract shall provide a valid agreement,
not subject to cancellation, covering the use of an approved disposal facility
in accordance with the County Waste Management Plan. Such agreement shall
accompany the application for license.
(Prior Code, § 20-112) (Ord. 2012-03, passed 7-9-2012)
§ 50.46 BILLING PROCEDURES.
   (A)   The collector shall be responsible for billing to, and collecting all
charges from, all residential dwellings and commercial properties within the
borough. Charges for residential dwellings shall be assessed on a monthly basis
and billed quarterly. Charges for commercial properties may be assessed and
billed on a monthly basis. Commercial properties who receive an exemption from
the Council from use of a dumpster under §
50.15(C) of this chapter shall be billed at the residential rate.
   (B)   All billing shall be consistent with the terms of the agreement
entered between the collector and the borough.
(Prior Code, § 20-113) (Ord. 2012-03, passed 7-9-2012; Ord. 2022-1, passed 6-
13-2022)
§ 50.47 COMPLAINTS.
   (A)   The Council shall have the right to determine finally the true
validity of any complaints made by residents as to failure of the contractor to
collect refuse in accordance with his or her license, and the borough decision
shall be final and binding upon the contractor.
   (B)   No refuse shall be allowed to accumulate on the ground or be deposited
on highways, vacant lots or other property, nor be thrown in any stream or
other body of water.
(Prior Code, § 20-114) (Ord. 2012-03, passed 7-9-2012; Ord. 2022-1, passed 6-
13-2022) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.99 PENALTY.
   Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
chapter, upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a magisterial
district judge in the manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses
under the Commonwealth Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a
fine of not more than $1,000 plus costs (subject to change via resolution) and,
in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to
exceed 90 days. Each day that a violation of this chapter continues, or each
section of this chapter which shall be found to have been violated, shall
constitute a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 20-124) (Ord. 2012-03, passed 7-9-2012; Ord. 2015-04, passed 12-
14-2015)
CHAPTER 51: SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL
Section
On-Lot Sewage Disposal
   
51.001   Definition
   
51.002   Septic tanks required
   
51.003   Privies, cesspools and certain other receptacles unlawful; exception
   
51.004   Abandonment of prohibited receptacles
Public Sanitary Sewer Connections and Uses
   
51.015   Properties abutting sanitary sewers to be connected
   
51.016   Certain receptacles not to be used where sewer available
   
51.017   Notice to connect; time limit; application for extension of time
   
51.018   Certain receptacles not to be connected to sewer
   
51.019   Roof drains not to connect to sanitary sewer; certain wastes not to
enter sanitary sewer
   
51.020   Conditions to fulfill before making connection
   
51.021   Manner of making connection
   
51.022   Authority of borough, Water Pollution Control Authority to connect at
owner’s expense
   
51.023   Definitions; applicability of rules and regulations
Public Sanitary Sewer Rates and Charges; Sewer Management
   
51.035   Sewer service charges, industrial cost recovery charges adopted
   
51.036   Billing
   
51.037   Authority over sewer system; rules and regulations authorized
   
51.038   When due and payable; penalty and interest on unpaid charges
   
51.039   Moneys collected to be deposited in proper account
   
51.040   When charges become effective and billing commences
Public Sanitary Sewage System Rules and Regulations
   
51.055   Definitions
   
51.056   Discharge of sanitary sewage to public sanitary sewage system required
   
51.057   Exclusion of stormwater runoff
   
51.058   Admission of industrial waste to public sanitary sewage system
   
51.059   Terms and conditions for the issuance of an industrial waste permit
   
51.060   Sewage collection, transportation and treatment charges
   
51.061   Removal, transportation and disposition of scavenger wastes
   
51.062   Billing and collection
   
51.063   Connections to system
   
51.064   Proposed extensions of system by developers
   
51.065   Delinquencies and remedies
Pretreatment Program
   
51.080   Need for enactment; purpose
   
51.081   Definitions
   
51.082   Failure to comply with rules and regulations unlawful
Grease Traps and Interceptors
   
51.095   Authority and findings
   
51.096   Grease trap maintenance and protection system
Dye Tests of Stormwater Infiltration
   
51.110   Definitions
   
51.111   Selling, conveying or transferring real property without permit
unlawful
   
51.112   Evidence of compliance
   
51.113   Temporary evidence of compliance
   
51.114   Borough lien letter or tax certification letter
   
51.115   Borough may establish procedures
   
51.116   Effective date
Membership in Kiski Valley Water Pollution Control Authority
   
51.130   Kiski Valley Water Pollution Control Authority granted right to
enforce payment
 
   
51.999   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Stormwater management, see
Chapter 154
ON-LOT SEWAGE DISPOSAL
§ 51.001 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PERSON. Any natural person, partnership, association, firm or corporation.
In this subchapter, the singular shall include the plural and the plural the
singular, and the masculine shall include the feminine and the neuter.
(Prior Code, § 18-101) (Ord. 112, passed 8-19-1966)
§ 51.002 SEPTIC TANKS REQUIRED.
   Every person being the owner of any building located in the borough wherein
any person shall live, work or congregate shall construct, install and maintain
upon the lot whereon such building is located a septic tank, and the necessary
appurtenances thereto, conforming in every respect to the requirements therefor
prescribed by the “Minimum Requirements for Individual Water Supply and Sewage
Disposal Systems,” this state and the Federal Housing Administration, and all
sewage matter and wastewater and other waste liquid from such building shall be
disposed of into such septic tank.
(Prior Code, § 18-102) (Ord. 112, passed 8-19-1966) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.003 PRIVIES, CESSPOOLS AND CERTAIN OTHER RECEPTACLES UNLAWFUL; EXCEPTION.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, at any location in the borough,
to construct, install or maintain, or to use for the disposal of sewage matter,
wastewater or other liquid waste, any privy or privy vault or any cesspool,
sink or other receptacle, other than a septic tank meeting the requirements set
forth and referred to in §
51.002 of this chapter.
   (B)   Provided, with special permit from the Mayor, a privy may be erected,
maintained and used temporarily, for the period of time stated in such permit,
at the site of a building or other construction project for the use of
construction workers at such project, provided that the same shall not become
offensive or a nuisance or menace to health, and provided further that the
holder of such permit shall remove such privy and cause the vault thereof to be
emptied, cleansed and properly filled on or before the date of expiration of
such permit.
(Prior Code, § 18-103) (Ord. 112, passed 8-19-1966) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.004 ABANDONMENT OF PROHIBITED RECEPTACLES.
   It shall be the duty of the owner of any premises on which there is a privy
vault, cesspool or other receptacle prohibited by §
51.003 of this chapter, and not conforming to the requirements for septic tanks
as set forth in the §
51.002 of this chapter within six months after the date of enactment of this
subchapter, to cause such vault, cesspool or other receptacle to be abandoned,
emptied, cleansed and filled under the direction of and to the satisfaction of
the Sewer Committee of the Council. In case any such privy vault, cesspool or
other receptacle shall not have been abandoned, emptied, cleansed and filled by
such owner within such time limit, the Sewer Committee shall cause the same to
be emptied, cleansed and filled and the cost of such work, with an additional
amount of 10%, shall be collected from the owner of such premises in the manner
provided by law.
(Prior Code, § 18-104) (Ord. 112, passed 8-19-1966)
PUBLIC SANITARY SEWER CONNECTIONS AND USES
§ 51.015 PROPERTIES ABUTTING SANITARY SEWERS TO BE CONNECTED.
   Every owner of property in the borough whose property abuts upon any public
sanitary sewer presently in existence or to be constructed in the future, and
which connects to or whose property abuts upon any sewer constructed or to be
constructed by Kiski Valley Water Pollution Control Authority, shall connect,
at its own cost, the house, building or other structures located on said
property with the aforementioned public sanitary sewers or Authority sewers for
the purpose of disposing of all acceptable sanitary sewage emanating from said
property.
(Prior Code, § 18-201) (Ord. 139, passed 7-13-1973)
§ 51.016 CERTAIN RECEPTACLES NOT TO BE USED WHERE SEWER AVAILABLE.
   It shall be unlawful for any owner, lessee or occupier of any property in
the borough abutting upon any aforementioned public sanitary sewer to employ
any means, either by septic tank, cesspool, privy vault, mine hole or
otherwise, for the disposal of acceptable sanitary sewage other than into and
through said public sanitary sewers.
(Prior Code, § 18-202) (Ord. 139, passed 7-13-1973)
§ 51.017 NOTICE TO CONNECT; TIME LIMIT; APPLICATION FOR EXTENSION OF TIME.
   Where any house, building or structure in the borough abutting upon any
aforementioned public sanitary sewer is now or hereafter may be using any
method for the disposal of acceptable sanitary sewage other than through said
public sanitary sewers, it shall be the duty of the Borough Secretary or the
authorized representative of Kiski Valley Water Pollution Control Authority
(hereinafter called the “Authority”) to notify the owner, lessee or occupier of
such structure in writing, either by personal service, certified mail or
registered mail, to disconnect the same and make proper connection for the
discharge and disposal of all acceptable sanitary sewage through said public
sanitary sewers, as herein provided, within 60 days after receipt of such
notice. Any owner or lessee or occupier of a structure who cannot comply with
the provisions of this subchapter as to connection within the 60-day period
stipulated above due to causes beyond his or her control shall apply to the
borough or the Authority within said 60-day period for a time extension of up
to six months in duration. Said application shall be made on a form to be
furnished by the borough or the Authority and shall contain a voluntary
agreement on the part of the applicant under which the applicant shall agree to
commence paying the regular monthly sewer rates immediately even though actual
connection to the public sanitary sewers will not be accomplished until some
stated later date within said six-month extension period.
(Prior Code, § 18-203) (Ord. 139, passed 7-13-1973)
§ 51.018 CERTAIN RECEPTACLES NOT TO BE CONNECTED TO SEWER.
   No privy vault, cesspool, septic tank, mine hole or similar receptacle for
human excrement shall at the present time or at any time hereafter be connected
with the aforesaid public sanitary sewers.
(Prior Code, § 18-204) (Ord. 139, passed 7-13-1973) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.019 ROOF DRAINS NOT TO CONNECT TO SANITARY SEWER; CERTAIN WASTES NOT TO
ENTER SANITARY SEWER.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation connected to any
aforementioned public sanitary sewers to connect any roof drain thereto or
permit any roof drain to remain connected thereto, or to permit, allow or cause
to enter into said public sanitary sewers any stormwater, foundation drain
water, spring water, surface water or any sewage or industrial waste from any
property other than that for which a permit is issued. These provisions do not
apply to combination (sanitary and storm) sewers.
(Prior Code, § 18-205) (Ord. 139, passed 7-13-1973) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.020 CONDITIONS TO FULFILL BEFORE MAKING CONNECTION.
   No person, firm or corporation shall make, or cause to be made, any
connection with any of the aforementioned public sanitary sewers until he or
she has fulfilled all of the following conditions.
   (A)   He or she shall make application to the borough or the Authority, as
the borough’s agent, upon a permit form to be formulated and supplied by the
borough or the Authority, for permission to connect to the aforementioned
public sanitary sewers. Among other things, the applicant must state the
character and use of each structure located upon his or her property.
   (B)   He or she shall pay to the borough, or its designated authorized
representative, the required tap connection fee in an amount as established
from time to time by resolution of the Borough Council for each equivalent
domestic unit (as defined in §
51.035) on each property connected to the aforementioned public sanitary sewers
at the time of making application for permission to make such connection or
connections, with the amount as specified in the aforesaid resolution to be
paid over by the borough to Kiski Valley Water Pollution Control Authority.
   (C)   No work shall commence before the payment of the aforesaid tap
connection fee and issuance of the aforementioned connection permit.
   (D)   He or she shall give the designated inspector of the borough or the
Authority at least 24 hours’ notice of the time when such connection shall be
made in order that said inspector can be present to inspect and approve the
work of connection. The inspector shall signify his or her approval of the
connection by endorsing his or her name and the date of approval on the
aforementioned connection permit in the possession of the permittees.
   (E)   At the time of inspection of the connection, the owner or owners of
properties shall permit the inspector full and complete access to all sanitary
and drainage arrangements and facilities in each building and in and about all
parts of the property. No building sewer line shall be covered over, or in any
manner concealed, until after it is inspected and approved by said inspector.
(Prior Code, § 18-206) (Ord. 139, passed 7-13-1973; Ord. 145, passed 5-12-1976;
Ord. 157, passed 3-12-1979; Ord. 2015-04, passed 12-14-2015) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.021 MANNER OF MAKING CONNECTION.
   The construction, number and size of all building sewer lines or house
service sewers shall be done in accordance with the specifications, plans and
procedures established by the borough and the authority in §§
51.055 to
51.065 of this chapter, as the same may be from time to time published and
amended, copies of which upon adoption shall be maintained on file with the
Borough Secretary and the Authority.
(Prior Code, § 18-207) (Ord. 139, passed 7-13-1973) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.022 AUTHORITY OF BOROUGH, WATER POLLUTION CONTROL AUTHORITY TO CONNECT AT
OWNER’S EXPENSE.
   If the owner or owners of any occupied houses, buildings or structures in
the borough shall neglect or refuse to comply with the provisions of this
subchapter or the written notice as prescribed in §
51.017 of this chapter, the borough or the Authority may perform, or cause to
be performed, such work and labor, and furnish or cause to be furnished such
material, as may be necessary to comply with the provisions of this subchapter
at the cost and expense of such owner or owners, together with 10% additional
thereof and all charges and expenses incidental thereto, which sum shall be
collected from said owner or owners for the use of the borough or the Authority
as debts are by law collectible, or the borough or the Authority, as its agent
may, by its proper officer, file a municipal claim or lien therefor against
said premises as provided by law.
(Prior Code, § 18-208) (Ord. 139, passed 7-13-1973) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.023 DEFINITIONS; APPLICABILITY OF RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   “Unacceptable sanitary sewage” and other terms used, for the purposes of
this subchapter, shall have the same definitions as those which are set forth
in §§
51.055 to
51.065 of this chapter, said rules and regulations to be applicable to all
users of the aforementioned public sanitary sewers.
(Prior Code, § 18-209) (Ord. 139, passed 7-13-1973)
PUBLIC SANITARY SEWER RATES AND CHARGES; SEWER MANAGEMENT
§ 51.035 SEWER SERVICE CHARGES, INDUSTRIAL COST RECOVERY CHARGES ADOPTED.
   The schedule of sanitary sewage collection and transportation charges for
sewer service that is set forth in Schedule 18-2B-1 below, which has been
recommended by the borough’s consulting engineers, be and it is hereby adopted
by the Borough Council and shall take effect as hereinafter provided. The
provisions for industrial cost recovery charges to be imposed against
industrial users of the sewer system that are set forth in Schedule 18-2B-
2 below, which also has been recommended by the borough’s consulting engineers,
be and they hereby are also adopted and approved by the Borough Council. All
charges imposed hereunder shall take effect as soon as substantial operation of
the borough’s total sewer system begins.
   (A)   Schedule 18-2B-1. The sewer service rates to be charged for sanitary
sewage collection and transportation service to be furnished to customers by
the existing and proposed sewer facilities of the borough, which shall take
effect upon substantial completion of construction of the borough’s 1979 sewer
construction project and as soon as substantial operation of the borough’s
sewer system begins, shall be as follows.
      (1)   The user charges by the borough for sewer service to sewered
premises in the borough (which is in addition to the sewage treatment service
rate already being charged by Kiski Valley Water Pollution Control Authority)
shall be as follows: sanitary sewage collection and transportation charge per
equivalent domestic unit (EDU)—semi-annual payment, on April 1 and October 1,
of $45 per payment/per year (subject to change via resolution).
      (2)   (a)   An EQUIVALENT DOMESTIC UNIT (EDU), with regard to residential
customers, shall be defined as any room, group of rooms or enclosure occupied
or intended for occupancy as separate living quarters for a family or other
group of persons living together or by persons living alone.
         (b)   An EQUIVALENT DOMESTIC UNIT (EDU), with regard to commercial
customers, shall be defined as any office, store, shop, restaurant, club,
tavern, barber or beauty shop, service station, funeral home or other similar
commercial establishment selling a product or rendering a service, or any
religious or fraternal or governmental establishment. In the case of motels,
hotels and schools, an EDU shall be defined as each 50,000 gallons or less of
water used per year therein. Each commercial EDU, even though in a building or
complex of buildings, shall be considered to be a separate EDU even though it
may be located in the same building with a residential unit or units or other
commercial units.
         (c)   An EQUIVALENT DOMESTIC UNIT (EDU), with regard to industrial
customers, shall be defined as each 50,000 gallons or less of water used per
year, at any industrial establishment.
      (3)   The borough specifically reserves the right to alter this schedule
at any time in the future, specifically in order to comply with the
requirements of the Federal Environmental Protection Agency under the EPA Grant
Agreement and its financing arrangements.
      (4)   In order to comply with federal regulations regarding sewer use
charges, the borough specifically covenants and provides herein that it shall
review the user charges provided for in this schedule annually and revise them
periodically to reflect actual sanitary sewage collection and transportation
service operation and maintenance costs and debt service costs.
   (B)   Schedule 18-2B-2. The following industrial cost recovery charges are
hereby also imposed upon all industrial users of the sewer system of the
borough, and they shall take effect as soon as substantial operation of the
borough’s total sewer system shall begin, and shall be calculated and collected
as follows.
      (1)   (a)   In providing the sewer system, a sanitary waste collection
and transportation system, which includes contractual provisions with the Kiski
Valley Water Pollution Control Authority for facilities for the treatment of
the sanitary sewage and industrial wastes, the borough shall have the authority
and shall collect from such industrial users to which they are applicable all
or any part of the construction costs of such waste collection and
transportation system reasonably attributed to such industrial wastes.
         (b)   The apportionment of such costs shall be equitable as among all
industrial users, and such costs shall be collected by periodic charges in
conjunction with the sanitary sewage collection and transportation charges
imposed hereunder, or in such other manner or combinations thereof as in the
judgment of the Borough Council is equitable and will assure each industrial
cost recovery.
      (2)   (a)   An industrial user hereunder is any non-governmental user of
the sewer system of the borough located in the borough, as identified in the
Standard Industrial Classification Manual, 1972, Office of Management and
Budget, as amended and supplemented, under the following divisions:
            1.   Division A–Agriculture, Forestry and Fishing;
            2.   Division B–Mining;
            3.   Division D–Manufacturing;
            4.   Division E–Transportation, Communication, Electric, Gas and
Sanitary Services; and
            5.   Division F–Services.
         (b)   Any industrial user may be excluded if it is determined that it
will introduce primarily segregated domestic wastes or wastes from sanitary
conveniences.
      (3)   The annual amount to be recovered from each industrial user shall
be predicated on the following formula:
          (A x G)        (B x H)        (C x I)
          D      +    E      +    F         J    = Annual Payment ($/year)
         Where:
         (a)   Eligible federal grant allocable to flow (q), in dollars;
         (b)   Eligible federal grant allocable to B.O.D., in dollars;
         (c)   Eligible federal grant allocable to S.S., in dollars;
         (d)   Total design flow (q), in 100 gallons/day;
         (e)   Total design B.O.D., in pounds/day;
         (f)   Industrial users flow discharge to sewer system, in (1) 1,000
gallons/day;
         (g)   Industrial users B.O.D. discharge to sewer system, in pounds/
day;
         (h)   Industrial users S.S. discharge to sewer system, in pounds/day;
and
         (i)   Amortization period = 30 years.
      (4)   For the purpose of computing hereunder the industrial user’s annual
payment, a cost recovery period of 30 years is hereby established.
      (5)   Any and all sections of the borough’s Sewer System Rules and
Regulations, as adopted and from time to time amended, pertaining to the
determination, measurement, billing and collecting regulations for industrial
wastewater discharges shall be the same hereunder and in effect as if written
herein. Each industrial user shall be billed monthly on the basis of his or her
computed annual industrial cost recovery payment divided by 12.
      (6)   Moneys collected under the industrial cost recovery charges
hereunder shall be deposited into a special account under its sewer revenue
fund entitled “Industrial Cost Recovery Account,” which is hereby established.
On an annual basis, 50% of the amounts recovered, together with interest earned
thereon, shall be returned to the United States Treasury. Of the 50% remaining,
together with interest earned thereon, 80% shall be used for eligible costs for
reconstruction and expansion pursuant to 40 C.F.R. part 35 and 20% used as the
Borough Council sees fit.
      (7)   Pending use, retained amounts in said Industrial Cost Recovery
Account shall be invested in:
         (a)   Obligations of the United States government;
         (b)   Obligations guaranteed as to principal and interest by the
United States government or any agency thereof; or
         (c)   Shall deposit such amounts in accounts fully collateralized by
obligations of the Unites States government or by obligations fully guaranteed
as to principal and interest by the United States government or any agency
thereof.
      (8)   Industrial users shall be reviewed annually by the borough for
quantity and strength of waste, and the industrial cost recovery charges
imposed hereunder adjusted accordingly.
      (9)   The borough shall maintain records and submit reports and financial
statements to the Environmental Protection Agency in conformance with the
latest applicable federal regulations.
      (10)   This schedule shall be amended, as necessary, in order to comply
with new or amended federal regulations.
(Prior Code, § 18-211) (Ord. 158, passed 3-12-1979; Ord. 2015-04, passed 12-14-
2015)
§ 51.036 BILLING.
   All bills for sanitary sewage collection and transportation charges and all
other charges imposed hereunder shall be computed in accordance herewith by the
borough, or its authorized and appointed agent, and shall be rendered to the
owner or, after proper arrangements, to the tenant of the premises to which the
sewer service is furnished; but, nevertheless, the owner of the premises shall
in all such cases be ultimately liable for the payment of such bills.
(Prior Code, § 18-212) (Ord. 158, passed 3-12-1979)
§ 51.037 AUTHORITY OVER SEWER SYSTEM; RULES AND REGULATIONS AUTHORIZED.
   (A)   The borough shall have charge and management of the sewer system and
shall from time to time hereafter issue rules and regulations governing the
use, operation and maintenance of said sewer system.
   (B)   The borough reserves the right to refuse permission to connect
directly or indirectly to the sewer system, to compel discontinuance of use of
the sewer system or to compel pretreatment of sewage and industrial wastes by
any establishment in order to prevent discharges deemed harmful or to have a
deleterious effect upon any portion of the sewer system. Nonresidential
establishments having large variations in rates of waste discharge may be
required to install such devices at their own expense as may be required and
approved by the borough for equalizing waste discharge rates.
   (C)   The borough’s representatives shall have access at all reasonable
times to both residential and nonresidential establishments for the purpose of
establishing, determining or checking water consumption and wastewaters
discharged to or excluded from the sewer system and the character of discharges
to the sewer system.
(Prior Code, § 18-213) (Ord. 158, passed 3-12-1979)
§ 51.038 WHEN DUE AND PAYABLE; PENALTY AND INTEREST ON UNPAID CHARGES.
   (A)   All bills imposed hereunder shall be due and payable immediately upon
receipt of the bill by the owner and/or tenant and shall be paid not later than
the due date appearing on the individual bills.
   (B)   Said charges shall be subject to a 10% penalty if not paid within 20
days from their due date. If not paid within 40 days after said due date, the
charge plus the penalty shall bear interest at the rate of 1% per month, or any
fraction thereof, until paid.
(Prior Code, § 18-214) (Ord. 158, passed 3-12-1979)
§ 51.039 MONEYS COLLECTED TO BE DEPOSITED IN PROPER ACCOUNT.
   All sanitary sewage collection and transportation charges and other charges
and fees received by the borough shall be promptly deposited to the appropriate
borough account, established hereunder, and under its financing arrangements.
(Prior Code, § 18-215) (Ord. 158, passed 3-12-1979)
§ 51.040 WHEN CHARGES BECOME EFFECTIVE AND BILLING COMMENCES.
   As stated above, the sanitary sewage collection and transportation charges
imposed hereunder shall become effective as soon as substantial operation of
the sewer system begins. Appropriate billings shall commence promptly
thereafter.
(Prior Code, § 18-216) (Ord. 158, passed 3-12-1979)
PUBLIC SANITARY SEWAGE SYSTEM RULES AND REGULATIONS
§ 51.055 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABNORMAL INDUSTRIAL WASTE. Any industrial waste having a suspended solid
content or BOD appreciably in excess of that normally found in municipal
sewage. For the purpose of these regulations, any industrial waste containing
more than 350 milligrams per liter of suspended solids, or having a BOD in
excess of 300 milligrams per liter, shall be considered an ABNORMAL INDUSTRIAL
WASTE regardless of whether or not it contains other substances in
concentrations differing appreciably from those normally found in municipal
sewage.
   AUTHORITY. The Kiski Valley Water Pollution Control Authority, a body
corporate and politic, organized and existing under the laws of the
commonwealth.
   BOARD. The elected and appointed members of the Borough Council, as now or
hereafter constituted, and its duly authorized agents or representatives.
   BOD OF SEWAGE OR INDUSTRIAL WASTE. The BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND, and shall
mean the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of the
organic matter in said sewage or industrial waste under standard laboratory
procedure in five days at 20°C (under aerobic conditions), expressed in
milligrams per liter by weight. It shall be determined by one of the acceptable
methods described in the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination
of Water and Wastewater cited above.
   BOROUGH. The Borough of Oklahoma, situated in Westmoreland County,
Pennsylvania.
   BUILDING DRAIN. The part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage
system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes
inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer,
beginning five feet outside the inner face of the building wall.
   BUILDING SEWER. The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or
other place of disposal.
   COMBINED SEWER. A sewer designed to receive both sewage and stormwater
runoff and which has been approved for such purpose.
   COMMERCIAL SERVICE. The provision of sewage service for premises where the
customer is engaged in trade and/or commerce.
   CUSTOMER. The owner or tenant, as hereinafter defined, which is furnished
sewage service by the borough.
   DATE OF PRESENTATION. The date upon which a bill or notice is mailed, as
evidenced by the United States Post Office mark.
   DOMESTIC SERVICE. The provision of sewage service for residential premises.
   GARBAGE. Solid wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food
and the handling, storage and sale of produce.
   INDUSTRIAL SERVICE. The provision of sewage service for premises where the
customer is engaged in manufacturing or process industries.
   INDUSTRIAL WASTES. The liquid wastes from industrial processes as distinct
from sanitary sewage.
   INTERCEPTING SANITARY SEWER. A sewer into which the sewage from all main and
other sewers is discharged.
   LATERAL SANITARY SEWER. A sewer which does not receive sanitary sewage from
any other common sewer.
   MAIN SANITARY SEWER or TRUNK SEWER. A sewer that is a main stem or artery of
the sewerage systems.
   MAY. It is permissive.
   MUNICIPAL OR PUBLIC SERVICE. The provision of service to a municipal
subdivision of the commonwealth or agency thereof, or to other similar public
bodies.
   NATURAL OUTLET. Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other
body of surface or groundwater.
   OCCUPIED BUILDING. Any structure erected and intended for continuous or
periodic habitation, occupancy or use by human beings or animals, and from
which structure sanitary sewage and industrial wastes, or either thereof, is or
may be discharged.
   PERSON. Natural persons, partnerships, associations and corporations, public
or private.
   pH. The logarithm to the base 10 of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion
concentration expressed in moles per liter. It shall be determined by one of
the acceptable methods described in the latest edition of Standard Methods for
the Examination of Water and Wastewater, published jointly by the American
Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association and the Water
Pollution Control Federation.
   PREMISES ACCESSIBLE TO THE PUBLIC SANITARY SEWAGE SYSTEM. Any real estate
abutting on or adjoining or having access to any street, alley or right-of-way
in which a sewer is located which ultimately connects to the public sanitary
sewage system.
   PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE. The wastes from the preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food and from the handling, storage and sale of produce that have
been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under
the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle
greater than one-half inch in any dimension.
   PUBLIC SANITARY SEWAGE SYSTEM or OKLAHOMA BOROUGH SEWER SYSTEM. All sanitary
or combined sewers, all pumping stations, all force mains, all sewage treatment
works and all other sewerage facilities owned or leased and operated by the
borough for the collection, transportation and treatment of sanitary sewage and
industrial wastes, together with their appurtenances, and any additions,
extensions or improvements thereto. It shall also include sewers within the
borough’s service area which serve one or more persons and discharge into the
PUBLIC SANITARY SEWERAGE SYSTEM even though those sewers may not have been
constructed by the borough and are not owned or maintained by the borough. It
does not include separate storm sewers or culverts which have been constructed
for the sole purpose of carrying storm and surface runoff, the discharge from
which is not and does not become tributary to the sewage treatment facilities.
   PUBLIC SEWER. A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal
rights, and is controlled by public authority.
   SANITARY SEWAGE. The normal water-carried household and toilet wastes from
residences, business buildings, institutions, industrial and commercial
establishments, exclusive of stormwater, water runoff, surface water or
groundwater.
   SANITARY SEWER. A sewer which carries sewage and to which storm, surface and
groundwaters are not intentionally admitted.
   SEWAGE. A combination of water-carried wastes from residences, business
buildings, institutions and industrial and commercial establishments, together
with such ground, surface or stormwater as may be present.
   SEWAGE SERVICE CONNECTION. The connection of a sewer carrying sewage to the
sanitary sewerage system.
   SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT. Any arrangement of devices and structures used for
treating sewage.
   SEWAGE WORKS. All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing
of sewage.
   SEWER. A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
   SEWER EXTENSION. Extensions of sewer lines, exclusive of service
connections, beyond existing facilities.
   SHALL. It is mandatory.
   STORM SEWER. A sewer which is intended to carry stormwater runoff, surface
waters, groundwater drainage and the like, but which is not intended to carry
any sanitary sewage or polluted industrial waste.
   STORMWATER RUNOFF. The portion of the rainfall which reaches a channel,
trench or sewer.
   SUBMAIN SANITARY SEWER or BRANCH SEWER. A sewer into which the sewage from
two or more laterals is discharged.
   SUSPENDED SOLIDS. Solids that either float on the surface or are in
suspension in water, sewage, industrial waste or other liquids, and which are
removable by laboratory filtration. The quantity of SUSPENDED SOLIDS shall be
determined by one of the acceptable methods described in the latest edition of
Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, cited above.
   TEMPORARY SERVICE. A service for circuses, bazaars, fairs, construction
work, trailers or trailer camps and similar uses that, because of their nature,
will not be used steadily or permanently.
   TENANT. Anyone occupying premises owned by another, which premises are
furnished sewage service.
   UNPOLLUTED WATER OR WASTE. Any water or waste containing none of the
following: free or emulsified grease or oil; pH less than 6.0 or greater than
9.0; phenols or other substances imparting taste and odor to receiving waters;
toxic or poisonous substances in suspension, colloidal state or solution; or
obnoxious or odorous gases. It shall contain not more than 750 milligrams per
liter by weight of dissolved solids, of which not more than 250 milligrams per
liter shall be as chloride and not more than 10 milligrams per liter each of
suspended solids and BOD. The color shall not exceed five color units. Analyses
for any of the above mentioned substances shall be made in accordance with the
latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater,
cited above.
   WATER AUTHORITY. Any publicly or privately owned duly authorized agency,
corporation or organization which is the approved purveyor of the public water
supply within the limits of the borough’s service area.
   WATERCOURSE. A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously
or intermittently.
(Prior Code, § 18-221) (Ord. 169, passed 3-10-1980)
§ 51.056 DISCHARGE OF SANITARY SEWAGE TO PUBLIC SANITARY SEWAGE SYSTEM
REQUIRED.
   (A)   All persons owning property within the borough’s service area
accessible to the public sanitary sewage system, and whose existing occupied
building is within 150 feet from such sewer system, shall, at their own
expense, make connection with the public sanitary sewage system in accordance
with the applicable sections of §§
51.015 to
51.023 of this chapter in effect in the borough’s service area if they are not
presently so connected.
   (B)   All persons owning property within the borough’s service area
accessible to the public sanitary sewage system upon which an occupied building
is subsequently erected within 150 feet from such sewer system shall, at their
own expense, make connection with the public sanitary sewage system in
accordance with the applicable sections of §§
51.015 to
51.023 of this chapter in effect in the borough’s service area.
   (C)   All persons owning any occupied building within the borough’s service
area accessible to the public sanitary sewage system, and if said building is
within 150 feet from such sewer system, shall, at their own expense, make
connection with the public sanitary sewage system within the time period
stipulated after proper notice to do so has been given in accordance with
applicable law.
   (D)   All connections to the public sanitary sewage system shall be made in
accordance with §
51.063 of this chapter.
   (E)   No privy vault, cesspool, septic tank, mine hole or similar receptacle
for human excrement shall presently or at any time hereafter be connected with
the public sanitary sewage system.
   (F)   The borough and the Authority will furnish sewage service only in
accordance with the prevailing rules and regulations of the borough and of the
Authority, which rules and regulations, along with the prevailing rates for
sewage service, are made a part of every application, contract, agreement or
license entered into between the property owner or customer or sewage agency
and the borough and the Authority.
(Prior Code, § 18-222) (Ord. 169, passed 3-10-1980) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.057 EXCLUSION OF STORMWATER RUNOFF.
   (A)   The discharge of stormwater runoff to sanitary sewers is prohibited.
   (B)   All persons presently connected to or connecting hereafter to the
public sanitary sewage system shall provide adequate means for excluding
stormwater runoff in the event the connection is made to a sanitary sewer.
   (C)   No person presently connected to or connecting hereafter to a sanitary
sewer shall connect any roof drain or foundation drain or cellar drain thereto
or permit any such drains to remain connected thereto, nor shall he or she
permit, allow or cause to enter into any sanitary sewer any spring water or
surface water from any other source. Also, no stormwater connection from any
building or yard, nor any drain from any catch basin, lake, swamp, pond or
swimming pool, nor any inlet for surface water, stormwater or groundwater of
any kind shall be connected to the public sanitary sewage system, or to any
private sanitary sewer connected to the public sanitary sewage system.
   (D)   The provisions of these rules and regulations do not prohibit the
discharge through presently existing connections of stormwater runoff to
combined sewers or storm sewers or to natural watercourses within the borough’s
service area, but within any area served by the public sanitary sewer system,
no future stormwater connections shall be made and existing stormwater
connections must also be removed prior to connection to the public sanitary
sewage system. Within such area, no downspout or leader, gutter or other pipe,
drain or channel which may at any time carry stormwater, subsurface drainage
derived from hydraulic pressure or from well points or cooling water shall
hereafter remain connected or be connected with any sanitary sewer. No
downspout or leader shall be used as a soil, waste or vent pipe. Every joint in
the connection of a house drain to a sanitary sewer shall be made watertight so
that no leakage into or from any such drain shall occur.
(Prior Code, § 18-223) (Ord. 169, passed 3-10-1980) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.058 ADMISSION OF INDUSTRIAL WASTE TO PUBLIC SANITARY SEWAGE SYSTEM.
   (A)   Except as hereinafter provided, no person shall discharge, or cause to
be discharged, or allow to run, leak or escape, directly or indirectly, into
the public sanitary sewage system or any public sewer, pipe, channel or sewer
appurtenance connecting with any public sewer, or into any private sewer
connected with a public sewer, any of the following described materials,
substances or wastes, except such small quantities as may be present in normal
household wastes:
      (1)   Construction materials, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings,
metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastic, wood, paunch manure, fur, wax or
any solids or viscous substances capable of causing obstruction to the flow in
sewers or other interference with the proper operation of the public sanitary
sewage system;
      (2)   Snow and ice;
      (3)   Any gasoline, benzine, naphtha, fuel oil or other inflammable or
explosive liquids, solids or gases;
      (4)   Steam or hot water above 150°F;
      (5)   Any waste or water which may contain petroleum hydrocarbons, such
as greases, oil and oil sludges from garages, repair shops, machine shops or
industrial establishments in concentrations in excess of 100 milligrams per
liter. However, fats and greases, such as those derived from cooking and food
processing, may be discharged to sewers provided that the concentration and
physical dispersion of the fats and greases does not result in separation and
adherence to sewer structures or appurtenances. If there is evidence of
adherence of such materials to said structures, or if such materials cause
blockage in the public sanitary sewage system, then the wastewater carrying
such materials must be effectively treated by a process or device, such as a
grease trap or interceptor, before its discharge;
      (6)   Coal tar, its derivatives and waste;
      (7)   Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 6.0 or higher than 9.0
or having any other corrosive property which may cause damage or hazard to
structures, equipment of the public sanitary sewage system or personnel
employed in its operations;
      (8)   Any liquids or wastes containing toxic or poisonous substances in
sufficient quantity or rate of flow as to injure or interfere with any of the
wastewater treatment processes, or to constitute a hazard to human beings or
animals, or to create any hazard in the receiving waters;
      (9)   Any liquids or wastes containing suspended solids of such quality
and/or quantity that become burdensome in the operation and maintenance of the
wastewater treatment plant facilities;
      (10)   Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance capable of creating a
nuisance;
      (11)   Any natural waters, including lake and swamp drainage, or recycled
stream waters; or
      (12)   Any water or substance which, in the opinion of the borough or
Authority, will result in a discoloration or other undesirable physical change
in the appearance of the receiving stream.
   (B)   When, in the opinion of the borough or Authority, solids in an
industrial or commercial waste require comminution before discharge to the
public sanitary sewage system, not only must the necessary comminution
facilities be approved for adequacy, but also the operating results must
satisfactorily abate the problem which such solids may tend to create in the
public sanitary sewage system.
   (C)   Any physical connection to the public sanitary sewage system, or to a
private sewer connected to the public sanitary sewage system, from vessels,
tanks or containers receiving any of the hereinbefore mentioned materials and
substances from which quantities of the aforesaid prohibited materials or
substances could accidentally be discharged directly or indirectly into the
public sanitary sewage system is prohibited. Precautions shall be taken by the
respective property owner to prevent the accidental spillage of any of the
hereinbefore mentioned material to floor drains, manholes, basins, gutters and
the like from any manufacturing process or storage tank.
   (D)   (1)   The following is a partial list of toxic substances and
pathogenic bacteria the admission of which into the public sanitary sewage
system is hereby prohibited unless their concentration:
         (a)   Is reduced by treatment at the source to a point that will meet
the general purposes of these rules and regulations or come within the
acceptable standards formally established by the Authority through issuance of
a permit, described under §
51.063 of this chapter, of said Authority’s rules and regulations; and
         (b)   Will not adversely affect sludge handling or any other bio-
chemical, biological, physical or other sewage treatment process.
      (2)   The partial list is as follows:
         (a)   Alcohols;
         (b)   Antibiotics;
         (c)   Arsenic and arsenicals;
         (d)   Bromine, iodine, chlorine;
         (e)   Copper and copper salts;
         (f)   Creosoles or creosotes;
         (g)   Fluorine;
         (h)   Formaldehydes;
         (i)   Mercury and mercurials;
         (j)   Phenols and their derivatives;
         (k)   Silver and silver compounds;
         (l)   Sulfonamides, toxic dyes (organic or mineral);
         (m)   Zinc compounds;
         (n)   All strong oxidizing agents such as chromates, dichromates,
peroxides and the like; and
         (o)   Chemical compounds producing toxic, inflammable or explosive
gases, either upon acidification, alkalization, oxidation or reduction.
(Prior Code, § 18-224) (Ord. 169, passed 3-10-1980) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.059 TERMS AND CONDITIONS FOR THE ISSUANCE OF AN INDUSTRIAL WASTE PERMIT.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge directly or
indirectly into the public sanitary sewage system, or into any private sewer or
drain emptying into the public sanitary sewage system, any non-domestic
industrial or commercial waste, except upon such terms and conditions as may be
established by the borough and the Authority in the issuance of such a permit.
   (B)   Terms and conditions as may be required by the borough and the
Authority in the issuance of a permit shall be as set forth in the Authority’s
rules and regulations.
(Prior Code, § 18-225) (Ord. 169, passed 3-10-1980) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.060 SEWAGE COLLECTION, TRANSPORTATION AND TREATMENT CHARGES.
   (A)   There is imposed upon the owners of, or the users of water in or on,
all properties served by the public sanitary sewage system, sewage collection,
transportation and treatment charges for the use of said system, payable in the
amounts and as provided in §§
51.035 to
51.040 of this chapter and in the Authority’s Sewer Rate Resolution heretofore
adopted by the borough and the Authority, respectively, and as they are
hereinafter from time to time amended and modified. Said owners and users will
be jointly and severally liable for the payment of said sewage collection,
transportation and treatment charges and the penalties therein prescribed for
delinquent payments thereof.
   (B)   All bills for sewage collection, transportation and treatment charges
shall be due when rendered and shall be subject to the penalty provisions set
forth in §§
51.035 to
51.040 of this chapter and in the Authority’s Sewer Rate Resolution. Owners
and, where adequate arrangements have been made with the borough and the
Authority, users will be billed periodically for the sewage collection,
transportation and treatment charges in accordance with the billing practices
of the borough and the Authority.
   (C)   The borough’s initial sewage collection charges shall be on a flat
rate basis in accordance with §§
51.035 to
51.040 of this chapter. The borough may, if it deems it advisable, elect at
some time in the future to impose, in whole or in part, the sewage collection
charges on such other basis as it may determine. When water usage is used as
the basis for said charges, the volume of water to be used for billing purposes
shall be based upon water meter readings of the Water Authority or, in the
absence of such readings, upon estimates made by the borough or flat rate
charges.
   (D)   When water usage is used as the basis of charges, then if an owner or
user obtains part or all of the water used in or on a property from sources
other than the Water Authority, such owner or user may, after written approval
from the borough, and at no expense to the borough or the Water Authority,
install and maintain a water meter or meters satisfactory to the borough and
the Water Authority for measuring all water used other than that obtained from
the Water Authority, and the quantity of water used to determine the sewage
collection charges shall be the quantity of water measured by all such meters
plus the quantity of water obtained from the Water Authority. In lieu of such
additional meters, the borough may establish under §
51.035 of this chapter a flat rate charge which shall be applicable to such
non-metered water usage.
   (E)   When water usage is used as the basis of charges, then if it is
established to the satisfaction of the borough that a portion of the water used
in or on any property served by the public sanitary sewage system does not and
cannot enter said system, and in the event that the total water used in or on
said property exceeds 100,000 gallons per quarter, the borough may determine,
in such manner and by such method as it may deem practical, the percentage of
the water entering the public sanitary sewage system, or the borough may
require or permit the installation of additional meters in such manner as to
determine either the quantity of water excluded from the public sanitary sewage
system or the quantity of water, sewage or industrial waste actually entering
the public sanitary sewage system, exclusive of stormwater runoff. In such
case, the sewage collection charge shall be based upon the quantity of water
estimated, measured or computed by the borough to be actually entering the
public sanitary sewage system, exclusive of stormwater runoff.
   (F)   When water usage is used as the basis of charges, then any person
requesting consideration for a reduction of the amount of the sewage collection
charges because of water not entering the public sanitary sewage system shall
make written application to the borough for such consideration, giving the name
of such person, his or her address and setting forth supporting data fully
describing other sources of water, if any, as well as the disposition of water
alleged not to be entering the public sanitary sewage system. The application
shall be accompanied by a sketch to approximate scale showing the plan of the
property, the water distribution system, sewer layout, existing meters and
proposed meters in the scheme to determine the quantity of flow entering, or
not entering, the public sanitary sewage system. The cost of furnishing,
installing and maintaining any meters, other than those utilized to measure
water purchased from the Water Authority, shall be borne by the applicant. The
type, size, location, arrangement and maintenance of such meters shall be
subject to the approval of the borough, the Authority and the Water Authority.
(Prior Code, § 18-226) (Ord. 169, passed 3-10-1980) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.061 REMOVAL, TRANSPORTATION AND DISPOSITION OF SCAVENGER WASTES.
   Scavenger wastes will be admitted into the public sanitary system only by
approval of the borough and the Authority, and only in accordance with and in
full compliance with the provisions of the Authority’s rules and regulations.
Persons desiring to discharge scavenger wastes into the public sanitary sewage
system and the treatment plant shall be required to obtain permits from the
Authority. SCAVENGER WASTES under this chapter shall mean putrid or offensive
matter collected from privies, septic tanks and cesspools within the limits of
the borough. The disposal of such wastes to the public sanitary sewage system
from sources outside of the borough is prohibited.
(Prior Code, § 18-227) (Ord. 169, passed 3-10-1980) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.062 BILLING AND COLLECTION.
   Bills and notices relating to the sewage collection, transportation and
treatment charges and surcharges will be mailed or delivered to the property
owner’s last address, or where proper arrangements have been made with the
borough and the Authority, to the user’s last address as shown on the billing
books of the borough and the Authority.
(Prior Code, § 18-228) (Ord. 169, passed 3-10-1980)
§ 51.063 CONNECTIONS TO SYSTEM.
   (A)   Definition of sewer system. All sewers and branches thereof for the
disposal of sanitary sewage and/or industrial wastes within the borough at any
time heretofore and hereafter constructed or otherwise acquired by the borough
are hereby adopted and declared to be, for the purposes of this section, a
common system of sanitary sewers for the borough and are hereinafter called the
SEWER SYSTEM.
   (B)   Connection required. The owner or owners of each property accessible
to and whose principal building heretofore and/or hereafter constructed, if
within 150 feet of the sewer line of the sewer system, shall connect therewith
at any time within 60 days after notice to make such connection is served on
such owner or owners by or on behalf of the Borough Council, either by personal
service or by registered mail. The terms "to connect," the "connection" and the
sanitary sewage and/or industrial wastes drainage system of the building or
premises to the "Y's" or "T's" or extensions thereof forming a part of the
sewer system.
   (C)   Connection by borough. In case any property owner or owners of such
building or premises shall neglect or refuse to connect with the sewer system
within the 60-day period immediately following service of the notice to connect
with the sewer system, the Borough Council or their agent may enter upon such
property and construct such sewer connection. Upon construction of such sewer
connection by the Borough Council or their agent, the Borough Council shall
send or cause to be sent an itemized bill of costs of the construction of such
sewer connection to the owner or owners of such property, which bill shall be
payable forthwith. In case such owner or owners neglect or refuse to pay such
bill of costs, the Borough Council may file or cause to be filed a municipal
lien for the costs of said construction within six months after the completion
of the construction of such sewer connection, as provided by law, or the
Borough Council may pursue or cause to be pursued any other legal or equitable
remedy available to collect such bill of costs. This section is not intended to
restrict or limit any legal or equitable remedy that the borough or their agent
may have with respect to the failure of a property owner to connect to the
sewer system.
   (D)   Annual permit required. No person shall be authorized to uncover, make
any connections with or opening into, alter or disturb the sewer system without
having received an annual permit from the borough to do so, having registered
with the Borough Secretary and posted with the Borough Secretary a bond payable
to the borough as the borough's and such's interests may appear, complying with
the requirements set forth herein as applicable to such person. A person must
submit 110% cost of construction performance bond, 10% cost of construction
escrow deposit and a certificate of insurance with the borough and Borough
Engineer as additional insured.
   (E)   Permit for connection.
      (1)   Procedure for obtaining permit and/or tap into sanitary sewer
system and inspections required during construction.
         (a)   Any person, corporation or other entity applying for connection
to the sanitary sewer
facilities of the borough (hereinafter "applicant") shall file an application
for issuance of a tap to connect to said facilities in accordance with the
rules and regulations of the borough (hereinafter "borough").
         (b)   Upon receipt of the application, the borough shall issue a
"notice of intent to issue sewer tap" on a form prescribed by the borough which
shall reserve a sewer tap for the applicant for a period of 30 days, provided
that the applicant obtains a building permit from the borough during said 30-
day period.
         (c)   The notice of intent to issue a tap shall expire 30 days after
it is issued unless the applicant has secured a building permit from the
borough during said 30-day period.
         (d)   If the applicant secures a building permit from the borough
within the 30- day life of the notice of intent to issue a tap, the borough
shall thereafter issue a sewer tap authorizing connection to the sanitary sewer
facilities of the borough, provided that the applicant pays the applicable
connection charge or tap-in charge to the borough; however, the tap shall
expire upon expiration of the building permit.
         (e)   If the applicant fails to secure a building permit from the
borough within the 30-day period immediately following the issuance of a notice
of intent to issue tap from the borough, or if the tap expires because the
building permit has expired, then the borough may issue said sewer tap to
another applicant in accordance with the rules and regulations of the borough
and this section.
         (f)   In the event that the applicant is not required to obtain a
building permit in accordance
with the applicable ordinances of the borough and/or proposes a sanitary sewer
connection to an existing building or structure, the borough shall issue a
sewer tap authorizing connection to the sanitary sewer facilities upon the
applicant's submission of a completed application, payment of the applicable
fee and compliance with the rules and regulations of the borough.
         (g)   An applicant who proposes to tap into or connect an existing
building or structure to the sanitary sewer system shall contact the borough
before making said connection so that a borough representative may be present
at the time of said connection to inspect and ensure full compliance with all
applicable ordinances, rules and regulations. No connection between an existing
building or structure and the sanitary sewer system shall be made unless an
authorized borough representative or agent is present to witness and inspect
said connection.
         (h)   In no event shall the borough issue a sewer tap unless a
building permit has been issued
within 30 days after the borough's issuance of a "notice of intent to tap" or
the applicant proposes to tap into or connect with an existing building or
structure.
      (2)   All repairs: inspections by borough or Borough Engineer during
construction; 48- hour notice prior to construction.
         (a)   During the construction of any structure or building which
requires the issuance of a
building permit by the borough, the owner of the property for which the
building permit was issued, the permittee, the contractor acting under the
borough of said permit and/or any other person acting under the borough of said
permit shall contact the borough and/or an authorized agent or representative
delegated by the borough during each of the following phases of construction of
any structure or building for which a notice of intent to issue a tap-in permit
or a tap-in permit has been issued by the borough, so that the borough and/or
its delegated agent or representative may perform an inspection to ensure
compliance with all ordinances of the borough including, but not limited to,
those provisions of any borough ordinance, or the rules and regulations of the
borough, which make it illegal, unlawful or improper to cause any stormwater,
surface water, or other unlawful or illegal substances or liquids to be
diverted into the sanitary sewer system of the borough:
            1.   Upon completion of any excavation or digging for the
installation of a foundation
or footer system for the structure and prior to installing said footer or
foundation by means of pouring concrete or otherwise;
            2.   Immediately prior to pouring any concrete basement for said
structure, including prior to pouring concrete over and/or covering any French
drains, drainage pumps or other stormwater drainage systems;
            3.   Immediately prior to backfilling any excavated areas to grade;
            4.   At the time of connection to the sanitary sewer system.
         (b)   The following regulations and specifications shall apply to any
gutters, downspouts, drainage systems and French drains installed and
constructed as part of or accessory to any building or structure:
            1.   All gutters, downspouts, French drains or other drainage
systems attached to or installed upon any building or structure shall have
drainage exits or openings that are visible or observable by the naked eye, so
that drainage of stormwater, surface water or other liquids or substances is
visible through said openings or exits by the naked eye;
            2.   It shall be the responsibility and burden of the property
owner for whom the building permit was issued, the permittee, the assignee, or
the contractor acting as an authorized agent of the owner, to demonstrate to
the borough, or its delegated representative, that discharge from said gutters
and downspouts flows through their drainage exits or openings, for example, by
placing a garden hose into said gutters and/or downspouts to display
appropriate flow through drainage exits or openings. The provisions and
requirements of this division shall also apply to the connection of existing
buildings or structures to the sanitary sewer system.
         (c)   The authorized agent or representative performing the
inspections required by this section shall be paid by the applicant the total
sum of $500 per inspection as an inspection fee. This fee may be changed from
time to time by resolution.
   (F)   Bond required. If the owner or owners of such building or premises
will have to connect with the sewer system by means other than through an
existing "Y" or "T" on any sewer system and extension thereof to the curbline
or cartway line of the road or street or public right-of-way line, as the case
may be, the Borough Secretary upon receipt of the approved application shall
prepare and deliver to the applicant a form of bond payable to the borough in
the sum of 110% of the construction value, with sufficient corporate sureties
to indemnify the borough: against all damages for injury to the sewer system;
to replace in good condition any curbing, pavement or earth disturbed; to
indemnify and save harmless the borough for three years from the completion of
the work, from all damages, repairs, costs and expenses, injuries and such
actions and suits as are caused or occasioned by defective materials and
workmanship, and from all damages from any accident and from all costs and
attorney's fees incurred by reasons of any matter or thing done, committed or
omitted by such owner, his or her agents or employees under such permit; and to
comply in all respects with the ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations
of the borough or any other governmental agency having jurisdiction with the
respect to the same now in force or hereafter to be passed. Upon receipt by the
Borough Secretary of the bond duly executed, he or she shall submit the bond to
the Borough Council or their agent for approval.
   (G)   Issuance of permit. Upon the return to the Borough Secretary of the
bond approved by the Borough Council or their agent in all cases where a bond
is required as above provided, and in all cases upon payment of the sewer
connection charge hereinafter provided, the Borough Secretary or his or her
agent shall issue a sewer connection permit authorizing the approved applicant
to connect such building or premises with the sewer system.
   (H)   Connection charges.
      (1)   Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall
have the meanings indicated.
         DWELLING UNIT. Any building or structure such as an apartment, home,
single- family residence or similar structure connected, directly or
indirectly, to the sewer system and occupied or intended for occupancy as
living quarters by an individual, a family or other discrete group of persons.
         EQUIVALENT DWELLING UNIT. The estimated equivalent amount of domestic
sanitary sewage discharge by a single dwelling unit or a quarterly average of
207 gallons per day.
      (2)   The sewer connection or tapping charge shall be imposed and
collected for each approved
property from the owner or owners of such building or premises being connected
to the sewer system in the amount as set by the borough shall, hereinafter,
have the right to establish, by resolution, certain enumerated fees in
accordance with 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5607, to be charged to property owners who
desire to or are required to connect to the borough's sewer system.
   (I)   Indemnification of borough. All costs and expenses incident to the
installation of the sewer connection and the connection of such building or
premises with the sewer system shall be borne by the owner or owners of such
building or premises. Such owner or owners shall indemnify and save harmless
the borough from any loss or damage directly or indirectly caused by or arising
out of such installation and connection.
   (J)   Separate sewer connections. A separate sewer connection shall be
provided for every principal building on a single property, except that where a
building stands at the rear of another and no separate connection to the sewer
system can be made through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, the
sewer connection from the front building may be extended to the rear building
upon written approval of the Borough Council or their agent.
   (K)   Approval of connections. All sewer connections, materials therefore,
jointing materials and methods used shall at all times be subject to the
direction, supervision and approval of the Borough Council or their agent
according to uniform rules and standards as adopted from time to time by the
Borough Council.
   (L)   Size and slope specifications. The size and slope of the sewer
connection shall be subject to the approval of the Borough Council or their
agent, but in no event shall the diameter be less than four inches nor shall
the slope of such four-inch pipe be less than one-fourth of an inch per foot.
The invert of the sewer connection at the point of connection with such
building or premises shall be at the same or at a higher elevation than the
invert at the point of connection with the sewer system.
   (M)   Connection specifications and material.
      (1)   No person or persons shall connect with the sewer system other than
through, by or into "Y's" and "T's" in the sewer system without a special sewer
connection permit and the designation of the location of the "Y's" and "T's" by
the Borough Council or their agent. No person shall drill into or tap any of
the sewer system without written permission from the Borough Council or their
agent. All pipe installed shall be PVC polyvinyl chloride plastic sewer pipe,
having a rubber ring (ASTM - D3212).
      (2)   Polyvinyl chloride pipe (PVC):
         (a)   Pipe, solid wall, four through six-inch diameters: Type PSM SDR-
26, ASTM D3034.
         (b)   Pipe, solid wall, eight through 15-inch diameters: Type PSM SDR-
35, ASTM D3034, or Type PS-46, ASTM F789 (to 18-inch diameter).
         (c)   Pipe, solid wall, 18 through 27-inch diameters: Type PS-46, SDR-
26, ASTM F679.
         (d)   Fittings: Commercially manufactured molded fittings conforming
to same applicable ASTM Specification requirements for pipe.
         (e)   Joints:
            1.   Push-on with elastomeric gasket, ASTM D3212, and ASTM F477 for
gasket specifications.
            2.   Pipe bell: Provide a gasket with a lock in a groove design so
as to prevent displacement when pipes are joined.
      (3)   Pressure air test. 
         (a)   All sewers (mains and service lines) shall be air tested for
leakage and any section of sewer showing leakage in excess of the amount
hereinafter set forth shall be rejected.
         (b)   The air test shall be conducted by the contractor under the
observation of the borough and shall be performed with AIR-LOC equipment
manufactured by Cherne Industrial, Inc., Hopkins Minnesota or approved equal.
         (c)   The contractor may desire to perform an air test for his or her
own purposes prior to backfilling; however, the "acceptance air test" shall be
performed after backfilling has been completed.
         (d)   Each section of the sewer being tested shall be temporarily
sealed off by means of suitable plugs. All ends of lateral studs shall be
sealed with suitable removeable caps securely fastened to withstand internal
test pressures.
         (e)   The procedure and criteria to be used for air testing shall
conform to that described by the National Clay Pipe Institute.
         (f)   All gauge test pressures in the test shall be increased by the
amount of groundwater pressure at the crown of the pipe.
         (g)   Plugs shall be properly secured and care shall be exercised in
their removal. All plugs
shall be blocked and carefully braced to prevent sudden release of compressed
air, slippage, or blowout due to internal pressure.
         (h)   No personnel shall be permitted in the manholes or at the end of
the pipe test section during testing.
         (i)   The pressurizing equipment shall have a safety gauge which shall
limit the loading on the sewer line to 10 psi. The calibrations on all pressure
gauges shall be no greater than 0.10 psi.
         (j)   If the pipe installation fails to meet test requirements, the
contractor shall determine, at his or her own expense the source or sources of
leakage, and he or she shall repair or replace all defective materials and
workmanship.
         (k)   Immediately following the testing, the entire interior of the
pipe shall be inspected by a borough representative, and in the event any
joints are found to be leaking, they shall be properly repaired, regardless of
whether or not the pipe meets the air/pressure test requirements. Under no
circumstances shall infiltration in any section of pipe between two adjacent
manholes exceed 200 gallon/mile/inch diameter/day.
         (l)   All sewer pipes shall be tested by inducing low pressure air,
internally, into the pipe. The air shall be slowly introduced into the pipe and
the pressures shall gradually be increased within the test section to 5.0 psi.
The test section shall be required to sustain that 5.0 psi minimum without loss
or drop in pressure for a time period of five minutes. In the event pressure
loss does occur, appropriate repairs or reconstruction shall be made, the test
procedure shall be made, and the test procedure shall be repeated until the
test criteria (5.0 psi for five minutes) are successfully accomplished.
         (m)   Where groundwater elevations prevail higher than the top of the
sewer pipe being tested, 0.5 psi per foot of hydrostatic head above the top of
the sewer pipe shall be added to the test pressure.
   (N)   Notification for inspection. The owner or owners holding sewer
connection permits shall notify the Borough Council or their agent 48 hours
prior to construction and when the sewer connection is ready for inspection and
connection with the sewer system. In no case shall backfill be placed until
such inspection is made.
   (O)   Protection from hazards. All excavations for sewer connections shall
be adequately guarded with barricades and lights to protect the public from
hazards. All streets, sidewalks and public property disturbed in the course of
making a sewer connection shall be restored to the same condition they were in
prior to such disturbance, to the extent practicable, in a manner satisfactory
to the Borough Council or their agent.
   (P)   Abandonment of other systems. After 60 days have lapsed since such
owner or owners received notice to connect with the sewer system as above
provided, such owner or owners shall forthwith abandon all privies, cesspools,
sinkholes, septic tanks and other receptacles on the premises for receiving
sewage and/or industrial wastes (unless specific written permission to the
contrary has been given by the Borough Council), and shall not at any time
thereafter erect, construct, use or maintain any pipe, conduit, drain or other
facility for the discharge of sewage and/or industrial wastes except into the
sewer system; and all privy vaults or cesspools or similar receptacles for
human excrement shall be cleansed and filled under the direction of the Borough
Council or their agent; and no connection shall be permitted from any privy
vault or cesspool to the sewer system.
   (Q)   Restrictions on discharges. No such owner or owners shall discharge or
permit the discharge of any stormwater, surface water, roof runoff, swimming
pool waters, subsurface drainage, cooling water or unpolluted industrial
process waters into the sewer system.
   (R)   Violations and penalties. Any person who violates or permits a
violation of this section shall, upon conviction in a summary proceeding
brought before a District Justice under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal
Procedure be guilty of a summary offense and shall be punishable by a fine of
not more than $1,000, plus costs of prosecution. In default of payment thereof,
the defendant may be sentenced to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90
days. Whenever such person shall have been notified in writing by the Borough
Council or its agent that such person is violating this section, each full week
that he or she shall continue such violation after receipt of such notification
shall constitute a separate offense punishable by a like fine hereunder upon
conviction thereof. Each section of this section that is violated shall also
constitute a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 18-229) (Ord. 169, passed 3-10-1980; Ord. 1 of 2025, passed 9-8-
2025) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.064 PROPOSED EXTENSIONS OF SYSTEM BY DEVELOPERS.
   (A)   Five copies of plans for proposed extensions shall be submitted by the
developer at his or her expense to the borough on 24-inch by 36-inch sheets
showing plan views to a scale of one inch equals 50 feet, and profiles to a
scale of one inch equals ten feet vertically and one inch equals 50 feet
horizontally, a north point, a suitable title block, date and the name of the
engineer or surveyor and imprint of his or her registration seal.
   (B)   All sewers shall be designed in accordance with the Sewerage Manual of
the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection, Division of Sanitary
Engineering, and these rules and regulations.
   (C)   The construction of sewers will not be permitted until the proper
state permits have been obtained.
   (D)   Prior to final acceptance of any sewer extensions by the borough, it
will be necessary for the developer to furnish to the borough “as-built” plans
showing the angle and distance between manholes, the top and invert elevation
of each manhole and the exact location of all house sewer connections relative
to the nearest manhole both downstream and upstream.
   (E)   Easements shall be recorded in the name of the borough for all sewers
to be constructed outside of dedicated street rights-of-way.
   (F)   All sewer pipe shall be extra-strength vitrified clay pipe conforming
to ASTM Specification C-700, ABS truss pipe conforming to ASTM Specification D-
2680, or PVC sewer pipe conforming to ASTM Specification D-3034 (with SDR of
35) unless otherwise specified for extraordinary ground conditions by the
borough.
   (G)   All sewer pipe shall be a minimum of eight inches in diameter and have
a minimum laying length of not less than five feet.
   (H)   Jointing connections for clay pipe shall be the factory-fabricated
type conforming to ASTM Specification C-425, Type III; both the bell and the
spigot of the pipe shall be especially prepared for the jointing connection
selected, and the details of any jointing connection which is proposed for use
must be submitted to the borough for prior approval.
   (I)   The installation of sewers shall start at the lower end of the line
and proceed upstream so that the spigot ends point in the direction of flow,
the pipe shall be carefully laid to line and grade, and the handling, placing
and jointing of pipe shall be in strict accordance with the pipe manufacturer’s
recommendations.
   (J)   All manholes shall be constructed in accordance with the standards
established by the borough. Frames and covers for all manholes shall be
fabricated of cast iron and shall conform to the standards established by the
borough. Vented covers shall be furnished at the ends of lines.
   (K)   Sewers shall be hydrostatically, pneumatically and/or smoke tested for
leakage at the discretion of, and in the manner required by, the borough.
   (L)   The developer shall file all necessary connection permits and pay the
applicable tap connection fees for each house or building to the borough, which
shall become due and payable prior to inspection and approval by the inspector
for each respective house service sewer.
   (M)   The developer shall also reimburse the borough in full for all costs
of inspection of construction of all sanitary sewers. The amount and type of
inspection required shall be determined by the borough during construction.
   (N)   No sewer extensions constructed by a developer will be approved for
use and acceptance by the borough until said sewers are formally approved by
the borough, all building tap connection fees have been paid for each building
connected to the system and the borough has been reimbursed in full for all
inspection costs incurred by the inspector during construction, testing and
approval.
(Prior Code, § 18-230) (Ord. 169, passed 3-10-1980; Ord. 2015-04, passed 12-14-
2015) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.065 DELINQUENCIES AND REMEDIES.
   Each sewage collection charge, surcharge and penalty imposed by §§
51.015 to
51.023 of this chapter shall be a debt due the borough and shall be a lien on
the property served, and if not paid within the period prescribed in the Sewer
Rate Ordinance after the date of the bill, shall be deemed delinquent. In such
event, the borough or its designated agent shall proceed to file a lien in the
Office of the Prothonotary of the county and collect the same in the manner
provided by law for the filing and collection of municipal claims. In the event
of failure to pay the sewage collection charge or surcharge or penalty after
they become delinquent, the borough may also authorize the appropriate
personnel to shut off water service to said property or to remove or close the
sewer connection and to take such steps as may be necessary to accomplish such
shutoff or removal or closing. The expense of such shutoff or removal or
closing, as well as the expense of restoring any such service, shall likewise
be a debt due the borough and a lien on the property served and may be filed
and collected as hereinabove provided. Such sewage service shall not be
restored until all sewage collection charges, surcharges and penalties,
including the expense of removal, closing and restoration, shall have been paid
or adequate provisions for their payment shall have been made.
(Prior Code, § 18-231) (Ord. 169, passed 3-10-1980; Ord. 204A, passed 2-13-
1989) Penalty, see §
51.999
PRETREATMENT PROGRAM
§ 51.080 NEED FOR ENACTMENT; PURPOSE.
   (A)   This borough, and the Boroughs of Apollo, East Vandergrift, Hyde Park,
Leechburg, North Apollo, Vandergrift and West Leechburg, and the Townships of
Allegheny, Gilpin, Kiskiminetas, Parks and Washington (hereinafter referred to
as the “municipalities”), have duly incorporated the Kiski Valley Water
Pollution Control Authority, hereinafter referred to as the “Authority,” under
the provisions of the Municipality Authorities Act of 2001, June 19, P.L. 287,
No. 22, 53 Pa.C.S. § 5601, as amended, and charged the Authority with the
responsibility to exercise all powers and control over the operation and use of
the sewage transportation and treatment facilities serving the municipality.
   (B)   The Authority has been ordered by the United States Environmental
Protection Agency to develop and submit for approval a pretreatment program in
accordance with the requirements of the General Pretreatment Regulations (40
C.F.R. part 403).
   (C)   An approvable pretreatment program must establish police powers,
including the authority to enforce criminal penalties against industrial users
which violate federal or local pretreatment standards or requirements.
   (D)   The borough desires to cooperate with the Authority in developing and
implementing an approvable pretreatment program.
(Prior Code, § 18-301) (Ord. 189A, passed 10-8-1984)
§ 51.081 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   INDUSTRIAL WASTES. Any liquid, gaseous or waterborne wastes from industrial
processes or commercial establishments as distinct from sanitary sewage.
   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company,
corporation, association or any other legal entity, or their legal
representatives, agents or assigns.
   SANITARY SEWAGE. The normal water-carried household and toilet wastes from
residences, business establishments, institutions, industries and commercial
establishments, exclusive of stormwater runoff, surface water, groundwater and
industrial wastes.
(Prior Code, § 18-302) (Ord. 189A, passed 10-8-1984)
§ 51.082 FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH RULES AND REGULATIONS UNLAWFUL.
   No person shall contribute, cause to be contributed or discharge any
industrial wastes to the public sanitary sewage facilities of the Kiski Valley
Water Pollution Control Authority, except in accordance with the rules and
regulations governing industrial sewer use that have been adopted, or may
hereafter be adopted, by the Authority.
(Prior Code, § 18-303) (Ord. 189A, passed 10-8-1984) Penalty, see §
51.999
GREASE TRAPS AND INTERCEPTORS
§ 51.095 AUTHORITY AND FINDINGS.
   The Authority is hereby authorized to establish an inspection and
maintenance program, along with rules, regulations and standards to require
commercial and industrial borough users whose use is likely to generate harmful
grease, fats and oils, to install and maintain traps, interceptors and recovery
devices to prevent the introduction, disposal and/or discharge of such grease,
fats, oils and other wastes and substances, food particles or organic or
inorganic solid or semisolid waste that can be collected and intercepted by a
grease interceptor, usually in layers of floatable, suspended and settleable
substances, which are or can be ultimately removed from a grease interceptor
for proper disposal (hereinafter “harmful grease”).
(Prior Code, § 18-402) (Ord. 2010-12, passed 9-13-2010)
§ 51.096 GREASE TRAP MAINTENANCE AND PROTECTION SYSTEM.
   The grease trap maintenance and protection system shall be implemented and
administered as follows.
   (A)   The objective of the grease trap protection and maintenance system is
to reduce the operational and maintenance costs of maintaining the public
sewers, sewage disposal system and sewer system by preventing the accumulation
of harmful grease within the sanitary sewer lines.
   (B)   The Council and/or its designee or agent, and persons designated and
under the instruction and supervision of any of them, may inspect and
investigate compliance with this subchapter and enforce violations hereof.
   (C)   Commercial or industrial generators of harmful grease shall install,
operate and maintain a GREASE INTERCEPTOR or INTERCEPTOR approved by the
Council, which shall mean a watertight receptacle to intercept, collect and
prevent the passage of harmful grease into the service connection and,
ultimately, the sewer, sewer system and/or sewage disposal system to which the
receptacle is directly or indirectly connected.
   (D)   Commercial or industrial generators of harmful grease shall install,
operate and maintain a GREASE RECOVERY DEVICE approved by the Council, which
shall mean a type of grease interceptor that mechanically removes harmful
grease from the waste stream for later disposal.
   (E)   Grease and grease interceptors and grease recovery devices shall:
      (1)   Be stored on premises in an integral recovered grease container;
      (2)   Be stored in such a manner as to minimize odors and insects;
      (3)   Not be mixed with edible grease;
      (4)   Be properly disposed of in accordance with all applicable rules and
regulations; and
      (5)   If stored on site, it shall be stored in proper containers so as to
prevent odors and leaking.
   (F)   The following facilities shall discharge all waste from sinks,
dishwashers and drains, and any other fixtures through which harmful grease may
be discharged, into an adequately sized, properly maintained and functioning
grease trap protection and maintenance system before the discharge enters the
service connection and, ultimately, the sewer, sewer system and/or sewage
disposal system to which the receptacle is directly or indirectly connected, as
well as providing a grease interceptor inlet flow control device inspection
port and a grease interceptor effluent monitoring port:
      (1)   Every commercial food preparation and service facility, including,
but not limited to, bakeries, boarding houses, butcher shops, cafés,
clubhouses, commercial kitchens, delicatessens, fat rendering plants, ice cream
parlors, hospitals, meat packing plants, restaurants, schools, slaughter
houses, soap factories and similar facilities, especially where meat, poultry,
seafood, dairy products or fried foods are prepared or served;
      (2)   All shopping centers that have food processing facilities;
      (3)   All food courts; and
      (4)   All other facilities discharging harmful grease that, in the
opinion of the Council, will, alone or in concert with other substances from
the discharges of other facilities, have a reasonable chance to impede or stop
the flow in the sewer, sewer system and/or sewage disposal system to which any
service connection is directly or indirectly connected.
   (G)   (1)   Grease interceptors or recovery devices shall not be required
for single-family residences, duplexes, triplexes, quadplexes or apartment
complexes unless the Council first determines there are discharges from the
property that will create problems in the sewer, sewer system and/or sewage
disposal system. The determination shall be made based upon an investigation of
the property and a comparison of the content and amount of discharge from the
property with the discharges of other properties similar in size and use.
      (2)   Upon a determination that the discharges will secrete problems in
the sewer, sewer system and/or sewage disposal system to which any service
connection receptacle is directly or indirectly connected, the Council may
require the installation of a sufficiently sized grease inceptor or recovery
device to treat the discharges.
   (H)   Those borough users of the sewer, sewer system and/or sewage disposal
system who are or may be determined to be subject to the requirements of this
subchapter shall:
      (1)   Describe the method or means by which harmful grease is being
disposed of in accordance with applicable rules and regulations when providing
records in accordance with division (H)(3) below;
      (2)   Maintain and inspect the grease interceptor and/or recovery device
as often as necessary to properly dispose of harmful grease, and not less often
than every 90 days, and maintain on the premises of the facility and produce,
upon request by the Council, backup copies of trip tickets and/or a service log
for at least two years;
      (3)   Within ten days after notice from the Council, provide copies of
records to the Council demonstrating service, cleaning and maintenance of the
interceptor and/or recovery device every 90 days;
      (4)   Allow demand inspection of the facility and of records by
inspectors during reasonable hours; and
      (5)   Pay the costs of inspecting, administering, implementing and
enforcing this subchapter in the event of failure to comply with the provisions
hereof.
   (I)   It is unlawful for any generator of harmful grease to discharge into
the service connection and, ultimately, the public sewer, sewer system and/or
sewage disposal system to which the receptacle is directly or indirectly
connected in any manner that is in violation of this subchapter, or of any
condition set forth in this subchapter. Additionally, a person commits an
offense if the person causes or permits the plugging or blocking of, or
otherwise interferes with or permits the interference of, a grease interceptor
or recovery device so as to cause the flow to rise above the design capacity of
the interceptor.
   (J)   The Council may suspend water or sewer service when such suspension is
necessary, in the opinion of the Council, in order to stop an actual or
threatened discharge which:
      (1)   Presents or may present an imminent or substantial endangerment to
the health or welfare of persons or the environment;
      (2)   Causes stoppages, or excessive maintenance to be performed to
prevent stoppages, in the public sewer, sewer system and/or sewage disposal
system;
      (3)   Causes interference to the public sewer, sewer system and/or sewage
disposal system;
      (4)   Causes the borough or Council to violate any condition of its
permits;
      (5)   Any person notified of a suspension of the water or sewer service
shall immediately stop or eliminate the discharge. In the event of a failure of
the person to comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the Council shall
take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate termination of water
or sewer service, to prevent or minimize damage to the sewer, sewer system and/
or sewage disposal system to which the receptacle is directly or indirectly
connected or endangerment to any individuals. The Council shall reinstate the
water or sewer service when such condition cause(s) of the harmful discharge
and the measure(s) taken to prevent any future occurrence shall be submitted to
the Council within 15 days of the date of occurrence; and
      (6)   A person is liable to the Council for any expense, loss or damage
incurred by the Council for reason of appropriate cleanup and proper disposal
of harmful grease. Additionally, an administrative fee equal to one-half of the
assessed cleanup costs shall be levied by the Council against the responsible
party.
(Prior Code, § 18-402) (Ord. 2010-12, passed 9-13-2010; Ord. 2015-04, passed
12-14-2015) Penalty, see §
51.999
DYE TESTS OF STORMWATER INFILTRATION
§ 51.110 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BOROUGH CLAIM/LIEN TAX VERIFICATION LETTER. A written letter from the
borough regarding any liens, claims and/or taxes due the borough from said
person.
   DYE TEST. Any commonly accepted plumbing test whereby dye is introduced into
the sanitary, storm or surface water collection system of real property to
determine if any sanitary water or discharge or storm or surface water is
entering the sanitary or storm sewer system.
   EVIDENCE OF COMPLIANCE. An official written letter or statement from the
borough confirming that it has on file a written report or statement from a
licensed plumber certifying there are no illegal storm or surface water
connections into the sanitary sewer system, or there are no sanitary water or
discharge connections into the storm sewer system, which would violate the
borough or county ordinances, the state statues or the borough, county or state
plumbing regulations.
   ILLEGAL STORM OR SURFACE WATER. The inflow, infiltration and/or discharge of
stormwater, surface water, basement seepage, downspouts, roof drainage, areaway
drainage or non-sanitary sewer discharge into the borough’s sanitary sewer
system.
   PERSON. Includes within limitation any person, partnership, association,
authority, syndicate, firm corporation or other entity having ownership rights
for or in any real property.
   SANITARY SEWAGE/WATER. The inflow, infiltration and/or discharge of sanitary
water or sewer discharge into the borough’s sanitary sewer system.
   TEMPORARY EVIDENCE OF COMPLIANCE. A temporary written report/statement from
the borough issued pursuant to §
51.113 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 18-501) (Ord. 6/9/2003B, passed 6-9-2003)
§ 51.111 SELLING, CONVEYING OR TRANSFERRING REAL PROPERTY WITHOUT PERMIT
UNLAWFUL.
   From and after the effective date of this subchapter, it shall be unlawful
for any person to sell, convey or transfer real property located within the
borough on which a building or improvement exists without first obtaining and
delivering to the purchaser an evidence of compliance or temporary evidence of
compliance form from the borough as required under this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 18-502) (Ord. 6/9/2003B, passed 6-9-2003) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.112 EVIDENCE OF COMPLIANCE.
   (A)   Any person selling, conveying or transferring real property located
within the borough shall apply for evidence of compliance on a borough-approved
form at least 14 days prior to the date of closing and pay such fee as the
borough may establish from time to time by resolution. Such person, hereinafter
termed the “applicant,” shall thereupon have a dye test performed on the real
property to be sold, conveyed or transferred by a plumber registered and
licensed by the County Health Department. Upon completion of the dye test, the
plumber so hired by the applicant shall then complete the appropriate section
of the borough form confirming that the property has been dye tested and
certifying the results of such test.
      (1)   In the event the said plumber certifies that there is no illegal
storm or surface water or sanitary water or discharge connections on the
property to be sold, conveyed or transferred, the Borough Manager or his or her
designated representative shall issue the evidence of compliance.
      (2)   If the dye test reveals the existence of an illegal storm or
surface water or sanitary connection, the Borough Manager shall not issue the
evidence of compliance until the illegal connection has been removed and
certification of the correction of the illegal connection has been certified by
a plumber who is registered and licensed by the County Health Department.
   (B)   This subchapter shall apply to any transfer of the property, whether
by sale, gift, exchange, inheritance or bequest or deed in lieu of mortgage
foreclosure, except that this subchapter shall not apply where a joint owner
with right of survivorship or a tenant by the entireties acquires full
ownership of the property upon the death of the co-owner.
(Prior Code, § 18-503) (Ord. 6/9/2003B, passed 6-9-2003)
§ 51.113 TEMPORARY EVIDENCE OF COMPLIANCE.
   In the event an illegal storm or surface water or a sanitary connection is
discovered and the necessary remedial correction of the condition would require
a length of time to perform such that it would create an undue hardship on the
applicant to perform the same prior to the date of closing on the sale,
conveyance or transfer of the property, the applicant may apply to the Borough
Manager for temporary evidence of compliance provided there is strict
compliance with the following conditions:
   (A)   The Borough Manager or designee is provided with a bona fide executed
contract between the applicant and a plumber registered and licensed by the
County Department of Health requiring the plumber to complete the necessary
remedial work to correct and/or remove the illegal storm or surface water or
sanitary water;
   (B)   Cash security in the amount of 110% of the contract price described in
division (A) above is deposited with the borough prior to the issuance of the
temporary evidence of compliance, to be held by the borough in a non-interest-
bearing account. Cash security shall be limited to cash, certified checks and
treasurer’s checks;
   (C)   A written acknowledgment and notarized agreement under which the
purchaser, grantee, transferee or devisee agrees to be responsible for all cost
overruns related to the remedial work, together with a grant to the borough of
a license to enter upon the property to complete the work at the expense and
cost of the purchaser should the contractor default in the agreement. The
Borough Manager or his or her designee may establish a reasonable period of
time for the said corrective work to be completed, taking into consideration
the extent of the work required and the conditions then existing. The said
Borough Manager or his or her designee shall thereupon advise the applicant and
the purchaser of the date of expiration of the temporary evidence of
compliance. Upon expiration of the temporary evidence of compliance, without
all remedial work having been completed, the cash security deposited with the
borough shall be forfeited, and the borough may use such security to have the
required remedial work completed. Any cost overrun exceeding the cash security
posted with the borough shall remain the sole and exclusive liability of the
purchaser and constitute a lien against the real estate; and
   (D)   The agreement referred to in division (C) above shall be in a form
capable of being recorded in the Office of the Recorder of Deeds, and may be
recorded by the borough as it deems necessary. The cost of recording the
agreement shall be the responsibility of the purchaser and applicant.
(Prior Code, § 18-504) (Ord. 6/9/2003B, passed 6-9-2003)
§ 51.114 BOROUGH LIEN LETTER OR TAX CERTIFICATION LETTER.
   A request for a borough lien letter or tax certification letter must be
accompanied by a valid evidence of compliance certificate and/or a valid
temporary evidence of compliance certificate not less than 14 business days
prior to the date the letters are requested. The borough may by resolution
establish the fees for such letters.
(Prior Code, § 18-505) (Ord. 6/9/2003B, passed 6-9-2003)
§ 51.115 BOROUGH MAY ESTABLISH PROCEDURES.
   The borough may, by resolution, adopt any or all of the following in order
to accomplish the purposes of this subchapter:
   (A)   Establish the application form, the purchaser acknowledgment form, the
plumber’s certificate form and the form of the evidence of compliance
certificate and temporary evidence of compliance, and the fee for issuance of
the same; and
   (B)   Establish the procedures and guidelines for the retention, release
and/or payment of any security fund held by the borough under and pursuant to §
51.113 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 18-506) (Ord. 6/9/2003B, passed 6-9-2003)
§ 51.116 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This subchapter shall take affect on June 9, 2003, and shall apply to any
transfer, conveyance, gift, sale or devise on or after that date without regard
to the date of any agreement or contract under which the transfer conveyance
gift or sale occurred.
(Prior Code, § 18-508) (Ord. 6/9/2003B, passed 6-9-2003)
MEMBERSHIP IN KISKI VALLEY WATER POLLUTION CONTROL AUTHORITY
§ 51.130 KISKI VALLEY WATER POLLUTION CONTROL AUTHORITY GRANTED RIGHT TO
ENFORCE PAYMENT.
   (A)   The borough does hereby resolve and agree that as a member
municipality of the Kiski Valley Water Pollution Control Authority, the borough
maintains a responsibility to collect delinquent rents, rates and charges from
its customers under and pursuant to the service agreement and, in furtherance
thereof, does hereby grant to the Kiski Valley Water Pollution Control
Authority all rights, duties, obligations and consent, as required or demanded
by commonwealth law or by the terms of the Authority service agreement dated
July 1, 1973, to permit the Kiski Valley Water Pollution Control Authority to
act to collect delinquent rates, rents and charges as billed by the Kiski
Valley Water Pollution Control Authority to the customers of the member
municipality, together with penalties, interest and costs which may be due and
owing by each member municipality.
   (B)   It is further resolved that the borough shall provide any and all
necessary assistance in the form of personnel and, if required, testimony of a
designated municipal agent to act before any judicial body to permit, assist,
sustain and enforce any obligations of the July 1, 1973 service agreement,
including, but not limited to, any authority for legal action of any type, kind
or sort as deemed appropriate by the Kiski Valley Water Pollution Control
Authority to pursue the collection of rates, rents and charges, together with
penalties, interest and costs which may be due and owing by each member
municipality.
(Res. 2 of 2022, passed 5-9-2022)
§ 51.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of §§
51.001 to
51.004 of this chapter, upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a
magisterial district judge in the manner provided for the enforcement of
summary offenses under the Commonwealth Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be
sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $200 nor more than $1,000 plus costs
(subject to change via resolution) and, in default of payment of said fine and
costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 90 days. Each day that a
violation of §§
51.001 to
51.004 continues or each section of §§
51.001 to
51.004 which shall be found to have been violated shall constitute a separate
offense. Provided, the payment of the cost of emptying, cleansing and filling,
and any additional charge in connection therewith as provided in §
51.004 shall not preclude prosecution and imposition of penalty as provided in
this division (B).
(Prior Code, § 18-105)
   (C)   In addition to any penalty prescribed in §§
51.015 to
51.023 of this chapter, any person, firm or corporation failing to make a
proper connection within the time specified after receipt of notice as provided
in §
51.017 shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $50 for each day
in violation (subject to change via resolution), and who or which violates any
other provision of §§
51.015 to
51.023 shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $200
nor more than $1,000 plus costs (subject to change via resolution) and, in
default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to
exceed 90 days. Each day that a violation of §§
51.015 to
51.023 continues or each section of §§
51.015 to
51.023 which shall be found to have been violated shall constitute a separate
offense.
(Prior Code, § 18-210)
   (D)   Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of §§
51.055 to
51.065 of this chapter, upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a
magisterial district judge in the manner provided for the enforcement of
summary offenses under the Commonwealth Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 plus costs (subject to change
via resolution) and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of
imprisonment not to exceed 90 days. Each day that a violation of §§
51.055 to
51.065 continues or each section of §§
51.055 to
51.065 which shall be found to have been violated shall constitute a separate
offense.
(Prior Code, § 18-231)
   (E)   (1)   As set out in §§
51.080 to
51.082 of this chapter, any person who is found to have violated or willfully
or negligently fails to comply with any provision of the rules and regulations
governing industrial sewer use adopted by the Authority or any order,
regulation, service contract or permit issued by the Authority, upon conviction
thereof in an action brought before a magisterial district judge in the manner
provided for the enforcement of summary offenses under the Commonwealth Rules
of Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $100
nor more than $1,000 plus costs (subject to change via resolution) and, in
default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to
exceed 90 days. Each day that a violation of §§
51.080 to
51.082 continues or each section of §§
51.080 to
51.082 which shall be found to have been violated shall constitute a separate
offense.
(Prior Code, § 18-304)
      (2)   As set out in §§
51.080 to
51.082 of this chapter, any person who knowingly makes any false statement,
representation or certification in any application, record, report, plan or
other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to the Authority’s
rules and regulations governing industrial sewer use, or who falsifies, tampers
with or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required
pursuant to the Authority’s rules and regulations governing industrial sewer
use, upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a magisterial district
judge in the manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses under the
Commonwealth Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of
not more than $1,000 plus costs (subject to change via resolution) and, in
default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to
exceed 90 days. Each day that a violation of §§
51.080 to
51.082 continues or each section of §§
51.080 to
51.082 which shall be found to have been violated shall constitute a separate
offense.
(Prior Code, § 18-305)
   (F)   If any person, company, firm, corporation or other entity is in
violation of any of the conditions, restitutions or requirements or any of the
provisions of §§
51.095 and
51.096 of this chapter and/or neglects or refuses to comply with the provisions
of §§
51.095 and
51.096, he or she shall be guilty of a violation and for each such violation,
and upon conviction thereof in a summary proceeding commenced under the
Commonwealth Rules of Criminal Procedure, he or she shall be sentenced to pay a
fine of not more than $1,000 (subject to change via resolution) along with
costs of prosecution, and imprisonment to the extent allowed by law for the
punishment of summary offenses; provided, each day’s violation shall constitute
a separate violation. In addition, the borough shall have the right to enforce
§§
51.095 and
51.096 or remedy conditions occasioned by violations of §§
51.095 and
51.096 by actions instituted in equity or at law.
(Prior Code, § 18-402)
   (G)   Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of §§
51.110 to
51.116 of this chapter, upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a
magisterial district judge in the manner provided for the enforcement of
summary offenses under the Commonwealth Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 plus costs (subject to change
via resolution) and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of
imprisonment not to exceed 90 days. Each day that a violation of §§
51.110 to
51.116 continues or each section of §§
51.110 to
51.116 which shall be found to have been violated shall constitute a separate
offense.
(Prior Code, § 18-507)
(Ord. 112, passed 8-19-1966; Ord. 139, passed 7-13-1973; Ord. 169, passed 3-10-
1980; Ord. 189A, passed 10-8-1984; Ord. 204A, passed 2-13-1989; Ord. 6/9/2003B,
passed 6-9-2003; Ord. 2010-12, passed 9-13-2010; Ord. 2015-04, passed 12-14-
2015)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
71.   TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
      
72.   PARKING REGULATIONS
      
73.   RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
      
74.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
      
75.   PARKING SCHEDULES
CHAPTER 70: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
70.01   Definitions
   
70.02   Manner of adopting permanent regulations
   
70.03   Provisions to be continuation of existing regulations
   
70.04   Temporary and emergency regulations
   
70.05   Experimental regulations
   
70.06   Streets closed or restricted for construction, maintenance or special
events
   
70.07   Processions and assemblages
   
70.08   Authority of police officers
   
70.09   Authorization for speed timing device usage
Restrictions on Vehicle Size, Weight, Type and Load
   
70.20   Vehicle weight limits on certain streets and bridges
   
70.21   Vehicle size restrictions on certain streets and bridges
   
70.22   Vehicle weight and size restrictions on certain streets and bridges
Snow and Ice Emergencies
   
70.35   Declaration of snow and ice emergency
   
70.36   Parking prohibited, driving motor vehicles restricted on snow emergency
routes during emergency
   
70.37   Snow emergency routes designated
Pedestrian Regulations
   
70.50   Pedestrians to obey traffic-control signs
   
70.51   Pedestrian-control signal locations
   
70.52   Locations where pedestrian crossing in unmarked crosswalks restricted
   
70.53   Locations where pedestrians may cross only in crosswalk
 
   
70.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 70.01 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   Words and phrases, when used in this Traffic Code, except for
subchapters or sections to which different or additional definitions apply,
shall have the meanings ascribed to them in the Vehicle Code, 75 Pa.C.S.A. §§
101 et seq., except that in this Traffic Code the word STREET may be used
interchangeably with the word HIGHWAY and shall have the same meaning as the
word HIGHWAY as defined in the Vehicle Code.
   (B)   The term LEGAL HOLIDAYS as used in this Traffic Code shall mean and
include: New Year’s Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day,
Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day.
   (C)   In this Traffic Code, the singular shall include the plural, the
plural shall include the singular and the masculine shall include the feminine.
(Prior Code, § 15-101) (Ord. 2015-04, passed 12-14-2015)
§ 70.02 MANNER OF ADOPTING PERMANENT REGULATIONS.
   All traffic and parking regulations of a permanent nature shall be enacted
as ordinances, as parts of ordinances, as amendments to ordinances or as
amendments to this Traffic Code, except where the law specifically authorizes
less formal action.
(Prior Code, § 15-102) (Ord. 2015-04, passed 12-14-2015)
§ 70.03 PROVISIONS TO BE CONTINUATION OF EXISTING REGULATIONS.
   The provisions of this Traffic Code, so far as they are the same as those of
ordinances and regulations in force immediately before the enactment of this
Traffic Code, are intended as a continuation of those earlier ordinances and
regulations and not as new enactments. Nothing in this Traffic Code shall
affect any act done or liability incurred, or any suit or prosecution pending
or to be instituted, under any of those repealed or superseded ordinances or
regulations.
(Prior Code, § 15-103) (Ord. 2015-04, passed 12-14-2015)
§ 70.04 TEMPORARY AND EMERGENCY REGULATIONS.
   (A)   The Borough Council or any official designated by the Borough Council
shall have the following powers to regulate traffic and parking temporarily and
in times of emergency:
      (1)   In the case of fire, flood, storm or other emergency, to establish
temporary traffic and/or parking regulations; and
      (2)   In the case of emergency or to facilitate public works, or in the
conduct of parades, processions or public events, to restrict or prohibit
traffic and/or parking in limited areas for periods of not more than 72 hours.
   (B)   Such temporary and emergency regulations shall be enforced by the
Police Department in the same manner as permanent regulations.
(Prior Code, § 15-104) (Ord. 2015-04, passed 12-14-2015) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.05 EXPERIMENTAL REGULATIONS.
   (A)   The borough may, from time to time by resolution, designate places
upon and along the highways in the borough where, for a period of not more than
90 days, specific traffic and/or parking regulations, prohibitions and
restrictions shall be in force and effect, and shall designate such locations
by proper signs and markings. Such regulations, prohibitions and restrictions
shall be effective as if they had been specified in this Traffic Code.
   (B)   No person shall operate or park a vehicle or tractor in violation of
this section, and no person shall move, remove, destroy or deface any sign or
marking erected, posted or made by the authority of this section.
(Prior Code, § 15-105) (Ord. 2015-04, passed 12-14-2015) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.06 STREETS CLOSED OR RESTRICTED FOR CONSTRUCTION, MAINTENANCE OR SPECIAL
EVENTS.
   (A)   The borough shall have the authority to close any street or specific
part of a street to vehicular traffic and to place barriers or station police
officers at each end of the closed portion while construction or maintenance
work is underway or a special event is being conducted on the closed portion.
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle upon any such closed
portion.
   (B)   The borough shall have the authority to establish a restricted traffic
area upon any street where construction or maintenance work is underway and to
station flaggers at each end of the restricted portion. It shall be unlawful
for any person to drive a vehicle upon any such restricted traffic area at any
time when the flaggers is displaying a sign directing that vehicle to stop, or
is signaling that vehicle, by a flag or other device, not to proceed.
(Prior Code, § 15-106) (Ord. 2015-04, passed 12-14-2015) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.07 PROCESSIONS AND ASSEMBLAGES.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      ASSEMBLAGE. A gathering of people without vehicles which interferes with
the movement of pedestrian or vehicular traffic on any street.
      PROCESSION. A group of individuals, vehicles, animals and/or objects
moving along a street in a way that interferes with the normal movement of
traffic. A PROCESSION shall not include a funeral caravan or military convoy.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to hold or participate in any
assemblage unless the person organizing or conducting the assemblage first
obtains a permit from the borough, which shall be issued without fee.
Application for the permit shall be made at least one week in advance of the
day on which the assemblage is proposed to be held, but in any case, where a
state-designated highway is proposed to be used, application shall be made at
least three weeks in advance of the proposed date. The permit shall state the
place where and the date when the assemblage is to be held, the hour when the
assemblage may convene and the hour by which it shall have been completely
dispersed. It shall be unlawful for any person to hold or to participate in any
assemblage unless the permit has been granted, or at any time or place other
than that authorized by the permit.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to hold or participate in any
procession unless the person organizing or conducting the procession first
obtains a permit from the borough, which shall be issued without fee.
Application for the permit shall be made at least two weeks in advance of the
day when the procession is proposed to be held, but in any case, where a state-
designated highway is proposed to be used, application shall be made at least
three weeks in advance of the proposed date. The permit shall specify the date
on which the procession is to be held, the route to be followed by the
procession, the hour when and place where participants may commence to assemble
and form before the procession is underway, the time when the procession may
commence to move along its route and the time by which the end of the
procession shall have been disbanded. It shall be unlawful for any person to
hold or to participate in any procession unless the permit shall have been
granted, or under any conditions as to time or route or otherwise than those
stated in the permit.
(Prior Code, § 15-107) (Ord. 2015-04, passed 12-14-2015) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.08 AUTHORITY OF POLICE OFFICERS.
   The police officers of the borough are hereby authorized to direct traffic
on the highways of the borough and at intersections thereof, and to otherwise
enforce the provisions of this Traffic Code.
(Prior Code, § 15-108) (Ord. 2015-04, passed 12-14-2015)
§ 70.09 AUTHORIZATION FOR SPEED TIMING DEVICE USAGE.
   (A)   The Police Department is hereby authorized to use all speed timing
devices for the determination of speed of a motor vehicle as are approved or
will be approved by the Department of Transportation of the commonwealth in
accordance with 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 3368.
   (B)   This section authorizes the use of said devices upon all highways
within the borough, be they borough, county or state highways, and does also
hereby elect to exercise all powers granted to “local authorities” under the
Vehicle Code of the commonwealth, 75 Pa.C.S.A. §§ 6101 et seq., as hereafter
amended, supplemented, modified or reenacted by the General Assembly of the
commonwealth.
(Prior Code, § 15-109) (Ord. 2015-04, passed 12-14-2015) Penalty, see §
70.99
RESTRICTIONS ON VEHICLE SIZE, WEIGHT, TYPE AND LOAD
§ 70.20 VEHICLE WEIGHT LIMITS ON CERTAIN STREETS AND BRIDGES.
   (A)   By authority granted to the borough by the Motor Vehicle Code, on the
following streets, or parts of streets, and bridges contained within said
streets, it shall be unlawful for any person or persons to drive any vehicle or
combination having a gross weight in excess of the maximum prescribed
restrictions set forth below:
      (1)   Aikens Street.
      (2)   Ash Street.
      (3)   Beverly Court.
      (4)   Birch Street.
      (5)   Chambers Street.
      (6)   Cherry Street.
      (7)   Chestnut Street.
      (8)   Culp Street.
      (9)   Elm Street.
      (10)   Grove Street.
      (11)   Heasley Court.
      (12)   Hemlock Street.
      (13)   Hickory Street.
      (14)   Larch Street.
      (15)   Maple Street.
      (16)   Morrison Way.
      (17)   Oak Street.
      (18)   Parkridge.
      (19)   Pine Street.
      (20)   Poplar Street.
      (21)   Sheridan Road.
      (22)   South Pine Street.
      (23)   Stanford Drive.
      (24)   Sycamore Street.
      (25)   Thorn Street.
      (26)   Vista Drive.
      (27)   Walnut Street.
      (28)   West Penn Drive.
   (B)   No vehicles may exceed a weight limit of 26,000 pounds in the
aforementioned borough streets.
   (C)   Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be
prosecuted under §§4902(a) and 4902(g)(1) of the Vehicle Code, 75 Pa.C.S.A. §§
4902(a) and 4902(g)(1) and, upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine
of $150 plus $150 for each 500 pounds, or part thereof, in excess of 3,000
pounds over the maximum allowable weight, and costs.
   (D)   Provided, nothing in this section shall prohibit any person from
driving an emergency vehicle on any of those streets or parts of streets, or
from driving on any of those streets or parts of streets a truck or other
commercial vehicle making local deliveries to or pickups from premises located
along that street or part of a street.
(Prior Code, § 15-301) (Ord. 2015-04, passed 12-14-2015; Ord. 5 of 2025, passed
12-8-2025) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.21 VEHICLE SIZE RESTRICTIONS ON CERTAIN STREETS AND BRIDGES.
   On the following bridges and streets or parts of streets, by authority
granted by § 4902(a) of the Vehicle Code, 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 4902(a), it shall be
unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle or combination in violation of the
size restrictions prescribed below for that bridge, street or part of street.
 
Street or Bridge Between Restrictions
[Reserved]
 
(Prior Code, § 15-302) (Ord. 2015-04, passed 12-14-2015) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.22 VEHICLE WEIGHT AND SIZE RESTRICTIONS ON CERTAIN STREETS AND BRIDGES.
   By reason of hazardous traffic conditions and other safety factors, by
authority granted by § 4902(b) of the Vehicle Code, 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 4902(b), it
shall be unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle or combination in
violation of the restriction prescribed below for that bridge, street or part
of street.
 
Street or Bridge Between Restrictions
[Reserved]
 
(Prior Code, § 15-303) (Ord. 2015-04, passed 12-14-2015) Penalty, see §
70.99
SNOW AND ICE EMERGENCIES
§ 70.35 DECLARATION OF SNOW AND ICE EMERGENCY.
   In order to facilitate the movement of traffic and to combat the hazards of
snow and ice on the snow emergency routes named in §
70.37 of this chapter, the borough, or official designated by the borough, in
its or his or her discretion, may declare a snow and ice emergency (designated
in this subchapter as a “snow emergency”). Information on the existence of a
snow emergency shall be given by the borough through radio, newspaper or other
available media, and information on the termination of the emergency may be
given by use of the same media.
(Prior Code, § 15-901) (Ord. 2015-04, passed 12-14-2015)
§ 70.36 PARKING PROHIBITED, DRIVING MOTOR VEHICLES RESTRICTED ON SNOW EMERGENCY
ROUTES DURING EMERGENCY.
   After any snow emergency is declared, it shall be unlawful at any time
during the continuance of the emergency for any person:
   (A)   To park a motor vehicle or to allow that vehicle to remain parked
anywhere on any snow emergency route designated in §
70.37 of this chapter; or
   (B)   To drive any motor vehicle on any such snow emergency route unless
that vehicle is equipped with snow tires or chains.
(Prior Code, § 15-902) (Ord. 2015-04, passed 12-14-2015) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.37 SNOW EMERGENCY ROUTES DESIGNATED.
   The following are designated as snow emergency routes.
 
Street Between
All streets and alleyways within borough limits
 
(Prior Code, § 15-903) (Ord. 2015-04, passed 12-14-2015) Penalty, see §
70.99
PEDESTRIAN REGULATIONS
§ 70.50 PEDESTRIANS TO OBEY TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNS.
   At all locations in the borough where official traffic-control signals are
installed, pedestrians, except where directed otherwise by pedestrian-control
signals installed under §
70.51 of this chapter, shall obey the directions of those traffic-control
signals as follows.
   (A)   When facing a green signal, a pedestrian may proceed across the
roadway within a crosswalk.
   (B)   When facing a steady yellow signal, a pedestrian shall not start to
cross the roadway.
   (C)   When facing a steady red signal, a pedestrian shall not enter the
roadway.
(Prior Code, § 15-1101) (Ord. 2015-04, passed 12-14-2015) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.51 PEDESTRIAN-CONTROL SIGNAL LOCATIONS.
   (A)   At the following locations, official pedestrian-control signals shall
be erected (or are ratified if previously erected).
 
Location
[Reserved]
 
   (B)   Every pedestrian facing a steady or flashing “Don’t Walk” signal shall
obey the directions of that signal as follows.
      (1)   When facing a steady “Don’t Walk” signal, a pedestrian shall not
start to cross the roadway in the direction of the signal, but any pedestrian
who has partially completed his or her crossing on the “Walk” signal should
proceed to a sidewalk or to a safety zone while the “Don’t Walk” signal is
showing.
      (2)   When facing a flashing “Don’t Walk” signal, a pedestrian shall not
start to cross the roadway in the direction of the indication, but any
pedestrian who has partly completed crossing during the “Walk” indication
should proceed to a sidewalk or to a safety zone.
   (C)   Any pedestrian who fails to obey the directions of a “Don’t Walk”
signal, as indicated above, shall be guilty of an offense and a violation of
this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 15-1102) (Ord. 2015-04, passed 12-14-2015) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.52 LOCATIONS WHERE PEDESTRIAN CROSSING IN UNMARKED CROSSWALKS RESTRICTED.
   Except when authorized by a police officer or other appropriately attired
person authorized to direct, control or regulate traffic, it shall be unlawful
for any pedestrian to cross the roadway at any of the following streets at the
intersection with that street indicated.
 
Street Intersection Direction of Travel
[Reserved]
 
(Prior Code, § 15-1103) (Ord. 2015-04, passed 12-14-2015) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.53 LOCATIONS WHERE PEDESTRIANS MAY CROSS ONLY IN CROSSWALK.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any pedestrian:
      (1)   To cross any roadway in a business district within the borough
except in a crosswalk; or
      (2)   To cross the roadway in any of the following portions of streets in
the borough except in a crosswalk.
 
Street Between
[Reserved]
 
   (B)   Provided, nothing in this section shall permit any pedestrian to cross
in a crosswalk at any location where that crossing is prohibited by §
70.51 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 15-1104) (Ord. 2015-04, passed 12-14-2015) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person who shall operate or park a vehicle or tractor in violation
of any regulation set out in §
70.04 of this chapter, or who shall move, remove, destroy, injure or deface any
sign or marking erected, posted or made to give notice of any such regulation,
upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to the penalty set forth in the law
or elsewhere in this Traffic Code for a violation of such nature and, in case
of a violation for which no specific penalty is set forth in the law or
elsewhere in this Traffic Code, to a fine of not more than $25 (subject to
change via resolution) together with the costs of prosecution.
(Prior Code, § 15-104)
   (C)   Any person who shall violate any provision of §
70.05 of this chapter, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to the penalty
set forth in the law or elsewhere in this Traffic Code for a violation of such
nature and, in case of a violation for which no specific penalty is set forth
in the law or elsewhere in this Traffic Chapter, to a fine of not more than $25
(subject to change via resolution) together with costs of prosecution;
provided, the purpose of §
70.05 is to allow for tests and experimental determination of the feasibility
and desirability of permanent changes in the ordinances of the borough relative
to traffic and parking.
(Prior Code, § 15-105)
   (D)   Any person who violates any provision of §
70.06 of this chapter, upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of $25
(subject to change via resolution) and costs.
(Prior Code, § 15-106)
   (E)   Any person who violates any provision of §
70.07 of this chapter, upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of $25
and costs.
(Prior Code, § 15-107)
   (F)   Any person who violates any provision of §
70.20 of this chapter shall be prosecuted under §§ 4902(a) and 4902(g)(1) of
the Vehicle Code, 75 Pa.C.S.A. §§ 4902(a) and 4902(g)(1), and, upon conviction,
shall be sentenced to pay a fine of $150, plus $150 for each 500 pounds, or
part thereof, in excess of 3,000 pounds over the maximum allowable weight, and
costs.
(Prior Code, § 15-301)
   (G)   Any person who violates any provision of §
70.21 of this chapter shall be prosecuted under §§4902(a) and 4902(g)(1) of the
Vehicle Code, 75 Pa.C.S.A. §§ 4902(a) and 4902(g)(1), and, upon conviction,
shall be sentenced to pay a fine of $75 and costs.
(Prior Code, § 15-302)
   (H)   Any person who violates any provision of §
70.22 of this chapter shall be prosecuted under §§ 4902(b) and 4902(g)(2) of
the Vehicle Code, 75 Pa.C.S.A. §§ 4902(b) and 4902(g)(2), and, upon conviction,
shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $500 and costs.
(Prior Code, § 15-303)
   (I)   (1)   If, at any time during a period of snow emergency declared under
§
70.35 of this chapter, a person shall park a motor vehicle or allow a motor
vehicle to remain parked anywhere upon a snow emergency route, that person
shall be guilty of a violation of §§
70.35 to 70.37 of this chapter and, upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay
a fine of not more than $50 and costs.
      (2)   If, at any time during a period of snow emergency declared under §
70.35 of this chapter, a person shall drive a motor vehicle upon a snow
emergency route without having that vehicle equipped with snow tires or chains,
that person shall be guilty of a violation of §§
70.35 to 70.37 of this chapter and, upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay
a fine of $50 and costs.
(Prior Code, § 15-904)
   (J)   Any pedestrian who violates any provision of §§
70.50 to
70.53 of this chapter shall be guilty of a summary offense and, upon
conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of $5 and costs.
(Prior Code, § 15-1105)
(Ord. 2015-04, passed 12-14-2015)
CHAPTER 71: TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Section
   
71.01   Maximum speed limits on certain bridges, elevated structures
   
71.02   Maximum speed limits for certain vehicles on hazardous grades
   
71.03   Maximum speed limits in parks
   
71.04   Traffic signals at certain locations
   
71.05   Intersections where turn prohibited on red signal
   
71.06   Turning at certain intersections prohibited or restricted
   
71.07   Right turns prohibited at certain intersections
   
71.08   U-turns prohibited at certain locations
   
71.09   No-passing zones
   
71.10   Yield intersections
   
71.11   Rotary traffic islands
   
71.12   One-way roadways
   
71.13   Motor vehicles operation restricted on public lands
   
71.14   Play highways; authorization
   
71.15   Snowmobile roads
 
   
71.99   Penalty
§ 71.01 MAXIMUM SPEED LIMITS ON CERTAIN BRIDGES, ELEVATED STRUCTURES.
   Maximum speed limits are established, as follows, on certain bridges and
elevated structures, and it shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle
on any such bridge or elevated structure at a higher speed than the maximum
prescribed for that bridge or elevated structure.
 
Bridge or Elevated Structure Location Maximum Speed Limit
[Reserved]
 
(Prior Code, § 15-202) (Ord. 2015-04, passed 12-14-2015) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.02 MAXIMUM SPEED LIMITS FOR CERTAIN VEHICLES ON HAZARDOUS GRADES.
   The following are declared to be hazardous grades, and upon any such
hazardous grade, no person shall drive a vehicle having a gross weight in
excess of that referred to for that grade, in the direction that is stated for
that grade, at a speed in excess of that established in this section for that
grade, and if so stated for a particular grade, the driver of every such
vehicle shall stop the vehicle before proceeding downhill.
 
               Direction of Maximum Gross                     Required to Stop
Street Between Travel       Weight        Maximum Speed Limit Before Proceeding
                                                              Downhill
[Reserved]
 
(Prior Code, § 15-203) (Ord. 2015-04, passed 12-14-2015) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.03 MAXIMUM SPEED LIMITS IN PARKS.
   A speed limit of 15 mph is established on all streets and roadways in the
public parks maintained and operated by the borough, except in the following
locations where the lower maximums, as specified, shall apply.
 
Park Street Location Maximum Speed Limit
[Reserved]
 
(Prior Code, § 15-204) (Ord. 2015-04, passed 12-14-2015) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.04 TRAFFIC SIGNALS AT CERTAIN LOCATIONS.
   At the following locations, traffic signals as indicated below shall be
erected (or are ratified if previously erected), and traffic at those locations
shall be directed by those signals.
 
Location Type of Signal
[Reserved]
 
(Prior Code, § 15-205) (Ord. 2015-04, passed 12-14-2015) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.05 INTERSECTIONS WHERE TURN PROHIBITED ON RED SIGNAL.
   The following are established as intersections where drivers of vehicles
headed in the direction or directions indicated are prohibited from making a
right turn (or a left turn from a one-way street into another one-way street)
on a steady red signal.
 
Intersection Vehicles Traveling on Facing
[Reserved]
 
(Prior Code, § 15-206) (Ord. 2015-04, passed 12-14-2015) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.06 TURNING AT CERTAIN INTERSECTIONS PROHIBITED OR RESTRICTED.
   It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle of the type indicated
traveling upon the first-named street at any of the following intersections, in
the direction or directions indicated in each case, to make a left turn and/or
a right turn into the second-named street, as indicated, at any time when such
a turn is prohibited by this section.
 
Vehicles Traveling Direction of Travel Not to Make Turn When Type of Vehicle
on                                     into                  Applicable to
[Reserved]
 
(Prior Code, § 15-208) (Ord. 2015-04, passed 12-14-2015) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.07 RIGHT TURNS PROHIBITED AT CERTAIN INTERSECTIONS.
   It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle traveling upon the first-
named street at any of the following intersections, in the direction or
directions indicated in each case, to make other than a left turn at any time
stated, both right turns and straight-across traffic being prohibited.
 
Vehicles Traveling on Direction of Travel Times Not to Make Right Turn into or
                                                Travel Straight Across
[Reserved]
 
(Prior Code, § 15-209) (Ord. 2015-04, passed 12-14-2015) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.08 U-TURNS PROHIBITED AT CERTAIN LOCATIONS.
   It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle traveling upon any of the
following portions of streets, in the direction or directions indicated for
that street, to make a U-turn.
 
Street     Portion Direction of Travel
[Reserved]
 
(Prior Code, § 15-210) (Ord. 2015-04, passed 12-14-2015) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.09 NO-PASSING ZONES.
   The following are established as no-passing zones, and it shall be unlawful
for the driver of any vehicle to overtake or pass another vehicle or to drive
on the left side of the roadway in any no-passing zone.
 
Street     Direction of Travel Between
[Reserved]
 
(Prior Code, § 15-211) (Ord. 2015-04, passed 12-14-2015) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.10 YIELD INTERSECTIONS.
   The following intersections (in addition to intersections with the through
highways established by
Chapter 74, Schedule II, of this code) are established as yield intersections,
and official yield signs shall be erected (or are ratified if previously
erected) in such a position as to face traffic approaching the second-named
street (the through street) on the first-named street (the yield street) in the
direction or directions indicated for that intersection. Every driver of a
vehicle approaching the intersection on the first-named or yield street, in the
direction indicated in each case, shall slow down or stop the vehicle, as
required by 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 3323(c) of the Vehicle Code, and then yield the
right-of-way as required by that section of the Vehicle Code.
 
Yield Street Through Street Direction of Travel
[Reserved]
 
(Prior Code, § 15-214) (Ord. 2015-04, passed 12-14-2015) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.11 ROTARY TRAFFIC ISLANDS.
   The following locations are designated as rotary traffic islands, and every
vehicle passing around a rotary traffic island shall be driven only to the
right of the island.
 
Location
[Reserved]
 
(Prior Code, § 15-216) (Ord. 2015-04, passed 12-14-2015) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.12 ONE-WAY ROADWAYS.
   The following are established as one-way roadways, and it shall be unlawful
for any person to drive a vehicle on any one-way street other than in the
direction established for traffic on that street.
 
Street     From To Direction of Travel
[Reserved]
 
(Prior Code, § 15-207) (Ord. 2015-04, passed 12-14-2015) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.13 MOTOR VEHICLES OPERATION RESTRICTED ON PUBLIC LANDS.
   No motor vehicle, including a motorcycle, pedalcycle or minibike, shall be
operated on any property owned by the borough or any other public agency or
instrumentality within the borough without the permission of the property owner
and a permit from the borough.
(Prior Code, § 15-215) (Ord. 2015-04, passed 12-14-2015) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.14 PLAY HIGHWAYS; AUTHORIZATION.
   (A)   The following areas upon the streets in the borough are established as
play highways.
 
Street     Between Days Hours
[Reserved]
 
   (B)   The Borough Council or official designated by the Borough Council is
authorized to designate as play highways, whenever he or she deems that action
advisable, and for whatever period of time directed by him or her, any part of
any street in the borough where sledding and coasting shall be permitted. That
play highway shall be set apart for the purpose under the direction of the
Borough Council or official designated by the Borough Council.
   (C)   No person shall drive any motor vehicle upon any play highway at any
time when that street shall be designated as a play highway, except in case of
emergency with the special permission of the Borough Council, official
designated by the Borough Council or the police officer in charge, who shall
first clear that play highway of all persons using it for the purpose for which
it was set aside.
(Prior Code, § 15-217) (Ord. 2015-04, passed 12-14-2015) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.15 SNOWMOBILE ROADS.
   (A)   The following roads and streets within the borough are designated as
special snowmobile roads.
 
                       Used by Snowmobiles Only
Street or Road Between When Closed to Vehicular Shared with Vehicular Traffic
                       Traffic
[Reserved]
 
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a snowmobile on any
highway, street or road in the borough other than as provided above. Provided,
nothing in this section shall prohibit any person from operating a snowmobile
on any other street in the borough:
      (1)   As authorized by the Vehicle Code, 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 7721, for
emergency and bridge crossings and for the direct crossing of streets or two-
lane highways; or
      (2)   For special snowmobile events where authorized in advance and the
street is blocked off as provided in the Vehicle Code, 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 7723. Any
person who violates any provision of this section shall be subject to the
penalties prescribed in § 7752(a) of the Vehicle Code, 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 7752(a).
(Prior Code, § 15-218) (Ord. 2015-04, passed 12-14-2015) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person who violates any provision of §
71.01 of this chapter, upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of $35
(subject to change via resolution) and costs. Any person exceeding the maximum
speed limit by more than five mph shall pay an additional fine of $2 per mile
(subject to change via resolution) for each mile in excess of five mph over the
maximum speed limit.
(Prior Code, § 15-202)
   (C)   Any person who violates any provision of §
71.02 of this chapter, upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of $35
(subject to change via resolution) and costs. Any person exceeding the maximum
speed limit by more than five mph shall pay an additional fine of $2 (subject
to change via resolution) for each mile in excess of five mph over the maximum
speed limit.
(Prior Code, § 15-203)
   (D)   Any person who violates any provision of §
71.03 of this chapter, upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of $35
(subject to change via resolution) and costs. Any person exceeding the maximum
speed limit by more than five mph shall pay an additional fine of $2 (subject
to change via resolution) per mile for each mile in excess of five mph over the
maximum speed limit.
(Prior Code, § 15-204)
   (E)   Any driver of a vehicle who disobeys the directions of any traffic
signal, as set out in §
71.04 of this chapter, upon conviction shall be sentenced to pay a fine of $25
(subject to change via resolution) and costs.
(Prior Code, § 15-205)
   (F)   Any driver of a vehicle who violates any provision of §
71.05 of this chapter, upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of $25
(subject to change via resolution) and costs.
(Prior Code, § 15-206)
   (G)   Any person who violates any provision of §
71.06 of this chapter, upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of $25
(subject to change via resolution) and costs.
(Prior Code, § 15-208)
   (H)   Any person who violates any provision of §
71.07 of this chapter, upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of $25
(subject to change via resolution) and costs.
(Prior Code, § 15-209)
   (I)   Any person who violates any provision of §
71.08 of this chapter, upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of $25
(subject to change via resolution) and costs.
(Prior Code, § 15-210)
   (J)   Any person who violates any provision of §
71.09 of this chapter, upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of $25
(subject to change via resolution) and costs.
(Prior Code, § 15-211)
   (K)   Any person who violates any provision of §
71.10 of this chapter, upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of $25
(subject to change via resolution) and costs.
(Prior Code, § 15-214)
   (L)   Any person who drives a vehicle otherwise than to the right of any
rotary traffic island shall be guilty of a violation of §
71.11 of this chapter and, upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of
$25 (subject to change via resolution) and costs.
(Prior Code, § 15-216)
   (M)   Any person who violates any provision of §
71.12 of this chapter, upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of $25
(subject to change via resolution) and costs.
(Prior Code, § 15-207)
   (N)   Any person who violates a provision of §
71.13 of this chapter, upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of $25
(subject to change via resolution) and costs.
(Prior Code, § 15-215)
   (O)   Any person who violates any provision of §
71.14(C) of this chapter, upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of
$25 (subject to change via resolution) and costs.
(Prior Code, § 15-217)
(Ord. 2015-04, passed 12-14-2015)
CHAPTER 72: PARKING REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
72.001   Vehicles to be parked within marked spaces
   
72.002   Parking prohibited in certain locations certain days, hours
   
72.003   Parking trucks, buses and certain other vehicles prohibited in certain
locations
   
72.004   Parking time limited in certain locations certain days, hours
   
72.005   Special-purpose parking zones; parking otherwise prohibited
   
72.006   Standing or parking on roadway for loading or unloading
   
72.007   Angle parking required on portions of certain streets
   
72.008   Residential permit parking
   
72.009   Parking prohibited on portions of certain highways during street
sweeping hours
On-Street Metered Parking
   
72.020   Parking meter zones
   
72.021   Days and hours parking meters in operation and parking time limits
apply
   
72.022   Placement and characteristics of parking meters
   
72.023   Parked vehicles to be wholly within marked spaces
   
72.024   Coin deposit in meter; overtime parking unlawful
   
72.025   Depositing substitute for coin in meter unlawful
   
72.026   Depositing coin in meter to extend parking time beyond legal limit
unlawful
   
72.027   Remaining parked at meter showing violation unlawful
   
72.028   Tampering with meter unlawful
   
72.029   Exceptions
Off-Street Metered Parking
   
72.045   Metered parking lots
   
72.046   Placement and characteristics of parking meters
   
72.047   Reserved parking spaces for persons with a disability may be provided
   
72.048   Parked vehicles to be wholly within marked spaces
   
72.049   Manner of parking at meters
   
72.050   Coin deposit in meter; overtime parking unlawful
   
72.051   Depositing substitute for coin in meter unlawful
   
72.052   Remaining parked at meter showing violation unlawful
   
72.053   Tampering with meter unlawful
   
72.054   Metered parking lots for certain types of vehicles only
Off-Street Unmetered Parking
   
72.070   Unmetered parking lots
   
72.071   Reserved parking spaces for persons with a disability may be provided
   
72.072   Parking overtime or when lot closed unlawful
   
72.073   Unmetered lots for certain types of vehicles
   
72.074   Manner of parking
   
72.075   Parking on rental basis only
Removal and Impoundment of Illegally Parked Vehicles
   
72.090   Applicability and scope
   
72.091   Authority to remove and impound
   
72.092   Tow-away zones designated
   
72.093   Designation of approved storage garages; bonding; towing and storage
   
72.094   Payment of towing and storage charges
   
72.095   Reclamation costs
   
72.096   Records of vehicles removed and impounded
   
72.097   Restrictions upon removal of vehicles
   
72.098   Reports and disposition of unclaimed vehicles
 
   
72.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 72.001 VEHICLES TO BE PARKED WITHIN MARKED SPACES.
   Wherever a space is marked off on any street for the parking of an
individual vehicle, every vehicle parked there shall be parked wholly within
the lines bounding that space, and it shall be a violation of this chapter for
any person to park a vehicle or allow it to remain parked otherwise.
(Prior Code, § 15-401) (Ord. 2015-04, passed 12-14-2015) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.002 PARKING PROHIBITED IN CERTAIN LOCATIONS CERTAIN DAYS, HOURS.
   Parking shall be prohibited in the following locations at all times on the
days and between the hours indicated in this section as follows.
 
Street     Side Between Days Hours
[Reserved]
 
(Prior Code, § 15-403) (Ord. 2015-04, passed 12-14-2015) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.003 PARKING TRUCKS, BUSES AND CERTAIN OTHER VEHICLES PROHIBITED IN CERTAIN
LOCATIONS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to park, or to allow to remain parked,
on any of the following streets or parts of streets any vehicle other than a
passenger car (which shall not include any bus, motor home or passenger car
attached to a trailer of any kind).
 
Street     Between
[Reserved]
 
(Prior Code, § 15-404) (Ord. 2015-04, passed 12-14-2015) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.004 PARKING TIME LIMITED IN CERTAIN LOCATIONS CERTAIN DAYS, HOURS.
   No person shall park a vehicle, or allow it to remain parked, for longer
than the time indicated in any of the following locations at any time on the
days and between the hours indicated.
 
Street     Side Between Days Hours
[Reserved]
 
(Prior Code, § 15-405) (Ord. 2015-04, passed 12-14-2015) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.005 SPECIAL-PURPOSE PARKING ZONES; PARKING OTHERWISE PROHIBITED.
   The following are established as special-purpose parking zones, and it shall
be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle or to allow it to remain parked in
any such zone except as specifically provided for that zone.
 
Street     Side Location Authorized Purpose or Vehicle
[Reserved]
 
(Prior Code, § 15-406) (Ord. 2015-04, passed 12-14-2015) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.006 STANDING OR PARKING ON ROADWAY FOR LOADING OR UNLOADING.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, stand or park a vehicle (other
than a pedalcycle) on the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the
edge or curb of any street, except that standing or parking for the purpose of
loading or unloading persons or property shall be permitted on the following
named streets on Monday through Saturday between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 11:
30 a.m. and between the hours of 1:30 p.m. and 4:00 p.m., and for no longer
than necessary for the loading or unloading.
 
Street     Side Between
[Reserved]
 
(Prior Code, § 15-407) (Ord. 2015-04, passed 12-14-2015) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.007 ANGLE PARKING REQUIRED ON PORTIONS OF CERTAIN STREETS.
   (A)   Only angle parking shall be permitted on the following portions of
streets.
 
Street     Side Between
[Reserved]
 
   (B)   On all streets where angle parking is required, every vehicle parked
at the angle shall be parked with its front nearest the curb.
(Prior Code, § 15-408) (Ord. 2015-04, passed 12-14-2015) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.008 RESIDENTIAL PERMIT PARKING.
   (A)   Findings and purpose. The borough finds that:
      (1)   Certain residential areas in the borough are subjected to commuter
vehicle parking, therefore depriving the residents of those areas of spaces in
which to park their own vehicles;
      (2)   Those residential streets are also subjected to a high degree of
commuter traffic, which substantially reduces the quality of the ambient air
level; and
      (3)   The establishment of a parking permit program for certain affected
areas should facilitate the efficient movement of traffic by providing for
parking preference during certain hours of the day and days of the week.
Therefore, the borough considers it to be in the interest of the people of the
borough to provide for the establishment of a residential permit parking
program to ensure primary access to available parking spaces by neighborhood
residents and also to provide a cleaner ambient air level.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      COMMUTER VEHICLE. A motor vehicle parked in a residential area by a
person not a resident of that residential area.
      PROPRIETOR. A person who owns or leases real estate within a residential
area of which he or she is not a resident, but who owns or manages a business
enterprise or professional office maintained at that address. For the purposes
of this section, a PROPRIETOR shall be entitled to one parking permit for that
business or professional office address.
      RESIDENT. A person who owns or leases real property within a residential
area and who maintains either a voting residence or bona fide occupancy, or
both, at that address.
      RESIDENTIAL AREA. A contiguous area containing public highways or parts
of public highways primarily abutted by residential property or residential and
nonbusiness property (such as schools, parks, places of worship, hospitals and
nursing homes).
   (C)   Criteria.
      (1)   The residential areas designated in division (D) below are those
deemed impacted and hence eligible for residential parking on the basis of the
following criteria.
         (a)   During any period between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:30 p.m.,
Monday through Saturday, except legal holidays, the number of vehicles parked
(or standing), legally or illegally, on the streets in the area is equal to 70%
or more of the legal, on-street parking capacity of the area. For the purpose
of this criterion, a legal parking space shall be 20 linear feet.
         (b)   During the same period as specified in division (C)(1)(a) above,
10% or more of the vehicles parked (or standing) on the streets in the area are
not registered in the name of a person residing in the area. For the purpose of
this criterion, the latest available information from the Commonwealth
Department of Transportation regarding registration of motor vehicles shall be
used.
      (2)   Provided, in determining that a specific area identified as
impacted and eligible for residential permit parking is designated as a
residential permit parking area, the following factors are taken into
consideration:
         (a)   The local and metropolitan needs with respect to clean air and
environment;
         (b)   The possibility of a reduction in total vehicle miles driven in
the borough;
         (c)   The likelihood of alleviating traffic congestion, illegal
parking and related health and safety hazards;
         (d)   The proximity of public transportation to the residential area;
         (e)   The desire and need of the residents for residential permit
parking and their willingness to bear the administrative costs in connection
with it; and
         (f)   The need for parking in excess of the residential permit parking
program in proximity to establishments located in the residential permit
parking area and used by the general public for religious, health or
educational purposes.
   (D)   Designation of residential permit parking areas.
      (1)   The following are designated as residential permit parking areas.
 
Area       Bounded by and Including
[Reserved]
 
      (2)   Signs shall be erected along the streets in each residential permit
parking area indicating the days, hours, locations and conditions under which
parking shall be by permit only.
   (E)   Application for permit.
      (1)   Application for a residential parking permit shall be made to the
Chief of Police by the person desiring the permit, who shall be only the owner
or the driver of a motor vehicle who resides on or is a proprietor of property
immediately adjacent to a street or other location within a residential parking
permit area. A separate application shall be required for each motor vehicle,
and each application shall be accompanied by a permit fee, in an amount as
established by resolution of the borough, which shall be for the use of the
borough, to be applied to the cost of administering the residential permit
parking program.
      (2)   Each application shall contain the following information:
         (a)   The name of the owner or the driver, as the case may be, of the
motor vehicle;
         (b)   The address of the resident or the proprietor, as the case may
be;
         (c)   The make, model and registration number of the motor vehicle;
and
         (d)   The driver number as taken from the applicant’s current driver’s
license.
      (3)   At the discretion of the Chief of Police, the applicant shall be
required, at the time of making application, to present his or her driver’s
license and the vehicle registration card.
   (F)   Issuance of permit. Upon receipt of the application and the permit
fee, and determination by him or her that the information upon the application
shows that the applicant is entitled to a residential parking permit, the Chief
of Police shall issue to the applicant a residential parking permit, which
shall be valid for the remainder of the calendar year. The permit shall display
the serial and registration numbers of the motor vehicle, the residential
parking area number and the expiration date. The permit shall be renewable
annually before the expiration date upon making application for renewal and
payment of the permit fee. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this section
for any person to display other than the current and valid permit while
standing or parking in a residential permit parking area at any time when those
permits are to be displayed.
   (G)   Temporary and exemption parking permits. Temporary parking permits may
be issued by the Chief of Police, upon payment of a fee in an amount as
established by resolution of the Borough Council, to bona fide visitors of
residents of a designated residential permit parking area, and exemption
parking permits may be issued, without payment of a fee, to persons with a
disability.
   (H)   Responsibility of permit holder.
      (1)   Notwithstanding any provision of this section to the contrary, the
holder of a residential parking permit shall be permitted to stand or park a
motor vehicle operated by him or her in any designated residential parking area
during those times when the parking of motor vehicles is permitted in that
area. While a vehicle for which a residential parking permit has been issued is
so parked, that permit shall be displayed so as to be clearly visible through
the windshield of the vehicle. A residential parking permit shall not guarantee
or reserve to the holder a parking space within a designated residential permit
parking area.
      (2)   A residential parking permit shall not authorize its holder to
stand or park a motor vehicle in any place where or at any time when the
stopping, standing or parking of motor vehicles is prohibited or set aside for
other specified types of vehicles, nor shall the permit exempt its holder from
observance of any traffic or parking regulation other than residential permit
parking regulations or restrictions.
      (3)   No person other than the permit holder whose name appears on the
permit shall use a residential parking permit or display it on a vehicle
operated; any such use or display by a person other than the permit holder
shall constitute a violation of this section by the permit holder and by the
person who so used or displayed the parking permit.
      (4)   It shall constitute a violation of this section for any person
falsely to represent himself or herself as eligible for a residential parking
permit or to furnish false information in an application to the Chief of Police
in order to obtain a residential parking permit.
   (I)   Revocation of permits. The Chief of Police shall have the authority to
revoke the residential parking permit of any permit holder found to be in
violation of any provision of this section. Upon written notification to the
present holder of the revocation, the permit holder shall surrender the permit
to the Chief of Police. Failure to do so, when so requested, shall constitute a
violation of this section. Provided, any person receiving such a notice may,
within ten days after the date of the notice, appeal to the borough for a
hearing on the revocation, and the decision of the borough shall be final.
(Prior Code, § 15-409) (Ord. 2015-04, passed 12-14-2015) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.009 PARKING PROHIBITED ON PORTIONS OF CERTAIN HIGHWAYS DURING STREET
SWEEPING HOURS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle or to allow the same
to remain parked, at any time designated by the Borough Council on any of
portions of the highways of the borough on the days hereby respectively
designated for street sweeping purposes by the Borough Council.
Penalty, see §
72.999
ON-STREET METERED PARKING
§ 72.020 PARKING METER ZONES.
   Parking meter zones are established upon and along certain streets in the
borough as follows.
 
Street     Between Rate Maximum Parking Time
[Reserved]
 
(Prior Code, § 15-501) (Ord. 2015-04, passed 12-14-2015) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.021 DAYS AND HOURS PARKING METERS IN OPERATION AND PARKING TIME LIMITS
APPLY.
   Parking meters shall be operated by the deposit of a coin in the meter as
prescribed by §
72.024 of this chapter, and the parking rates for specified lengths of time, as
well as the maximum parking times prescribed in §
72.020 of this chapter, shall apply at all times between the hours of 9:00 a.m.
and 6:00 p.m. Monday through Thursday and Saturday, and between the hours of 9:
00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. Friday, in the parking meter zones listed in §
72.020 of this chapter. Provided, however, the requirements of this subchapter
as to parking time limits and as to deposit of coins in meters shall not apply
on Sundays or legal holidays.
(Prior Code, § 15-502) (Ord. 2015-04, passed 12-14-2015) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.022 PLACEMENT AND CHARACTERISTICS OF PARKING METERS.
   Parking meters installed in the parking meter zones established by §
72.020 of this chapter shall be placed upon the curb or sidewalk, and
immediately adjacent to the individual parking spaces described in §
72.023 of this chapter. Each parking meter shall be placed or set so as to show
that the parking space adjacent to that meter is or is not legally occupied.
Each parking meter installed shall indicate by a proper legend the legal
parking time established by the borough, and when the adjacent space is
occupied by a vehicle, the parking meter shall indicate on and by its dial and
pointer the duration of the period of legal parking and, on the expiration of
that period, shall indicate illegal parking or over-parking.
(Prior Code, § 15-503) (Ord. 2015-04, passed 12-14-2015) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.023 PARKED VEHICLES TO BE WHOLLY WITHIN MARKED SPACES.
   Lines and/or markings shall be painted or placed upon the curb, sidewalk or
roadway adjacent to each parking meter for the purpose of delineating the
parking space for which that meter shall be used. Every vehicle parked at any
parking meter shall be parked wholly within the lines or markings so placed and
applicable to that meter. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this section
for any person to park a vehicle across any such line or marking, or to park a
vehicle in such a position that the vehicle is not wholly within the area
designated by those lines or markings.
(Prior Code, § 15-504) (Ord. 2015-04, passed 12-14-2015) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.024 COIN DEPOSIT IN METER; OVERTIME PARKING UNLAWFUL.
   (A)   Whenever a vehicle is to be parked in any space adjacent to a parking
meter at any time in the period of limited parking as prescribed by §
72.021 of this chapter, the driver of the vehicle, upon entering the parking
space, shall immediately deposit, or cause to be deposited, in that parking
meter one or more proper coins of the United States of America as specified in
the legend on the parking meter. Upon deposit of the coin or coins and placing
the meter in operation, the parking space may be lawfully occupied by the
vehicle for the time indicated on the meter.
   (B)   If any vehicle shall remain in any such parking space for any length
of time that the meter shall indicate by proper signal that the lawful parking
time has expired, that vehicle shall be considered as having been parked
overtime, and the parking of a vehicle overtime shall be a violation of this
subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 15-505) (Ord. 2015-04, passed 12-14-2015) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.025 DEPOSITING SUBSTITUTE FOR COIN IN METER UNLAWFUL.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit in any parking meter
installed under the provisions of this subchapter any slug or other substitute
for a coin of the United States.
(Prior Code, § 15-506) (Ord. 2015-04, passed 12-14-2015) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.026 DEPOSITING COIN IN METER TO EXTEND PARKING TIME BEYOND LEGAL LIMIT
UNLAWFUL.
   It shall be unlawful and a violation of this subchapter for any person to
deposit, or cause to be deposited, in any parking meter installed under the
provisions of this subchapter any coin for the purpose of increasing or
extending the parking time of any vehicle beyond the legal parking time
established for that parking zone.
(Prior Code, § 15-507) (Ord. 2015-04, passed 12-14-2015) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.027 REMAINING PARKED AT METER SHOWING VIOLATION UNLAWFUL.
   It shall be unlawful and a violation of this subchapter for any person to
permit a vehicle to remain in a parking space adjacent to a parking meter
installed under this subchapter when that meter displays a signal indicating
that the vehicle has already been parked there beyond the period of time
prescribed for that parking space, or the time for which a coin or coins was
deposited in that meter for the parking of that vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 15-508) (Ord. 2015-04, passed 12-14-2015) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.028 TAMPERING WITH METER UNLAWFUL.
   It shall be unlawful and a violation of this subchapter for any person to
deface, tamper with, open or willfully break, destroy or impair the usefulness
of any parking meter installed under the provisions of this subchapter.
Provided, nothing in this section shall apply to the servicing or opening of
parking meters by officers, employees or police officers of the borough under
the direction of the borough.
(Prior Code, § 15-509) (Ord. 2015-04, passed 12-14-2015) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.029 EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   By resolution, the borough may temporarily suspend the provisions of
this subchapter requiring coin deposit in meters and establishing a maximum
parking time at meters.
   (B)   The borough shall have the authority to establish no-parking or
special-purpose parking zones within any parking meter zone, and to remove
parking meters from those areas as previously installed there, and the
provisions of this subchapter shall not apply in those areas where no-parking
or special-purpose parking is in effect.
(Prior Code, § 15-512) (Ord. 2015-04, passed 12-14-2015) Penalty, see §
72.999
OFF-STREET METERED PARKING
§ 72.045 METERED PARKING LOTS.
   (A)   The following are established as the metered parking lots established
by the borough.
 
Lot        Location Rate Maximum Parking Days in Operation Hours in Operation
                         Time
[Reserved]
 
   (B)   Provided the parking meters in the metered lots shall be in operation,
the parking lots shall be open for parking and the provisions of this
subchapter regulating the operation of parking meters and establishing parking
time limits shall be in force on the days and between the hours prescribed for
the individual lots. But, on Sundays and legal holidays, no parking time limit
shall apply and the placing of coins in meters shall not be required.
(Prior Code, § 15-601) (Ord. 2015-04, passed 12-14-2015) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.046 PLACEMENT AND CHARACTERISTICS OF PARKING METERS.
   (A)   Parking meters installed in the parking lots shall be placed
immediately adjacent to the individual parking spaces that shall be marked off
and maintained in the lots. For each parking meter, there shall be a clear
indication, through the use of a directional arrow or an identification as to
number with the parking space, to show which individual parking space it
serves.
   (B)   Each parking meter shall indicate by a proper legend the parking rate
and the maximum parking time established by §
72.045 of this chapter, and, when the parking space is occupied and the parking
meter put into operation by the insertion of one or more coins, the parking
meter shall indicate on and by its dial and pointer the duration of legal
parking, and upon the expiration of that period, shall indicate illegal parking
or over-parking.
(Prior Code, § 15-602) (Ord. 2015-04, passed 12-14-2015) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.047 RESERVED PARKING SPACES FOR PERSONS WITH A DISABILITY MAY BE PROVIDED.
   The borough, at its discretion, may provide, at convenient and suitable
locations in any one or more of the metered parking lots, reserved parking
spaces for persons with a disability, and shall designate those spaces by
appropriate signs. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this subchapter for
any person to park in any such reserved parking space any vehicle unless that
vehicle bears or displays either a “registration plate for a person with a
disability,” a “parking placard for a person with a disability,” a
“registration plate for a veteran with a disability” or a “placard for a
veteran with a disability.”
(Prior Code, § 15-603) (Ord. 2015-04, passed 12-14-2015) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.048 PARKED VEHICLES TO BE WHOLLY WITHIN MARKED SPACES.
   (A)   Lines and/or markings shall be painted or placed upon the surface of
the metered parking lots adjacent to each parking meter for the purpose of
delineating the parking space for which that meter shall be used. Every vehicle
parked adjacent to any parking meter shall be parked wholly within the lines or
markings so placed and applicable to that meter.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful and a violation of this subchapter for any
person:
      (1)   To park a vehicle across any such line or marking;
      (2)   To park a vehicle in such a position that the vehicle shall not be
within the area so delineated by the lines or markings; or
      (3)   To park a vehicle elsewhere in any such lot than in an individual
parking space adjacent to a parking meter.
(Prior Code, § 15-604) (Ord. 2015-04, passed 12-14-2015) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.049 MANNER OF PARKING AT METERS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle in any metered parking
lot:
   (A)   Otherwise than with the front of the parked vehicle nearest to the
parking meter applicable to that vehicle; or
   (B)   With any part of the vehicle touching the meter post or head or the
raised base or barrier on which meters are erected.
(Prior Code, § 15-605) (Ord. 2015-04, passed 12-14-2015) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.050 COIN DEPOSIT IN METER; OVERTIME PARKING UNLAWFUL.
   (A)   Whenever a vehicle is to be parked in any metered parking lot at any
time when the lot is open for use and the meters are to be in operation, the
driver of the vehicle, upon entering the parking space, shall immediately
deposit, or cause to be deposited, in the proper parking meter one or more
proper coins of the United States of America as specified in the legend on the
parking meter. Upon deposit of the coin or coins and placing the meter in
operation, the parking space may be lawfully occupied by the vehicle for the
time indicated on the meter.
   (B)   If any vehicle remains in any such parking space for such length of
time that the meter indicates that the lawful parking time has expired, that
vehicle shall be considered as being parked overtime, and the parking of a
vehicle overtime shall be a violation of this subchapter. Provided, every hour
that a vehicle remains parked at a meter showing a violation shall constitute a
separate violation of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 15-606) (Ord. 2015-04, passed 12-14-2015) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.051 DEPOSITING SUBSTITUTE FOR COIN IN METER UNLAWFUL.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit in any parking meter
installed under the provisions of this subchapter any slug or other substitute
for a coin of the United States.
(Prior Code, § 15-607) (Ord. 2015-04, passed 12-14-2015) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.052 REMAINING PARKED AT METER SHOWING VIOLATION UNLAWFUL.
   It shall be unlawful and a violation of this subchapter for any person to
permit a vehicle to remain in a parking space adjacent to a parking meter
installed under this subchapter when that meter displays a signal indicating
that the vehicle has already been parked there beyond the period of time
prescribed for that parking space, or the time for which a coin or coins was
deposited in that meter for the parking of that vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 15-608) (Ord. 2015-04, passed 12-14-2015) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.053 TAMPERING WITH METER UNLAWFUL.
   It shall be unlawful and a violation of this subchapter for any person to
deface, tamper with, open or willfully break, destroy or impair the usefulness
of any parking meter installed under the provisions of this subchapter.
Provided, nothing in this subchapter shall apply to the servicing or opening of
parking meters by officers, employees or police officers of the borough under
the direction of the borough.
(Prior Code, § 15-609) (Ord. 2015-04, passed 12-14-2015) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.054 METERED PARKING LOTS FOR CERTAIN TYPES OF VEHICLES ONLY.
   The metered parking lots established by this part shall be for the use of
passenger cars, passenger vans and pickup trucks only, and it shall be unlawful
for any person to park any other type of vehicle in any of those lots.
(Prior Code, § 15-610) (Ord. 2015-04, passed 12-14-2015) Penalty, see §
72.999
OFF-STREET UNMETERED PARKING
§ 72.070 UNMETERED PARKING LOTS.
   The following are established as the unmetered parking lots operated by the
borough.
 
Lot        Location Maximum Parking Time Days in Operation Hours in Operation
[Reserved]
 
(Prior Code, § 15-701) (Ord. 2015-04, passed 12-14-2015) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.071 RESERVED PARKING SPACES FOR PERSONS WITH A DISABILITY MAY BE PROVIDED.
   (A)   The borough, at its discretion, may provide, at convenient and
suitable locations in one or more of the unmetered parking lots, reserved
parking spaces for persons with a disability, and shall designate those spaces
by appropriate signs. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this subchapter
for any person to park in any such reserved parking space any vehicle unless
that vehicle bears or displays either a “registration plate for persons with a
disability,” a “parking placard for persons with a disability,” a “registration
plate for veterans with a disability” or a “placard for veterans with a
disability.”
   (B)   Provided, all provisions, requirements and restrictions contained in
the other sections of this subchapter shall apply to vehicles lawfully parked
in reserved parking spaces for persons with a disability.
(Prior Code, § 15-702) (Ord. 2015-04, passed 12-14-2015) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.072 PARKING OVERTIME OR WHEN LOT CLOSED UNLAWFUL.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle or to allow a vehicle
to remain parked in any unmetered parking lot:
   (A)   For longer than the maximum parking time prescribed by §
72.070 of this chapter; or
   (B)   At any time when the lot is not in operation and is closed to public
use.
(Prior Code, § 15-703) (Ord. 2015-04, passed 12-14-2015) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.073 UNMETERED LOTS FOR CERTAIN TYPES OF VEHICLES.
   The unmetered parking lots established by §
72.070 of this chapter shall be for the use of passenger cars, passenger vans
and pickup trucks only, and it shall be unlawful for any person to park any
other kind or class of vehicle in any such lot.
(Prior Code, § 15-704) (Ord. 2015-04, passed 12-14-2015) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.074 MANNER OF PARKING.
   (A)   Every vehicle parked in an unmetered parking lot shall be parked
wholly within the lines bounding or marking the individual parking space
assigned to that vehicle, and shall be parked headed into the parking space.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person:
      (1)   To park a vehicle in a space not rented by him or her;
      (2)   To park a vehicle otherwise than as required by this section; or
      (3)   To park a vehicle elsewhere than in an individual parking space,
the prohibited areas including, but not limited to, the access and exit
driveways and turning and maneuvering spaces.
(Prior Code, § 15-705) (Ord. 2015-04, passed 12-14-2015) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.075 PARKING ON RENTAL BASIS ONLY.
   The parking spaces in the unmetered parking lots shall be available for
parking on a monthly rental basis only. The rental fee shall be fixed by the
borough by a resolution and shall be for a calendar month or the part of a
calendar month remaining after the rental arrangements are made. The rental fee
shall be paid in advance to the borough, for the use of the borough, and after
the first month shall be automatically renewable until the renter notifies the
borough that he or she wishes to terminate the rental arrangements. At any
time, however, the borough may, by amending §
72.070 of this chapter, discontinue provision of a specific unmetered parking
lot or a portion of the parking spaces in any such lot, or may change any
unmetered parking lot, or part of an unmetered parking lot, to a metered
parking lot or to metered parking spaces. The rental parking spaces shall be
assigned by the borough or official designated by the borough. The name of the
renter of a parking space and/or the numbers and/or letters on the registration
tag of the vehicle entitled to be parked there shall be posted by the borough
at the rental space or shall be painted on the surface of that parking space.
(Prior Code, § 15-706) (Ord. 2015-04, passed 12-14-2015) Penalty, see §
72.999
REMOVAL AND IMPOUNDMENT OF ILLEGALLY PARKED VEHICLES
§ 72.090 APPLICABILITY AND SCOPE.
   This subchapter is enacted under the authority of § 6109(a)(22) of the
Vehicle Code, 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 6109(a)(22), and gives authority to the borough to
remove and impound those vehicles which are parked in a tow-away zone and in
violation of the parking regulations of this chapter. Vehicles which have been
abandoned (as defined by the Vehicle Code, 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 102) or which are
parked in such a manner as to interfere with traffic or pose a hazard to others
may be towed under the provisions of the Commonwealth Vehicle Code, 75
Pa.C.S.A. §§ 101 et seq.
(Prior Code, § 15-801) (Ord. 2015-04, passed 12-14-2015) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.091 AUTHORITY TO REMOVE AND IMPOUND.
   The borough shall have the authority to remove and impound, or to order the
removal and impounding of, any vehicle parked overtime or otherwise illegally;
provided that the circumstances of its parking were within the conditions
stated in §
72.090 of this chapter. Provided, no such vehicle shall be removed or impounded
except in strict adherence to the provisions of this subchapter or the
provisions of the Vehicle Code, 75 Pa.C.S.A. §§ 101 et seq.
(Prior Code, § 15-802) (Ord. 2015-04, passed 12-14-2015) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.092 TOW-AWAY ZONES DESIGNATED.
   The following designated streets and/or parking lots are hereby established
as tow-away zones. Signs shall be posted to place the public on notice that
their vehicles may be towed for violation of borough parking regulations.
 
Street     Side Between Parking Lot
[Reserved]
 
(Prior Code, § 15-803) (Ord. 2015-04, passed 12-14-2015) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.093 DESIGNATION OF APPROVED STORAGE GARAGES; BONDING; TOWING AND STORAGE.
   (A)   The removal and impounding of vehicles under this subchapter shall be
done only by “approved storage garages,” which shall be designated from time to
time by the borough. Every such garage shall submit evidence to the borough
that it is bonded or has acquired liability insurance in an amount satisfactory
to the borough as sufficient to indemnify owners of impounded vehicles against
loss or damage to those vehicles while in the custody of the garage keeper for
the purpose of towing or storage.
   (B)   (1)   The approved storage garage shall submit to the borough its
schedule of charges for the towing and storage of vehicles under this
subchapter and, when the schedule is approved by the borough, those charges
shall be adhered to by the approved storage garage; no different schedule of
charges shall be demanded of or collected from any person whose vehicle is
removed or impounded under this subchapter by any approved storage garage.
      (2)   The borough shall delete from its list of approved storage garages
any garage that makes any unapproved charge in connection with any vehicle
removed or impounded under this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 15-804) (Ord. 2015-04, passed 12-14-2015) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.094 PAYMENT OF TOWING AND STORAGE CHARGES.
   The payment of towing and storage charges shall not relieve the owner or
driver of any vehicle from liability for any fine or penalty for the violation
of the provisions of this subchapter for which the vehicle was removed or
impounded.
(Prior Code, § 15-805) (Ord. 2015-04, passed 12-14-2015) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.095 RECLAMATION COSTS.
   In order to reclaim his or her vehicle, the owner shall pay towing and
storage costs plus a $50 fee (subject to change via resolution), of which $25
shall be transferred to the Commonwealth Department of Transportation by the
garage to which the vehicle was taken.
(Prior Code, § 15-806) (Ord. 2015-04, passed 12-14-2015) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.096 RECORDS OF VEHICLES REMOVED AND IMPOUNDED.
   The borough shall cause a record to be kept of all vehicles impounded under
this chapter and shall be able at all reasonable times to furnish the owners,
or the agents of the owners, of those vehicles with information as to the place
of storage of the vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 15-807) (Ord. 2015-04, passed 12-14-2015) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.097 RESTRICTIONS UPON REMOVAL OF VEHICLES.
   No vehicle shall be removed under the authority of this subchapter or the
Vehicle Code, 75 Pa.C.S.A. §§ 101 et seq., if, at the time of the intended
removal, the owner or the person for the time being in charge of the vehicle is
present and expresses a willingness and intention to remove the vehicle
immediately.
(Prior Code, § 15-808) (Ord. 2015-04, passed 12-14-2015) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.098 REPORTS AND DISPOSITION OF UNCLAIMED VEHICLES.
   If, after a period of 15 days, the vehicle in storage remains unclaimed, a
report shall be filed with PennDOT in accordance with § 7311 of the Vehicle
Code, 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 7311, by the person having legal custody of the vehicle.
If the vehicle has not been claimed after 30 days, the vehicle may be
transferred to a licensed salvor, who will then be responsible for filing the
proper reports and disposing of the vehicle in accordance with the provisions
of Chapter 73 of the Vehicle Code (75 Pa.C.S.A. §§ 7301 et seq.).
(Prior Code, § 15-810) (Ord. 2015-04, passed 12-14-2015) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person who violates any provision of §§
72.001 to
72.009 of this chapter, upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of
not more than $50 (subject to change via resolution) and costs. Provided, it
shall be the duty of the parking enforcement personnel of the borough to report
to the appropriate official all violations of any provision of §§
72.001 to
72.009 indicating, in each case, the section violated; the license number of
the vehicle involved in the violation; the location where the violation took
place; and any other facts that might be necessary in order to secure a clear
understanding of the circumstances attending the violation. The person making
the report shall also attach to or place upon every such vehicle a notice
stating that the vehicle was parked in violation of §§
72.001 to
72.009.
(Prior Code, § 15-411)
   (C)   (1)   Any person who violates any provision of §§
72.020 to
72.029 of this chapter, with the exception of §
72.028, and who fails to pay the fine set forth in this chapter shall be cited
within 15 days of the violation and, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a
fine of not more than $50 (subject to change via resolution) and costs.
      (2)   Any person who violates any provision of §
72.028 of this chapter, upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of
not more than $1,000 (subject to change via resolution) and costs and, in
default of payment of fine and costs, to imprisonment for not more than 30
days.
(Prior Code, § 15-511)
   (D)   (1)   Any person who violates any provision of §§
72.045 to
72.054 of this chapter, with the exception of §
72.053, and who fails to pay the fine set forth in this chapter shall be cited
within 15 days of the violation and, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a
fine of not more than $50 (subject to change via resolution) and costs.
      (2)   Any person who violates any provision of §
72.053, upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than
$1,000 (subject to change via resolution) and costs and, in default of payment
of fine and costs, to imprisonment for not more than 30 days.
(Prior Code, § 15-612)
   (E)   Any person who violates any provision of §§
72.070 to
72.075 of this chapter, upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of
not more than $50 (subject to change via resolution) and costs. Provided, it
shall be the duty of the parking enforcement personnel of the borough to report
to the appropriate official all violations of any provision of §§
72.070 to
72.075, indicating, in each case, the section violated; the license number of
the vehicle involved in the violation; the location where the violation took
place; and any other facts that might be necessary in order to secure a clear
understanding of the circumstances attending the violation. The person making
the report shall also attach to or place upon every such vehicle a notice
stating that the vehicle was parked in violation of this §§
72.070 to
72.075.
(Prior Code, § 15-707)
   (F)   Any person who shall violate any provision of §§
72.090 to
72.098 of this chapter, upon conviction thereof, shall be sentenced to pay a
fine of $50 (subject to change via resolution) together with all costs of
disposing of the vehicle under the provisions of the Vehicle Code, 75 P.S. §§
7301 et seq.
(Prior Code, § 15-809)
(Ord. 2015-04, passed 12-14-2015)
CHAPTER 73: RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
Section
Pedalcycles and Nonmotorized Vehicles
   
73.01   Riding or parking pedalcycles on sidewalks along certain streets
prohibited
   
73.02   Pushcart usage restrictions
   
73.03   Skates, skateboards, coasters, sleds and other toy vehicles
 
   
73.99   Penalty
PEDALCYCLES AND NONMOTORIZED VEHICLES
§ 73.01 RIDING OR PARKING PEDALCYCLES ON SIDEWALKS ALONG CERTAIN STREETS
PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to ride or to park a pedalcycle on the
sidewalk along the following portions of the streets in the borough.
 
Street     Side Between
[Reserved]
 
(Prior Code, § 15-1001) (Ord. 2015-04, passed 12-14-2015) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.02 PUSHCART USAGE RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      PUSHCART. A vehicle, including a pedalcycle, propelled solely by human
power and used or intended for use for the display, transport, exhibit or sale
of goods, wares or merchandise.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to propel a pushcart upon any
sidewalk in any business district except as necessary to move the pushcart to a
location from which it is to be loaded or unloaded or from which goods, wares
or merchandise are to be sold or dispensed under a permit from the borough as
provided in division (C) below.
   (C)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to park a pushcart upon any
sidewalk except for the purpose of selling or dispensing from that pushcart
goods, wares or merchandise to passers-by under permit from the borough. Every
such permit shall be issued to the person making application for the permit
upon payment of a fee, which shall be for the use of the borough, set by the
borough by resolution.
      (2)   The permit shall be granted to the applicant upon payment of the
fee and upon the applicant signing an agreement with the borough that he or she
shall be bound by the conditions imposed by the borough and made a part of the
permit, dealing with the following matters:
         (a)   Restricting or limiting the parking of the pushcart to one or
more stated locations upon the sidewalk and to stated days and hours at each
location;
         (b)   Stating requirements to be adhered to in connection with the
disposal of garbage and refuse resulting from the operations carried on; and
         (c)   Requiring that there be no violation of any law, ordinance or
regulation pertaining to health, sanitation and the handling of food or drink.
(Prior Code, § 15-1002) (Ord. 2015-04, passed 12-14-2015) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.03 SKATES, SKATEBOARDS, COASTERS, SLEDS AND OTHER TOY VEHICLES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to ride on a sled upon any
sidewalk in the borough, or upon any roadway unless that roadway is on a
portion of a street blocked off for sledding by authority of §§
70.05 or
71.14 of this code. Provided, nothing in this section shall prevent a
pedestrian from pulling a sled, with or without a rider, upon a sidewalk.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in roller-skating or
skateboarding, or to ride upon or propel any coaster or other toy vehicle,
upon:
      (1)   Any street, except in order to cross the roadway; or
      (2)   Any sidewalk located in a business district, except that nothing in
this section shall prevent a pedestrian from pulling a coaster or other toy
vehicle, with or without a rider, upon a sidewalk.
(Prior Code, § 15-1003) (Ord. 2015-04, passed 12-14-2015) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person who violates any provision of §
73.01 of this chapter, upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of $5
(subject to change via resolution) and costs.
(Prior Code, § 15-1001)
   (C)   Any person who violates any provision of §
73.02 of this chapter, or any condition of any permit granted under §
73.02, upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 (subject to
change via resolution) and costs.
(Prior Code, § 15-1002)
   (D)   Any person who violates any provision of §
73.03 of this chapter, upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of $5
(subject to change via resolution) and costs.
(Prior Code, § 15-1003)
(Ord. 2015-04, passed 12-14-2015)
CHAPTER 74: TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
Schedule
   
I.   Maximum speed limits on certain streets
   
II.   Through highways established
   
III.   Truck traffic restricted on certain streets
   
IV.   Stop intersections established
SCHEDULE I. MAXIMUM SPEED LIMITS ON CERTAIN STREETS.
   (A)   Maximum speed limits are established on portions of specified streets,
as follows, and it shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle on any
part of a street where a maximum speed limit applies at a higher speed than the
maximum prescribed for that part of the street.
 
Street                          Between       Maximum Speed Limit
All streets and alleys, except                25 mph, except on those portions
those upon which a 35 mph speed               of streets and alleys where a
limit                                         lesser speed limit is applicable
                                              under the law
Hancock Avenue                  Entire length 35 mph
 
   (B)   Any person who violates any provision of this schedule, upon
conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of $35 (subject to change via
resolution) and costs. Any person exceeding the maximum speed limit by more
than five mph shall pay an additional fine of $2 per mile (subject to change
via resolution) for each mile in excess of five mph over the maximum speed
limit.
(Prior Code, § 15-201) (Ord. 2015-04, passed 12-14-2015)
SCHEDULE II. THROUGH HIGHWAYS ESTABLISHED.
   (A)   The following highways are established as through highways, thus
authorizing stop or yield signs to be erected facing traffic approaching every
intersection with the through highway, except for those intersections with
traffic signals, or with exceptions or modifications as indicated below. Every
driver of a vehicle approaching a stop or yield sign authorized by this
schedule shall stop the vehicle or yield right-of-way as required by 75
Pa.C.S.A. § 3323(b) and 3323(c) of the Vehicle Code, as the case may be, and
shall not proceed into or across the through highway until he or she has
followed all applicable requirements of that section of the law.
 
Highway        Between
Hancock Avenue Entire extent
 
   (B)   Any person who violates any provision of this schedule, upon
conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 (subject to change via
resolution) and costs.
(Prior Code, § 15-212) (Ord. 2015-04, passed 12-14-2015)
SCHEDULE III. RESERVED.
SCHEDULE IV. STOP INTERSECTIONS ESTABLISHED.
   (A)   The following intersections (in addition to intersections with the
through highways established by
Chapter 74, Schedule II, of this code) are established as stop intersections,
and official stop signs shall be erected (or are ratified if previously
erected) in such a position as to face traffic approaching the second-named
street (the intersecting or through street) on the first-named street (the stop
street) in the direction or directions indicated for that intersection. Every
driver of a vehicle approaching the intersection on the first-named or stop
street, in the direction indicated in each case, shall stop the vehicle as
required by the Vehicle Code, 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 3323(b), and shall not proceed
into or across the second-named or intersecting or through street until he or
she has followed all applicable requirements of that section of the law.
Stop Street Intersecting or Through Street Direction of Travel
Stop Street     Intersecting or Through Street Direction of Travel
Chambers Street Thorn Street                   Eastbound and westbound
Chambers Street Walnut Street                  Southbound
Chestnut Street Thorn Street                   Westbound
Culp Street     Thorn Street                   Eastbound and westbound
Culp Street     Thorn Street                   Westbound
Elm Street      Thorn Street                   Westbound
Grove Street    Walnut Street                  Northbound
Hemlock Street  Thorn Street                   Westbound
Hickory Street  Thorn Street                   Westbound
Larch Street    Thorn Street                   Westbound
Maple Street    Middle Street                  Westbound
Middle Street   Chambers Street                Northbound and southbound
Middle Street   Chestnut Street                Northbound and southbound
Middle Street   Hemlock Street                 Southbound
Middle Street   Hickory Street                 Northbound and southbound
Middle Street   Larch Street                   Southbound
Middle Street   Oak Street                     Northbound and southbound
Middle Street   Pine Street                    Northbound and southbound
Oak Street      Thorn Street                   Westbound
Pine Street     Thorn Street                   Westbound
Poplar Street   Thorn Street                   Westbound
Thorn Street    Orr Avenue                     Northbound and southbound
Thorn Street    Walnut Street                  Southbound
Vista Drive     Orr Avenue                     Eastbound and westbound
Walnut Street   Chambers Street                Westbound
 
   (B)   Any person who violates any provision of this schedule, upon
conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 (subject to change via
resolution) and costs.
(Prior Code, § 15-213) (Ord. 2015-04, passed 12-14-2015)
CHAPTER 75: PARKING SCHEDULES
Schedule
   
I.   Parking prohibited at all times in ceratin locations
SCHEDULE I. PARKING PROHIBITED AT ALL TIMES IN CERATIN LOCATIONS.
   Parking shall be prohibited at all times in the following locations.
 
Street        Side      Between
Cherry Street Both      N/A
Grove Street  Southside Willow Run Road and Hancock Avenue
 
(Prior Code, § 15-402) (Ord. 2015-04, passed 12-14-2015) Penalty, see §
72.999
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   ANIMALS
      
91.   HEALTH AND SAFETY; NUISANCES
      
92.   FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
      
93.   PARKS AND RECREATION
CHAPTER 90: ANIMALS
Section
   
90.01   Definitions
   
90.02   Dog Warden; appointment and duties
   
90.03   Running at large unlawful
   
90.04   Seizing animals
   
90.05   Licensed dogs
   
90.06   Unlicensed dogs
 
   
90.99   Penalty
§ 90.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   EXOTIC ANIMAL OR PET. The type of animal that is not indigenous to the
commonwealth. Those EXOTIC ANIMALS that are indigenous to the commonwealth are
limited by law to two per household. A pet such as any type of potbelly pig or
farm animal or fowl not possessed at the time of the enactment of this section
is not permitted in the borough unless physical possession of said pet preceded
the enactment of this section.
   OWNER. The proprietorship of certain exotic animals, farm animals or fowl or
dogs includes every person having a right of property in such exotic animals,
farm animals or fowl or dogs, and every person who keeps or harbors such exotic
animals, farm animals or fowl or dogs, or has such in his or her care, and
every person who permits such exotic animals, farm animals or fowl or dogs to
remain on or about any premises occupied by him or her.
   RUNNING AT LARGE. Being upon any public highway, street, ally, park or any
other public land, or upon the property of another person other than the owner,
and not being accompanied by or under the control of the owner or any other
person having custody of said exotic animal, farm animal or fowl or dog.
(Prior Code, § 2-101) (Ord. 2005-2, passed 11-14-2005)
§ 90.02 DOG WARDEN; APPOINTMENT AND DUTIES.
   A dog warden shall be appointed by the Council for the borough to serve
during its pleasure. Such Warden shall have concurrent responsibility for the
enforcement of this chapter and of the Dog Law, §§ 1002 et seq. of the Act of
December 7, 1982, P.L. 784, No. 225, art. I et seq., 3 P.S. §§ 459-101 et seq.,
as amended and supplemented; provided, that he or she shall not have the power
to make arrests under this act of assembly or any other act or assembly or
ordinance of the borough.
(Prior Code, § 2-102) (Ord. 2005-2, passed 11-14-2005)
§ 90.03 RUNNING AT LARGE UNLAWFUL.
   It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dog or dogs, or exotic animals,
farm animals or fowl, to allow or permit such dog or dogs or exotic animals,
farm animals or fowl to run at large in the borough.
(Prior Code, § 2-103) (Ord. 2005-2, passed 11-14-2005) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.04 SEIZING ANIMALS.
   The Dog Warden or any police officer or constable may seize any exotic
animal, farm animal or fowl or dog found at large in the borough. Such exotic
animal, farm animal or fowl or dog is to be impounded in a licensed kennel.
(Prior Code, § 2-104) (Ord. 2005-2, passed 11-14-2005)
§ 90.05 LICENSED DOGS.
   (A)   The Dog Warden, State Police or Constable shall notify the owner of a
licensed dog by registered or certified mail, with return receipt, that the dog
is impounded and will be disposed of in five days if not claimed.
   (B)   Five days after the return receipt has been received and the dog has
not been claimed, the dog may be sold or be given to a humane society or
association for the prevention of cruelty to animals in accordance with § 302
of the Dog Law, §§ 1002 et seq. of the Act of December 7, 1982, P.L. 784, No.
225, art. I et seq., 3 P.S. § 459-302.
(Prior Code, § 2-105) (Ord. 2005-2, passed 11-14-2005; Ord. 2015-04, passed 12-
14-2015)
§ 90.06 UNLICENSED DOGS.
   Pursuant to 3 P.S. § 459-303(c), as amended and supplemented, unlicensed
dogs that are seized shall be held in such kennel for 48 hours, and if not
claimed, may be humanely killed or given to a humane society or association for
the prevention of cruelty to animals.
Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Each time that an exotic animal, farm animal or fowl or dog is seized
within a 30-day period from the previous seizure, the owner shall pay a fine of
$50 (subject to change via resolution) to the borough, as well as reasonable
fees for keeping the animal in a kennel in the amount as established from time
to time by resolution of the Council.
   (B)   Any person allowing an exotic animal, farm animal or fowl or dog to
run at large a third time within a 30-day period from the first seizure in
violation of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a
fine of not more than $1,000 (subject to change via resolution) plus costs and,
in default of payment of said fines and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to
exceed 30 days.
(Prior Code, § 2-107) (Ord. 2005-2, passed 11-14-2005)
CHAPTER 91: HEALTH AND SAFETY; NUISANCES
Section
Grass, Weeds and Other Vegetation
   
91.01   Definition
   
91.02   Nuisance under certain conditions
   
91.03   Owner or occupant responsibility
   
91.04   Notice; borough authority to do work, collect fees
Nuisances
   
91.15   Definitions
   
91.16   Unlawful to create or maintain
   
91.17   Removal or abatement
   
91.18   Exceptions
Discarded Vehicles and Appliances
   
91.30   Definitions
   
91.31   Unlawful to accumulate junked, abandoned or discarded items
   
91.32   Prosecution
 
   
91.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Abandoned vehicle offenses, see
Chapter 131
GRASS, WEEDS AND OTHER VEGETATION
§ 91.01 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PERSON. Any natural person, partnership, association, firm or corporation.
The singular shall include the plural and the plural the singular, and the
masculine shall include the feminine and the neuter.
(Prior Code, § 10-101) (Ord. 109, passed 8-19-1966)
§ 91.02 NUISANCE UNDER CERTAIN CONDITIONS.
   No person owning or occupying any real estate within the borough shall
permit any grass or weeds, or any vegetation whatsoever not edible or planted
for some useful or ornamental purpose, to grow or remain upon such premises so
as to exceed a height of six inches, or to throw off any unpleasant or noxious
odor or to conceal any filthy deposit or to create or produce pollen. Any
grass, weeds or other vegetation growing upon any premises in the borough in
violation of any of the provisions of this subchapter is declared to be a
nuisance and detrimental to the health, safety, cleanliness and comfort of the
inhabitants of the borough.
(Prior Code, § 10-102) (Ord. 109, passed 8-19-1966) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.03 OWNER OR OCCUPANT RESPONSIBILITY.
   The owner of any premises, as to vacant or unoccupied premises or premises
occupied by the owner, and the occupant thereof, in case of premises occupied
by other than the owner thereof, shall remove, trim or cut all grass, weeds or
other vegetation growing or remaining upon such premises in violation of any of
the provisions of §
91.02 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 10-103) (Ord. 109, passed 8-19-1966)
§ 91.04 NOTICE; BOROUGH AUTHORITY TO DO WORK, COLLECT FEES.
   The Borough Council, or any officer or employee of the borough designated
thereby for the purpose, is hereby authorized to give notice, by personal
service or by the United States mail, to the owner or occupant, as the case may
be, of any premises whereon grass, weeds or other vegetation is growing or
remaining in violation of any of the provisions of §
90.02 of this chapter directing and requiring such owner or occupant, as the
case may be, to remove, trim or cut such grass, weeds or other vegetation so as
to conform to the requirements of this subchapter within five days after
issuance of such notice. In case any person shall neglect, fail or refuse to
comply with such notice within the period of time stated therein, the borough
authorities may remove, trim or cut such grass, weeds or other vegetation, and
the cost thereof, together with any additional penalty authorized by law, may
be collected by the borough from such person in default in the manner provided
by law.
(Prior Code, § 10-104) (Ord. 109, passed 8-19-1966) Penalty, see §
91.99
NUISANCES
§ 91.15 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   In this subchapter, the singular shall include the plural, the plural
shall include the singular and the masculine shall include the feminine and the
neuter.
   (B)   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      NUISANCE.
         (a)   Any use of property within the borough, or any condition upon
property within the borough, that, other than infrequently, causes or results
in:
            1.   Annoyance or discomfort to persons beyond the boundaries of
that property;
            2.   Interference with the health and/or safety of persons beyond
the boundaries of that property or of persons who might reasonably be expected
to enter upon or be in that property; or
            3.   Disturbance to or interference with the peaceful use of the
property of others within the borough, in any case taking into consideration
the location of the use or condition and the nature and condition of the
surrounding neighborhood.
         (b)   Specifically, the word NUISANCE shall include, but shall not be
limited to, the following:
            1.   Loud playing of radios, television sets, juke boxes,
amplifiers and other sound devices so as to be heard beyond the premises from
which the sound emanates;
            2.   Operation of gasoline-powered lawnmowers or gasoline-powered
chainsaws on any weekday before 8:00 a.m. or on any Sunday before 12:00 p.m.;
            3.   Operating model airplanes equipped with gasoline engines on
any public street or on any playground;
            4.   Keeping or harboring any dog or other animal or fowl which, by
creation of odor or by frequent howling or barking or other noise, particularly
by barking after 10:00 p.m. or before 6:00 a.m., annoys or disturbs the
neighborhood or a number of persons;
            5.   Maintaining or permitting the maintenance of any of the
following dangerous conditions, structures or premises:
               a.   Open wells or cisterns;
               b.   Open excavations;
               c.   Unfinished buildings, foundations or other structures;
               d.   Dangerous placement of materials or equipment;
               e.   Lakes, ponds or swimming pools not properly safeguarded;
and
               f.   Stagnant water in pools in which mosquitoes, flies or
insects multiply.
            6.   Carrying on any building or road construction, excavation or
trenching, or the operation of heavy equipment or trucks in connection
therewith, at any time on Sunday or a legal holiday, or on any other day of the
year at any time between 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., without a special permit
issued by the Borough Secretary. That special permit shall be issued only if it
is shown that the construction work must proceed as a matter of emergency or
that it can be carried on in such a manner or in such a place that the public
or residents will not be annoyed or disturbed by that construction work;
            7.   Carrying on construction work in such a manner that dirt is
carried by wind onto adjacent properties or that mud is tracked or drained into
streets adjacent to the project;
            8.   Carrying on any mechanical work in the nature of that done in
a machine shop, auto body or repair shop, or similar establishment, at any time
on Sunday or on any weekday after the hour of 9:00 p.m. or before the hour of
7:00 a.m.;
            9.   Washing, tracking or otherwise depositing dirt, mud, soil,
stone or debris upon or onto the pavement of any street without removing the
material before 5:00 p.m. of the day on which the material was deposited;
            10.   Using any property or operating any business or other
activity so as to permit or cause smoke, soot, cinders, fly ash, dust, mud,
dirt, acid, noxious or offensive fumes, gases or odors to be carried off the
premises, or to cause any water to become polluted by sewage, industrial
wastes, acid or other substances, or to cause a glare from lights or noise of
such character as to cause annoyance to residents or interference with the
normal use of adjacent properties; and
            11.   The creation or maintenance of ATTRACTIVE NUISANCES, which is
the leaving of a dangerous instrumentality which by its character is dangerous
and attractive to children and in a place frequented by children.
      PERSON. Any natural person, partnership, association, firm or
corporation.
(Prior Code, § 10-201) (Ord. 182, passed 9-12-1983)
§ 91.16 UNLAWFUL TO CREATE OR MAINTAIN.
   It shall be unlawful and a violation of this subchapter for any person to
create, continue, cause, maintain or permit any nuisance at any place within
the borough.
(Prior Code, § 10-202) (Ord. 182, passed 9-12-1983) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.17 REMOVAL OR ABATEMENT.
   Any person who creates, continues, causes, maintains or permits to exist any
nuisance at any place within the borough shall, within ten days after notice
from the Borough Council to do so, remove or abate that nuisance. If that
person fails, neglects or refuses to abate the nuisance within the time limit,
the Council shall have the authority, in person or by its agents and/or
employees, to remove or abate the nuisance and, in so doing, shall have the
authority to enter upon the property of the person in default. Thereupon, the
Council shall collect the cost and expense of the abatement or removal from the
person who created, continued, caused or maintained the nuisance and/or
permitted it to exist, that person having failed, neglected or refused to
remove or abate the nuisance, with an additional amount of 10%, in the manner
provided for the collection of municipal claims or by an action in assumpsit.
Provided, the cost and expense may be in addition to any penalty imposed under
§
91.99(C) of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 10-203) (Ord. 182, passed 9-12-1983) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.18 EXCEPTIONS.
   This subchapter shall not be construed to be the sole means for the
abatement of nuisances within the borough, and nothing shall preclude any
person from proceeding individually or with other injured persons to effect the
abatement of a private nuisance. Furthermore, in the exercise of the powers
conferred in this subchapter, the borough may institute proceedings in equity.
(Prior Code, § 10-205) (Ord. 182, passed 9-12-1983)
DISCARDED VEHICLES AND APPLIANCES
§ 91.30 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONED. Any item resting for 96 hours or more and which is inoperable,
without current registration plates, certificate or inspection, or in such a
condition as to be unusable.
   APPLIANCE. A stove, refrigerator, television, furnace, water heater, water
softener, washer, dryer or household article used to perform any necessary work
in a household, or any article used in business to increase production or to
speed, ease or eliminate work.
   BOAT. Any vessel capable of transporting a person on any river, stream,
creek, lake or ocean.
   DISCARDED. Any item resting for 96 hours or more with no known or apparent
owner.
   HOUSEHOLD FURNISHING. All items normally found and used in a home.
   JUNKED. Items sold or to be sold for scrap, being stripped or being used or
sold for parts.
   PERSON. A natural person, the members of an unincorporated association, all
of the partners of a partnership and the officers and board of directors of a
corporation.
   TRAILER. A wheeled device used as a means of carrying, hauling or conveying
any vehicle, person, animal, object or boat.
   VEHICLES. An automobile, motorcycle, motorbike, minibike, bicycle, go-cart,
truck or other wheeled means of conveyance, motorized or self-propelled.
(Prior Code, § 10-301) (Ord. 165, passed 9-10-1979)
§ 91.31 UNLAWFUL TO ACCUMULATE JUNKED, ABANDONED OR DISCARDED ITEMS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to accumulate or store any junked,
abandoned or discarded vehicle, trailer, boat, appliance or household
furnishing on private or public property within the borough.
(Prior Code, § 10-302) (Ord. 165, passed 9-10-1979) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.32 PROSECUTION.
   All prosecutions for violation of this subchapter shall be brought in the
name of the borough before the magisterial district judge having jurisdiction
in the borough, and shall be commenced by information and warrant, citation or
complaint and summons, and shall be directed to and be served by a constable or
other proper person. Warrants shall be returnable forthwith, and upon such
return, like proceedings shall be had as in case of summary convictions.
(Prior Code, § 10-304) (Ord. 165, passed 9-10-1979; Ord. 2015-04, passed 12-14-
2015)
§ 91.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of §§
91.01 to
91.04 of this chapter, upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a
magisterial district judge in the manner provided for the enforcement of
summary offenses under the Commonwealth Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be
sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $1,000 (subject to
change via resolution) plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and
costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 90 days. Each day that a
violation of §§
91.01 to
91.04 continues or each section of §§
91.01 to
91.04 which shall be found to have been violated shall constitute a separate
offense.
(Prior Code, § 10-105)
   (C)   Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of §§
91.15 to
91.18 of this chapter, upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a
magisterial district judge in the manner provided for the enforcement of
summary offenses under the Commonwealth Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be
sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $1,000 (subject to
change via resolution) plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and
costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 90 days. Each day that a
violation of §§
91.15 to
91.18 continues or each section of §§
91.15 to
91.18 which shall be found to have been violated shall constitute a separate
offense.
(Prior Code, § 10-204)
   (D)   Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of §§
91.30 to
91.32 of this chapter, upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a
magisterial district judge in the manner provided for the enforcement of
summary offenses under the Commonwealth Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be
sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $25 nor more than $1,000 (subject to
change via resolution) plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and
costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 90 days. Each day that a
violation of §§
91.30 to
91.32 continues or each section of §§
91.30 to
91.32 which shall be found to have been violated shall constitute a separate
offense.
(Prior Code, § 10-303)
(Ord. 109, passed 8-19-1966; Ord. 165, passed 9-10-1979; Ord. 182, passed 9-12-
1983; Ord. 204A, passed 2-13-1989; Ord. 2015-04, passed 12-14-2015)
CHAPTER 92: FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
Section
Fire Protection
   
92.01   Fire Department rendering fire service outside borough
   
92.02   Outside fire service requires highways passable for fire apparatus
   
92.03   Contract required for outside fire service
   
92.04   Compensation and conditions stated in contract
   
92.05   Mutual aid agreements for outside fire service
   
92.06   Contracts subject to Fire Department approval
Emergency Service Cost Reimbursement
   
92.20   Authority; findings; purpose
   
92.21   Recovery of costs
   
92.22   Responsibility of the borough
   
92.23   Revocation of grant of authority
Open Burning
   
92.35   Short title
   
92.36   Definitions
   
92.37   Prohibition against outdoor burning
   
92.38   Minimum distance
   
92.39   Attendance of fires
   
92.40   Hours and days for burning
   
92.41   Prohibition against odor
   
92.42   Notification of intent
   
92.43   Exceptions generally
   
92.44   Exemption for recreational fires
   
92.45   Prohibition against burning
   
92.46   Authority to extinguish outdoor fires
   
92.47   Enforcement
 
   
92.99   Penalty
FIRE PROTECTION
§ 92.01 FIRE DEPARTMENT RENDERING FIRE SERVICE OUTSIDE BOROUGH.
   The Oklahoma Volunteer Fire Department No. 1, with its apparatus, equipment
and personnel, may render fire service outside the limits of the borough under
certain conditions.
(Prior Code, § 7-101) (Ord. 78, passed 11-6-1961)
§ 92.02 OUTSIDE FIRE SERVICE REQUIRES HIGHWAYS PASSABLE FOR FIRE APPARATUS.
   This fire service shall not be extended to any section of any area which is
not reached by highways in good passable condition for fire apparatus; and the
officer in charge of said apparatus shall make every reasonable effort to reach
the fire, and his or her judgment shall be final as to when and where the roads
are passable for said apparatus.
(Prior Code, § 7-102) (Ord. 78, passed 11-6-1961)
§ 92.03 CONTRACT REQUIRED FOR OUTSIDE FIRE SERVICE.
   No fire service shall be extended to any property in any township or borough
unless the proper authorities of such township or borough shall enter into a
contract with this borough for such service.
(Prior Code, § 7-103) (Ord. 78, passed 11-6-1961)
§ 92.04 COMPENSATION AND CONDITIONS STATED IN CONTRACT.
   The compensation and conditions for fire service in a township or borough
shall be stated in a contract or agreement entered into between this borough
and the township or borough.
(Prior Code, § 7-104) (Ord. 78, passed 11-6-1961)
§ 92.05 MUTUAL AID AGREEMENTS FOR OUTSIDE FIRE SERVICE.
   Fire service shall be rendered, without charge, to any borough or township
which maintains an organized fire department and enters into a reciprocal
agreement with this borough for mutual aid fire service.
(Prior Code, § 7-105) (Ord. 78, passed 11-6-1961)
§ 92.06 CONTRACTS SUBJECT TO FIRE DEPARTMENT APPROVAL.
   No contract for fire service herein provided for shall be entered into until
approved by the Oklahoma Volunteer Fire Department No. 1.
(Prior Code, § 7-106) (Ord. 78, passed 11-6-1961)
EMERGENCY SERVICE COST REIMBURSEMENT
§ 92.20 AUTHORITY; FINDINGS; PURPOSE.
   (A)   Authority. Under 8 Pa.C.S. § 1202, the borough has the authority to
make rules and regulations for the government of fire companies located within
the borough.
   (B)   Findings. The borough recognizes that the duties of volunteer fire
companies require specialized emergency rescue tools and equipment, emergency
rescue materials, hazardous material abatement equipment and hazardous
abatement materials during emergency responses. The Borough Council recognizes
that such tools and equipment place a financial burden on volunteer fire
companies, and the replacement of such materials and specialized training add
to the additional financial burden for volunteer fire companies.
   (C)   Purpose. To grant the borough’s Volunteer Fire Department the
authority to seek reimbursement for the reasonable cost of responding to such
incidents, either directly or in coordination with the Office of Emergency
Management.
(Prior Code, § 7-202) (Ord. 2006-1, passed 1-3-2006)
§ 92.21 RECOVERY OF COSTS.
   (A)   The borough authorizes the Fire Department to recover the reasonable
cost of emergency rescue tools, equipment and materials; hazardous material
abatement tools, equipment and materials; and personnel hours involving any
hazardous material, environmental, fire safety and/or rescue incident or
operation, including vehicular accidents.
   (B)   The reasonable costs that are outlined above may be recovered either
directly by the Fire Department or through a third-party billing service as an
authorized agent for the collection of such costs.
   (C)   The Fire Department or third-party billing service shall only have the
authority to recover the aforementioned costs from the applicable insurance
company/carrier.
   (D)   The reimbursement rates for the aforementioned tools, equipment and
materials shall be set by the Fire Department from time to time and shall be
only applied to the recovery costs arising out of incidents that occurred
subsequent to the setting of the rates. These rates shall be approved by the
borough and be kept on file in the Borough Building.
   (E)   In addition to the aforementioned reasonable costs, the Fire
Department or third-party billing service shall be authorized to collect
reasonable interest, as well as a reasonable administrative fee for collecting
the same, and any and all additional fees as may be authorized by the Hazardous
Material and Emergency Planning and Response Act, 35 P.S. §§ 6022.101 et seq.,
or authorized by any other statute or law.
(Prior Code, § 7-203) (Ord. 2006-1, passed 1-3-2006)
§ 92.22 RESPONSIBILITY OF THE BOROUGH.
   (A)   The borough shall not be responsible for any aspect of the recovery of
costs under this subchapter.
   (B)   The borough shall not take any steps to assist the Fire Department or
any third-party billing service in the recovery of costs under this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 7-204) (Ord. 2006-1, passed 1-3-2006)
§ 92.23 REVOCATION OF GRANT OF AUTHORITY.
   Any attempt by the Fire Department or third-party billing service to recover
costs from any individuals/entity other than the appropriate insurance company/
carrier shall result in the immediate revocation of the authority to recover
such costs granted under this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 7-205) (Ord. 2006-1, passed 1-3-2006) Penalty, see §
92.99
OPEN BURNING
§ 92.35 SHORT TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Borough of Oklahoma
Open Burning Ordinance 2015.”
(Prior Code, § 7-301) (Ord. 2015-02, passed 8-10-2015)
§ 92.36 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BOROUGH. The Borough of Oklahoma, Westmoreland County, Pennsylvania.
   OPEN BURNING. The burning of any material or combination of materials where
the products of combustion are emitted directly into the ambient air without
first passing through a stack or chimney from an enclosed chamber inside of any
building. For the purposes of this definition, a chamber is considered ENCLOSED
when, during the time combustion is taking place, the only apertures, ducts,
stacks, flues or chimneys are open to the outside of any building and emit into
the ambient air.
   OUTDOOR BARBECUE PITS/CONTAINMENT. Any commercial grill, charcoal patio pit,
chiminea or fire pit table used for the purpose of heating, cooking or
preparing food for the purpose of consumption, provided they are screened and/
or enclosed.
   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, association, corporation, department,
bureau, agency or other legal entity.
   RECREATIONAL FIRE. An outdoor charcoal, propane or wood fire utilized to
cook food for human consumption.
(Prior Code, § 7-302) (Ord. 2015-02, passed 8-10-2015)
§ 92.37 PROHIBITION AGAINST OUTDOOR BURNING.
   Willful burning of solid waste or residual waste is prohibited. Willful
burning of rubbish shall be prohibited except in fireproof containers equipped
with a screen and located at least 25 feet from the nearest residence.
(Prior Code, § 7-303) (Ord. 2015-02, passed 8-10-2015) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.38 MINIMUM DISTANCE.
   (A)   Willful burning of brush or wood shall not take place within 25 feet
from the nearest residence.
   (B)   Recreational fires and/or outdoor barbecue pits/containment shall not
be used within the construction setback requirements for the zoning district
where the fire is ignited.
(Prior Code, § 7-304) (Ord. 2015-02, passed 8-10-2015) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.39 ATTENDANCE OF FIRES.
   Except as otherwise provided, all intentional outdoor burning must be
constantly attended by an adult having at hand the means to extinguish the
fire.
(Prior Code, § 7-305) (Ord. 2015-02, passed 8-10-2015) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.40 HOURS AND DAYS FOR BURNING.
   (A)   The designated days of burning shall be Wednesday and Saturday.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided, no willful outdoor burning may take
place after sunset or before sunrise on Wednesday and 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. on
Saturday; however, recreational fires, barbecue pits, grills and/or
commercially manufactured burn containers may be ignited and kept burning
during such period, provided that at least one adult is constantly at the site
of the fire and sufficient means of extinguishing the fire is immediately
available at the fire site.
(Prior Code, § 7-306) (Ord. 2015-02, passed 8-10-2015) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.41 PROHIBITION AGAINST ODOR.
   Objects which give off an offensive odor when burned may not be willfully
burned.
(Prior Code, § 7-307) (Ord. 2015-02, passed 8-10-2015) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.42 NOTIFICATION OF INTENT.
   Any person shall notify their local fire department at least 48 hours prior
to burning large amounts of brush or wood. Large amounts of brush or wood shall
be those which cover an area greater than seven feet in diameter.
(Prior Code, § 7-308) (Ord. 2015-02, passed 8-10-2015) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.43 EXCEPTIONS GENERALLY.
   (A)   The prohibition against open burning as set forth in §
92.37 of this chapter shall not apply to:
      (1)   Any fire ignited to prevent or abate a fire hazard;
      (2)   Any fire ignited for the purpose of instructing firefighting
personnel or to demolish a fire hazard;
      (3)   Any fire ignited for the prevention and control of disease or
pests; or
      (4)   Any fire ignited in conjunction with the production of agricultural
commodities in their un-manufactured state on the premises of a farm operation.
   (B)   The exceptions listed in division (A) above shall be permitted, if
any, only if any open burning done pursuant to these exceptions are:
      (1)   Authorized by the Borough Council;
      (2)   Done under the supervision of a member of the Borough Fire
Department; or
      (3)   To the extent required, authorized by a permit duly issued by the
Commonwealth Department of Environmental Protection (DEP).
(Prior Code, § 7-309) (Ord. 2015-02, passed 8-10-2015) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.44 EXEMPTION FOR RECREATIONAL FIRES.
   It shall be lawful at any time for any person to start kindle and maintain a
recreational fire, barbecue pit or grill for the purpose of outdoor barbeques,
provided that such fire is confined to an outdoor barbecue structure as defined
herein, and is used solely for the heating, cooking and preparation of food
products for the purpose of consumption.
(Prior Code, § 7-310) (Ord. 2015-02, passed 8-10-2015) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.45 PROHIBITION AGAINST BURNING.
   The Emergency Management Coordinator may institute a complete no-burning ban
by notifying the local fire departments as well as the borough. Such a ban
shall be implemented as dictated by weather conditions.
(Prior Code, § 7-311) (Ord. 2015-02, passed 8-10-2015) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.46 AUTHORITY TO EXTINGUISH OUTDOOR FIRES.
   Authority is hereby granted to the borough’s Fire Department to extinguish
any fire of any nature within the borough when the Fire Chief, or in his or her
absence, the highest acting officer of the Fire Department, deems that
conditions warrant such action.
(Prior Code, § 7-312) (Ord. 2015-02, passed 8-10-2015) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.47 ENFORCEMENT.
   The Borough Council shall appoint an enforcement officer to enforce this
subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 7-313) (Ord. 2015-02, passed 8-10-2015) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of §§
92.35 to
92.47 of this chapter, upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a
magisterial district judge in the manner provided for the enforcement of
summary offenses under the Commonwealth Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be
sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $1,000 (subject to
change via resolution) plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and
costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 90 days. Each day that a
violation of §§
92.35 to
92.47 continues or each section of §§
92.35 to
92.47 which shall be found to have been violated shall constitute a separate
offense.
(Prior Code, § 7-314)
(Ord. 2015-02, passed 8-10-2015; Ord. 2015-04, passed 12-14-2015)
CHAPTER 93: PARKS AND RECREATION
Section
   
93.01   Regulations for parks, playgrounds and other outdoor recreational areas
   
93.02   Tobacco-free commitment
 
   
93.99   Penalty
   
Appendix A: Oklahoma Borough Tobacco Policy
§ 93.01 REGULATIONS FOR PARKS, PLAYGROUNDS AND OTHER OUTDOOR RECREATIONAL
AREAS.
   The following regulations are established and prescribed for the
maintenance, operation and protection of the parks, playgrounds and other
outdoor recreational areas owned or operated by the borough, which are referred
to in this chapter as “parks,” and it shall be unlawful for any person to
violate or to fail to obey any provision of any of these rules and regulations.
   (A)   The parks shall be open daily to the public between the hours of 6:00
a.m., Eastern Standard Time, and 9:00 p.m., Eastern Standard Time. All
activities in the parks shall cease and all persons in the parks shall leave as
soon as possible after that closing hour. No person, other than authorized
employees of a park, shall be in any park at any time between 11:00 p.m. and 6:
00 a.m., Eastern Standard Time, of the following morning.
   (B)   No person shall injure, deface, remove, cut or damage any tree, plant,
shrub, turf, building, structure or fixture, or any other property of the
borough located in a park.
   (C)   No person shall remove or change the location of any bench, seat or
table from a park without permission from the Borough Council.
   (D)   No person shall conduct himself or herself within a park so as to
annoy any other person using that park for recreational purposes.
   (E)   (1)   No person shall hold any meeting or gathering assembled through
advertisement or public notice, or any gathering otherwise assembled and
composed of 25 or more persons, within any park without first having made
application to the Borough Council for a permit for the meeting or gathering.
The permit shall indicate the location in the park where the meeting or
gathering is to be held, and the meeting or gathering shall not be held at any
other location in the park.
      (2)   The permit shall also specify the day and hours when the meeting or
gathering is to be held, and the meeting or gathering shall be held only on the
day and between the hours specified. The application for the permit shall be in
the name of a person who shall be responsible for seeing that all refuse left
by the group is placed in proper containers before leaving the park. Unless the
permit specifically authorizes beer, wine or other intoxicating liquor to be
brought into a park for the use of the persons covered by the permit, it shall
be unlawful for any beer, wine or other intoxicating liquor to be brought into
that park by or for the use of any person in attendance at any such meeting or
gathering.
   (F)   No person shall set up any booth, table or stand for the sale of any
article whatsoever within any park.
   (G)   No person shall dispose of any waste or garbage in any park except in
receptacles designated for the respective purposes. All persons using a park
shall dispose of all waste and garbage left by them in those proper
receptacles.
   (H)   No person shall injure, deface or destroy any notice, rule or
regulation posted at any place in any park by authority of the borough. Nor
shall any person post, at any place in a park, any notice or placard other than
by authority of the borough.
   (I)   No person shall set or maintain any fire in any park except in stoves
and fireplaces maintained for the purpose and located by the authority of the
Borough Council.
   (J)   No person, other than an officer of the law, shall carry any firearm
within any park.
   (K)   Except by special permission authorized under division (E) above, no
person shall bring any beer, wine or other intoxicating liquor into any park,
either for his or her own use or for the use of any other person.
   (L)   No person shall bring into any park, or drive or use therein, any
minibike, motorized pedalcycle or similar vehicle, or any snowmobile.
   (M)   No person shall play at the game of golf in any park, or drive or hit
any golf ball therein, or, while in any park, drive, hit or throw any object or
ball in such a manner as to endanger any other person who is in or near the
park.
(Prior Code, § 16-101) (Ord. 164, passed 9-10-1979; Ord. 189B, passed 11-12-
1984; Ord. 197, passed 6-9-1986) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.02 TOBACCO-FREE COMMITMENT.
   The borough is committed to providing a high quality of living for all
residents and invited guests. Therefore, the Borough Council believes in the
following.
   (A)   Tobacco product use in proximity of children, youths and adults
engaging in or watching recreational activities is unhealthy and detrimental to
the health of others.
   (B)   Tobacco products, once consumed in public spaces, are often discarded
on the ground, thus posing a risk of ingestion to toddlers and causing a litter
problem.
   (C)   The use of tobacco products around youths has a negative effect on
their choices.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any person to use tobacco products while
engaged in or watching recreational activities in any and all borough park
facilities.
(Prior Code, § 16-201) (Ord. 2014-06, passed 12-8-2014; Ord. 2015-04, passed
12-14-2015) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of §
93.01 of this chapter, upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a
magisterial district judge in the manner provided for the enforcement of
summary offenses under the Commonwealth Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be
sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $1,000 (subject to
change via resolution) plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and
costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 90 days. Each day that a
violation of §
93.01 continues shall constitute a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 16-102)
   (C)   Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of §
93.02 of this chapter, upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a
magisterial district judge in the manner provided for the enforcement of
summary offenses under the Commonwealth Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 (subject to change via
resolution) plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a
term of imprisonment not to exceed 90 days. Each day that a violation of §
93.02 continues shall constitute a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 16-201)
(Ord. 164, passed 9-10-1979; Ord. 197, passed 6-9-1986; Ord. 204A, passed 2-13-
1989; Ord. 2014-06, passed 12-8-2014; Ord. 2015-04, passed 12-14-2015)
APPENDIX A: OKLAHOMA BOROUGH TOBACCO POLICY
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/9434653894a16ad54b7b591131774b31d8ffe75a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1219.png]
 
(Prior Code, Chapter 16)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
110.   PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
      
111.   ADULT-ORIENTED BUSINESSES
      
112.   AMUSEMENTS AND AMUSEMENT DEVICES
      
113.   JUNK DEALERS AND JUNKYARDS
CHAPTER 110: PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
Section
   
110.01   Definitions
   
110.02   License required; conditions for issuance; fee
   
110.03   Exceptions
   
110.04   License application
   
110.05   Issuance of license; custody, display and exhibit
   
110.06   Prohibited acts
   
110.07   Supervision; records and reports
   
110.08   License denial, suspension or revocation; appeals
 
   
110.99   Penalty
§ 110.01 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   The singular shall include the plural; the plural shall include the
singular; and the masculine shall include the feminine and the neuter.
   (B)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      LEGAL HOLIDAY. New Year’s Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day,
Thanksgiving Day and Christmas.
      PERSON. Any natural person, partnership, association, corporation or
other legal entity.
      TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESS.
         (a)   Engaging in peddling, soliciting or taking orders, either by
sample or otherwise, for any goods, wares or merchandise upon any street,
alley, sidewalk or public ground, or from house to house, within the borough.
         (b)   Selling, soliciting or taking orders for any goods, wares or
merchandise, from a fixed location within the borough, on a temporary basis,
which shall include, but not be limited to, such activities conducted at the
time of special occasions or celebrations, for seasonal purposes or for yearly
holidays.
(Prior Code, § 13-301) (Ord. 2015-04, passed 12-14-2015)
§ 110.02 LICENSE REQUIRED; CONDITIONS FOR ISSUANCE; FEE.
   No person shall engage in any transient retail business within the borough
without first having obtained from the Borough Secretary a license, for which a
fee, which shall be for the use of the borough, shall be charged, said fee to
be in such amount as established from time to time by resolution of the
borough.
(Prior Code, § 13-302) (Ord. 2015-04, passed 12-14-2015) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.03 EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   No license fee shall be charged:
      (1)   To farmers selling their own produce;
      (2)   For the sale of goods, wares and merchandise donated by the owners
thereof, the proceeds whereof are to be applied to any charitable or
philanthropic purpose;
      (3)   To any manufacturer or producer in the sale of bread and bakery
products, meat and meat products or milk and milk products;
      (4)   To children under the age of 18 years who take orders for and
deliver newspapers, greeting cards, candy, bakery products and the like, or who
represent the Boy Scouts or Girl Scouts or similar organizations;
      (5)   To the seeking or taking of orders by insurance agents or brokers
licensed under the insurance laws of the commonwealth;
      (6)   To a person who has complied with the provisions of the
Solicitation of Funds for Charitable Purposes Act, 10 P.S. §§ 162.1 et seq., as
hereafter amended, supplemented, modified or reenacted by the General Assembly
of the commonwealth; or
      (7)   For taking orders for merchandise, by sample, from dealers or
merchants for individuals or companies who pay a license or business privilege
tax at their chief place of business.
   (B)   But all persons exempted hereby from the payment of the license fee
shall be required to register with the Borough Secretary and obtain a license
without fee; provided, any person dealing in one or more of the above-mentioned
exempted categories, and dealing with other goods, wares or merchandise not so
exempted, shall be subject to the payment of the license fee fixed by this
chapter for his or her activities in connection with the sale of goods, wares
and merchandise not in such exempted categories. Provided, further, the
Secretary may similarly exempt from payment of the license fee, but not from
registering with him or her, persons working without compensation and selling
goods, wares or merchandise for the sole benefit of a nonprofit corporation.
Provided, further, every license issued under the provisions of this chapter
shall be issued on an individual basis to any person or persons engaging in
such business; every individual shall obtain a separate license, issued to him
or her in his or her name, and the license fee hereby imposed shall be
applicable to every such individual license, except that a representative of a
charitable organization may obtain licenses for the applicants.
(Prior Code, § 13-303) (Ord. 2015-04, passed 12-14-2015)
§ 110.04 LICENSE APPLICATION.
   (A)   Every person desiring a license under this chapter shall first make
application to the Secretary for such license. He or she shall, when making
such application, exhibit a valid license from any state or county officer if
such license is also required.
   (B)   The applicant shall state:
      (1)   His or her criminal record, if any;
      (2)   Name and address of the person by whom he or she is employed;
      (3)   Type of goods, wares and merchandise he or she wishes to deal with
in such transient retail business;
      (4)   Length of time for which the license is to be issued; and
      (5)   Type and license number of the vehicle to be used, if any.
(Prior Code, § 13-304) (Ord. 2015-04, passed 12-14-2015)
§ 110.05 ISSUANCE OF LICENSE; CUSTODY, DISPLAY AND EXHIBIT.
   Upon receipt of such application and the prescribed fee, the Secretary, if
he or she shall find such application in order, shall issue the license
required under this chapter. Such license shall contain the information
required to be given on the application therefor. Every license holder shall
carry such license upon his or her person if engaged in transient retail
business from house to house or upon any of the streets, alleys, sidewalks or
public grounds, or shall display such license at the location where he or she
shall engage in such business if doing so at a fixed location. He or she shall
exhibit such license, upon request, to all police officers, municipal officials
and citizens or residents of the borough.
(Prior Code, § 13-305) (Ord. 2015-04, passed 12-14-2015) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.06 PROHIBITED ACTS.
   No person in any transient retail business shall:
   (A)   Sell any product or type of product not mentioned in his or her
license;
   (B)   Hawk or cry his or her wares upon any of the streets, alleys,
sidewalks or public grounds in the borough;
   (C)   When operating from a vehicle, stop or park such vehicle upon any of
the streets or alleys in the borough for longer than necessary in order to sell
therefrom to persons residing or working in the immediate vicinity;
   (D)   Park a vehicle upon any of the streets or alleys in the borough for
the purpose of sorting, rearranging or cleaning any of his or her goods, wares
or merchandise, or of disposing of any carton, wrapping material or stock,
wares or foodstuffs which have become unsalable through handling, age or
otherwise; or
   (E)   Engage in any business activity, except by prior appointment, at any
time on a Sunday or legal holiday or at any time before 9:00 a.m. or after 5:00
p.m. on any day of the week other than a Sunday or legal holiday.
(Prior Code, § 13-306) (Ord. 2015-04, passed 12-14-2015) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.07 SUPERVISION; RECORDS AND REPORTS.
   The Secretary shall supervise the activities of all persons holding licenses
under this chapter. He or she shall keep a record of all licenses issued
hereunder and shall make a report thereof each month to the Council.
(Prior Code, § 13-307) (Ord. 2015-04, passed 12-14-2015)
§ 110.08 LICENSE DENIAL, SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION; APPEALS.
   The Secretary is hereby authorized to deny, suspend or revoke any license
issued under this chapter when he or she deems such denial, suspension or
revocation to be beneficial to the public health, safety or morals, or for
violation of any provision of this chapter, or for giving false information
upon any application for a license hereunder. Appeals from any suspension,
revocation or denial of a license may be made to the Council at any time within
ten days after such suspension, revocation or denial, and a hearing shall be
held within 30 days of the petition for appeal. No part of a license fee shall
be refunded to any person whose license shall have been suspended or revoked.
(Prior Code, § 13-308) (Ord. 2015-04, passed 12-14-2015)
§ 110.99 PENALTY.
   Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
chapter, upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a magisterial
district judge in the manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses
under the Commonwealth Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a
fine of not more than $1,000 (subject to change via resolution) plus costs and,
in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to
exceed 90 days. Each day that a violation of this chapter continues or each
section of this chapter which shall be found to have been violated shall
constitute a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 13-309) (Ord. 2015-04, passed 12-14-2015)
CHAPTER 111: ADULT-ORIENTED BUSINESSES
Section
   
111.01   Intent
   
111.02   Definitions
   
111.03   Classification
   
111.04   Permit required; application; inspection
   
111.05   Issuance of permit
   
111.06   Fees
   
111.07   Inspections
   
111.08   Expiration of permit
   
111.09   Suspension of permit
   
111.10   Revocation of permit
   
111.11   Transfer of permit
   
111.12   Location of sexually oriented businesses
   
111.13   Exemptions
   
111.14   Injunctions
§ 111.01 INTENT.
   (A)   It is the intent of this regulation to further the purpose of the
zoning regulations. The borough, through its planning and zoning regulations,
wishes to provide for its citizens and tourists an atmosphere that is both
safe, healthy and aesthetically pleasing, one that fosters activities
appropriate for visitors of all ages on its thoroughfares. In addition, the
borough, through its Neighborhood Planning Program and Comprehensive Plan,
recognizes that some residential neighborhoods, because of their proximity to
commercial districts, are more susceptible to the effects of intensive or
obnoxious activities. This regulation aims to preserve neighborhood integrity
while fostering a positive and wholesome image for visitors from out of the
area.
   (B)   (1)   It is further the purpose of this chapter to promote the health,
safety and general welfare of the citizens of the borough and to establish
reasonable regulations.
      (2)   The provisions of this chapter have neither the purpose nor effect
of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative
materials, including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the
intent nor effect of this chapter to restrict or deny access by adults to
sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access
by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their
intended market. Neither is it the intent nor effect of this chapter to condone
or legitimize the distribution of obscene material.
(Prior Code, § 13-401) (Ord. 2003-02, passed 6-9-2003)
§ 111.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADULT ARCADE. Any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein
coin-operated or slug-operated, or electronically, electrically or mechanically
controlled, still or motion picture machines, projectors or other image-
producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per
machine at any one time and where the images so displayed are distinguished or
characterized by the depicting or describing of specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas. All ADULT ARCADES must be constructed according to
Exhibit A, on file in the Borough Office, which is part of this chapter as if
set out herein in full.
   ADULT BOOKSTORE OR ADULT VIDEO STORE. A commercial establishment which, as
one of its principal business purposes, offers for sale or rental for any form
of consideration any one or more of the following: books, magazines,
periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures,
videocassettes, video reproductions, slides or other visual representations,
which depict or describe specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas; or instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designed for use in
connection with specified sexual activities.
   ADULT CABARET. A nightclub, bar, restaurant or similar commercial
establishment which regularly features persons appearing in the state of
nudity; live performances which are characterized by the exposure of specified
anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities; films, motion pictures,
videocassettes, slides, digital imaging, photographic reproductions or any and
all visual media using the most recent technology, which are characterized by
the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas.
   ADULT MOTEL. A hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment which offers
accommodations to the public for any form of consideration; provides patrons
with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures,
videocassettes, slides, digital imaging, photographic reproductions or any
visual media using current technology which are characterized by the depiction
or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas;
and has a sign visible from the public right-of-way which advertises the
availability of this adult-type of photographic reproductions; or offers
sleeping rooms for rent four or more times in one calendar day during five or
more calendar days in any continuous 30-day period.
   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER. A commercial establishment where, for any form
of consideration, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or similar
photographic reproductions are regularly shown which are characterized by the
depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas.
   ADULT THEATER. A theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar commercial
establishment which regularly features persons who appear in a state of nudity
or live performances which are characterized by the exposure of specified
anatomical areas or specified sexual activities.
   CHILD-ORIENTED BUSINESS. Any commercial establishment which, as one of its
principal business purposes, serves and/or sells children and their families
food, apparel, goods, services, play and/or entertainment.
   ESCORT. A person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a
companion, guide or date for another person, or who agrees or offers to
privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another
person.
   ESCORT AGENCY. Any person or business association who furnishes, offers to
furnish or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business
purposes for a fee, tip or other consideration.
   MUNICIPALITY. The Borough of Oklahoma.
   NUDE MODEL STUDIO. Any place where a person who appears in a state of nudity
or displays specified anatomical areas is provided to be observed, sketched,
drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed or similarly depicted by other persons
who pay money or any form of consideration.
   NUDITY OR A STATE OF NUDITY. The appearance of a human bare buttock, anus,
male genitals, female genitals or female breast.
   PERMITTEE or LICENSEE. Any person in whose name a permit and/or license to
operate a sexually oriented business has been issued, as well as the individual
listed as an applicant on the application for a permit and/or license.
   PERSON. An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association
or other legal entity.
   SEMINUDE. A state of dress in which clothing covers not more than the
genitals, pubic region and the areola of the female breast, as well as portions
of the body covered by supporting straps or devices.
   SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER. A business or commercial enterprise that, as one of
its primary business purposes, offers for any form of consideration physical
contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons of the opposite
sex; or activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the same
sex when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or seminude.
   SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS. An adult arcade, adult bookstore or adult video
store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion-picture theater, adult theater,
escort agency, nude model studio or sexual encounter center.
   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS. The male genitals in a state of sexual arousal
and/or the vulva or more intimate parts of the female genitals.
   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES. Includes any of the following: fondling or
other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus or female
breasts; sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including
intercourse, oral copulation or sodomy; masturbation, actual or simulated; or
excretory functions as part of or in connection with any other specified sexual
activities.
   SUBSTANTIAL ENLARGEMENT OF A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS. An increase in
floor area occupied by the business by more than 25%, as the floor area exists
on the date of enactment of this section.
   TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL OF A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS. Includes
any of the following: the sale, lease or sublease of the business; the transfer
of securities which constitute a controlling interest in the business, whether
by sale, exchange or similar means; or the establishment of a trust, gift or
other similar legal device which transfers the ownership or control of the
business, except for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the
death of the person possessing the ownership or control.
(Prior Code, § 13-402) (Ord. 2003-02, passed 6-9-2003)
§ 111.03 CLASSIFICATION.
   Sexually oriented businesses are classified as follows:
   (A)   Adult arcades;
   (B)   Adult bookstores or adult video stores;
   (C)   Adult cabarets;
   (D)   Adult motels;
   (E)   Adult motion picture theaters;
   (F)   Adult theaters;
   (G)   Escort agencies;
   (H)   Nude model studios; and
   (I)   Sexual encounter centers.
(Prior Code, § 13-403) (Ord. 2003-02, passed 6-9-2003)
§ 111.04 PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATION; INSPECTION.
   (A)   Any person who operates a sexually oriented business without a valid
permit issued by the borough is guilty of a violation of the Zoning Ordinance (
Chapter 156).
   (B)   An application for a permit to operate a sexually oriented business
must be made on a form provided by the Zoning Officer. State Department of
Labor and Industry-approved plans showing the floor plan and plot plan
configuration of the premises, including a statement of total floor space
occupied by the business, must accompany the application. The sketch or diagram
need not be professionally prepared but must be drawn to a designated scale or
drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of
plus or minus six inches.
   (C)   The applicant must be qualified according to the provisions of this
chapter, and the premises must be inspected and found to be in compliance with
the law of the Zoning Officer.
   (D)   If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is an
individual, he or she must sign the application for a permit as applicant. If a
person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is other than an
individual, each individual who has a 10% or greater interest in the business
must sign the application for a permit as applicant. If a corporation is listed
as owner of a sexually oriented business or as the entity which wishes to
operate such a business, each individual having a direct or indirect interest
of 10% or greater in the corporation must sign the application for a permit as
applicant.
   (E)   The fact that a person possesses other types of borough permits does
not exempt the person from the requirements of obtaining a sexually oriented
business permit.
(Prior Code, § 13-404) (Ord. 2003-02, passed 6-9-2003) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.05 ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.
   (A)   The Zoning Officer shall approve the issuance of a permit to an
applicant within 30 days after receipt of an application unless he or she finds
one or more of the following to be true.
      (1)   An applicant is under 18 years of age.
      (2)   An applicant or an applicant’s spouse is overdue in his or her
payment to the borough of taxes, fees, fines or penalties assessed against him
or her or imposed upon him or her in relation to a sexually oriented business.
      (3)   An applicant has failed to provide all information required for
issuance of the permit or has falsely answered a question or request for
information on the application form.
      (4)   An applicant is residing with a person who has been denied a permit
by the borough to operate a sexually oriented business within the preceding 12
months or residing with a person whose license to operate a sexually oriented
business has been revoked within the preceding 12 months.
      (5)   The premises to be used for the sexually oriented business have
been reviewed and have been disapproved by the Zoning Officer as not being in
compliance with applicable laws and ordinances.
      (6)   The permit fee required by this chapter has not been paid.
      (7)   An applicant of the proposed establishment is in violation of or is
not in compliance with any of the provisions of this chapter.
      (8)   An individual applicant or any individual holding a direct or
indirect interest of more than 10% of a corporate applicant, or any of the
officers and directors of a corporate applicant, if the applicant is a
corporation; or any of the partners, including limited partners, if the
applicant is a partnership; or the manager or other person in charge of the
operation of the applicant’s business, has or have been convicted of an offense
involving sexual misconduct within the commonwealth, including, but not limited
to, prostitution, obscenity and possession of child pornography, or convicted
of any offense in any jurisdiction other than the commonwealth that would have
constituted an offense involving sexual misconduct if committed within the
commonwealth. In order for approval to be denied pursuant to this division (A)
(8), the person or person’s conviction or release in connection with the sexual
misconduct offense must have occurred within two years of the date of
application in the event of a misdemeanor and within five years of the date of
application in the event of a felony.
   (B)   The permit, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person
or persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date and the address of the
sexually oriented business. The permit shall be posted in a conspicuous place
at or near the entrance to the sexually oriented business so that it may be
easily read at any time.
   (C)   The Zoning Officer shall complete the certification that the premises
are in compliance or not in compliance within 20 days of receipt of the
application to the Zoning Officer. The certification shall be promptly
presented to the Zoning Officer.
(Prior Code, § 13-405) (Ord. 2003-02, passed 6-9-2003)
§ 111.06 FEES.
   The annual fee for a sexually oriented business permit shall be in an amount
as established from time to time by resolution of the Borough Council.
(Prior Code, § 13-406) (Ord. 2003-02, passed 6-9-2003; Ord. 2015-04, passed 12-
14-2015)
§ 111.07 INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   An applicant, or permittee, shall permit the Zoning Officer to inspect
the premises of a sexually oriented business for the purpose of ensuring
compliance with the law at any time that the sexually oriented business is open
for business.
   (B)   A person who operates a sexually oriented business or his or her agent
or employee violates the Zoning Ordinance (Chapter 156 of this code) if he or
she refuses to permit such lawful inspection of the premises at any time it is
open for business.
(Prior Code, § 13-407) (Ord. 2003-02, passed 6-9-2003)
§ 111.08 EXPIRATION OF PERMIT.
   (A)   Each permit shall expire one year from the date of issuance and may be
renewed only by making application as provided in §
111.05 of this chapter. Application for renewal should be made at least 30 days
before the expiration date, and when made fewer than 30 days before the
expiration date, the pendency of the application will not prevent the
expiration of the permit.
   (B)   If the Zoning Officer denies renewal of a license, the applicant shall
not be issued a permit for one year from the date of denial, except that after
90 days having elapsed since the date of denial, the applicant may be granted a
permit if the Zoning Officer finds that the basis for denial of the renewal
permit has been corrected or abated.
(Prior Code, § 13-408) (Ord. 2003-02, passed 6-9-2003)
§ 111.09 SUSPENSION OF PERMIT.
   The Zoning Officer shall suspend a permit for a period not to exceed 30 days
if he or she determines that a permittee or an employee of a permittee has
violated or is not in compliance with any section to this chapter; refused to
allow an inspection of the sexually oriented business premises as authorized by
this chapter; or knowingly permitted gambling by any person on the sexually
oriented business premises.
(Prior Code, § 13-409) (Ord. 2003-02, passed 6-9-2003)
§ 111.10 REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   (A)   The Zoning Officer shall revoke a permit if a cause of suspension set
forth in §
111.09 of this chapter occurs and the permit has been suspended within the
preceding 12 months.
   (B)   The Zoning Officer shall revoke a permit if he or she determines that:
      (1)   A permittee, or any of the persons specified in §
111.05 of this chapter, has been convicted of the offenses specified in said
section;
      (2)   A permittee gave false or misleading information in the material
submitted to the borough during the application process;
      (3)   A permittee or an employee of a permittee has knowingly allowed
possession, use or sale of controlled substances on the premises;
      (4)   A permittee or an employee of a permittee engages in or knowingly
allows or permits prostitution on the premises;
      (5)   A permittee or an employee of a permittee knowingly operated the
sexually oriented business during a period of time when the permittee’s permit
was suspended;
      (6)   A permittee or an employee of a permittee has knowingly allowed any
act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation or other
explicit sexual conduct to occur in or on the permitted premises; or
      (7)   A permittee is delinquent in payment to the borough or state of any
taxes or fees relating to sexually oriented businesses.
   (C)   When the Zoning Officer revokes a permit, the revocation shall
continue for one year, and the permittee shall not be issued a sexually
oriented business permit for one year from the date revocation becomes
effective, except that if the revocation is pursuant to division (B)(1) above,
the revocation shall be effective for two years in the event of a misdemeanor
or five years in the case of a felony.
   (D)   (1)   To minimize and reduce delay to the applicant or permittee, and
in addition to the appeal time frames and remedies available under the
Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S. §§ 10101 et seq., all permit denial,
renewal, suspension or revocation decisions shall be sent, in writing, to the
applicant or licensee. All such decisions which deny, refuse to renew, suspend
or revoke a permit shall state specifically the ordinance requirement not met
and any other basis of the decision. After denial of an application, or denial
of a renewal of an application, or after suspension or revocation of any
permit, the applicant or permittee may appeal, pursuant to the procedures of
the Municipalities Planning Code and Administrative Law and Procedure, 2
Pa.C.S.A. §§ 101 et seq., to the Borough Zoning Hearing Board, except as
modified herein. Any such appeal must be filed, in writing, with the Zoning
Officer within 30 days from the date of the mailing of the decision appealed
from and shall specify, in detail, the basis for the appeal. Failure or refusal
to file said appeal or specify the basis of said appeal with the Zoning Officer
shall be deemed a conclusive determination as to the issues or matters
addressed by the written decision. If an appeal is timely filed, the Zoning
Hearing Board will then hold a Local Agency Law hearing pursuant to the
Municipalities Planning Code and Administrative Law and Procedure within 20
days from the date the appeal is filed and will render a written decision
within ten days from the date such hearing concludes.
      (2)   In the case of a denial or renewal, or in the case of a permit
suspension or revocation, the permittee may continue to operate to the same
extent as immediately prior to the suspension or revocation until the earlier
of:
         (a)   The expiration of the ten-day appeal period without the filing
of an appeal; or
         (b)   The date of a final decision dismissing any appeal.
   (E)   To minimize and reduce delay to the applicant or permittee, and in
addition to the appeal time frames and remedies available under the
Municipalities Planning Code, §§ 101 et seq., of the Act of July 31, 1968, P.L.
805, No. 247, art. I, as amended by the Act of Dec. 21, 1988, P.L. 1329, No.
170, 53 P.S. §§ 10101 et seq., any person aggrieved by a decision of the Zoning
Hearing Board may appeal to a court of competent jurisdiction pursuant to the
Local Agency Law, 105, 551-555 and 751-753, 2 Pa.C.S.A. §§ 101 et seq., and 42
Pa.C.S.A. § 933(a)(2). The Zoning Hearing Board shall, upon the filing of such
an appeal, consent to any request by a permit applicant or permittee to the
court to give expedited review of such appeal. The Zoning Hearing Board shall
certify any record to the court within 20 days after the appeal is filed. In
the case of a denial of a permit renewal, or in the case of a permit suspension
or revocation, the permittee may continue to operate to the same extent as
immediately prior to the denial, suspension or revocation until the earlier of
the expiration of the 30-day appeal period without the filing of an appeal, or
the date of a decision dismissing an appeal by a court of competent
jurisdiction.
(Prior Code, § 13-410) (Ord. 2003-02, passed 6-9-2003)
§ 111.11 TRANSFER OF PERMIT.
   A permittee shall not transfer his or her permit to another person. A
permittee shall not operate a sexually oriented business under the authority of
a permit at any place other than the address designated in the application.
(Prior Code, § 13-411) (Ord. 2003-02, passed 6-9-2003) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.12 LOCATION OF SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES.
   (A)   (1)   A person is guilty of a violation of the Zoning Ordinance (
Chapter 156 of this code) if he or she operates or causes to be operated a
sexually oriented business outside of the district in which a sexually oriented
business is a permitted use. No sexually oriented business shall be located
outside a district in which a sexually oriented business is a permitted use.
      (2)   Sexually oriented businesses as defined herein shall be permitted
in the General Industrial District (M). Hours of operation shall be from 8:00
a.m. to 10:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday. No hours of operation on Sundays
and legal holidays.
   (B)   A person is guilty of a violation of the Zoning Ordinance (
Chapter 156 of this code) if he or she operates or causes to be operated a
sexually oriented business within 1,000 feet of a church; a public or private
pre-elementary, elementary or secondary school; a public library; a child care
facility or nursery school; a public park adjacent to any residential district;
a child-oriented business; a college and/or public or private university; and
any residentially zoned districts in the borough.
   (C)   A person is guilty of a violation of the Zoning Ordinance (
Chapter 156 of this code) if he or she causes or permits the operation,
establishment, substantial enlargement or transfer of ownership or control of a
sexually oriented business within 1,000 feet of another sexually oriented
business.
   (D)   A person is guilty of a violation of the Zoning Ordinance (
Chapter 156 of this code) if he or she causes or permits the operation of a
substantial enlargement of the sexually oriented business.
   (E)   For the purposes of this part of the Zoning Ordinance (
Chapter 156 of this code), measurement shall be made in a straight line,
without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest portion
of the building or structure used as a part of the premises where a sexually
oriented business is conducted, to the nearest property line of the premises of
a church, public or private pre-elementary, elementary or secondary school,
public library, child care facility, child-oriented business or nursery school;
or to the nearest boundary of an affected public park, college, university or
residentially zoned district.
   (F)   For purposes of this section of this part of the Zoning Ordinance (
Chapter 156 of this code), the distance between any two sexually oriented
businesses shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening
structures or objects, from the closest exterior wall of the structure in which
each business is located.
   (G)   Any sexually oriented business lawfully operating on the date of
enactment of this chapter that is in violation of any part of this section
shall be deemed a nonconforming use. Any preexisting nonconforming use sexually
oriented business that is abandoned or is not used as such for a period of at
least 12 months loses its preexisting nonconforming status and must thereafter
comply with all provisions of this chapter to reopen. At the time of the
writing of the ordinance codified in this chapter, there are no such
preexisting uses in the borough. In the event that two or more sexually
oriented businesses are within 1,000 feet of one another and otherwise in a
permissible location, the sexually oriented business which was first
established and continually operating at a particular location is the
conforming use and the later established business is nonconforming.
   (H)   A sexually oriented business lawfully operating as a conforming use is
not rendered a nonconforming use by the location, subsequent to the grant or
renewal of the sexually oriented business permit, of a church, public or
private pre-elementary, elementary or secondary school, public library, child
care facility, child-oriented business, nursery school or public park within
1,500 feet of the sexually oriented business. This provision applies only to
the renewal of a valid permit and does not apply when an application for a
permit is submitted after a permit has expired or has been revoked.
(Prior Code, § 13-412) (Ord. 2003-02, passed 6-9-2003) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.13 EXEMPTIONS.
   It is a defense to prosecution under §§
111.05 and
111.12 of this chapter that a person appearing in a state of nudity did so in a
modeling class operated by a proprietary school, licensed by the commonwealth,
or a college, junior college or university supported entirely or partly by
taxation; a private college or university which maintains and operates
educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior
college or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; in a structure
which has no sight visible from the exterior of the structure and no other
advertising that indicates a nude person is available for viewing where, in
order to participate in a class, a student must enroll at least three days in
advance of the class and where not more than one nude model is on the premises
at any one time.
(Prior Code, § 13-413) (Ord. 2003-02, passed 6-9-2003)
§ 111.14 INJUNCTIONS.
   A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business
without a valid permit or in violation of this chapter is subject to an action
in equity or a suit for injunction as well as citations for violations of the
Zoning Ordinance (
Chapter 156 of this code).
(Prior Code, § 13-414) (Ord. 2003-02, passed 6-9-2003) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 112: AMUSEMENTS AND AMUSEMENT DEVICES
Section
   
112.01   License required to operate amusement machines
   
112.02   Fee; license not transferable; new license not required for
replacement machines
   
112.03   Inspections of licensed machines
   
112.04   Exhibit of license upon request; suspension of license
   
112.05   Category 4 licensed facilities prohibited
 
   
112.99   Penalty
§ 112.01 LICENSE REQUIRED TO OPERATE AMUSEMENT MACHINES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons, firm or corporation, either
as a principal or agent (hereinafter called “operator”), to operate, cause to
operate or permit to continue to be operated, if within their control, anywhere
within the borough, whether on public or private property, any pinball
machines, machines operated as games of skill or other machines played for
amusement (hereinafter called “machines”) without having first obtained a
license therefor from the Mayor.
(Prior Code, § 13-101) (Ord. 41, passed 2-10-1948; Ord. 2015-04, passed 12-14-
2015) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.02 FEE; LICENSE NOT TRANSFERABLE; NEW LICENSE NOT REQUIRED FOR
REPLACEMENT MACHINES.
   The operator shall pay in advance for said license the sum in an amount as
established from time to time by resolution of the Borough Council for each
amusement machine for each calendar month or fraction thereof; provided,
however, that said license shall not be transferable from one owner to another,
and provided further that such owner shall not be required to secure a new
license when one machine is replaced by another, so long as the operator is
licensed to operate the total number of machines in his or her place of
business.
(Prior Code, § 13-102) (Ord. 41, passed 2-10-1948; Ord. 177, passed 2-14-1983;
Ord. 2015-04, passed 12-14-2015)
§ 112.03 INSPECTIONS OF LICENSED MACHINES.
   The borough police, under the direction of the Mayor, shall make periodical
inspections of machines so licensed.
(Prior Code, § 13-103) (Ord. 41, passed 2-10-1948; Ord. 2015-04, passed 12-14-
2015)
§ 112.04 EXHIBIT OF LICENSE UPON REQUEST; SUSPENSION OF LICENSE.
   The license granted under this chapter shall be exhibited on the request of
the Mayor or any police officer, and the Mayor may, after affording a hearing
to the licensee, of which said hearing the licensee shall have at least 48
hours’ notice, suspend any license herein granted if he or she deems it to be
of benefit to the public health, safety and morals, and when so suspended, that
portion of the unearned license fee shall be returned to the operator.
(Prior Code, § 13-104) (Ord. 41, passed 2-10-1948; Ord. 2015-04, passed 12-14-
2015)
§ 112.05 CATEGORY 4 LICENSED FACILITIES PROHIBITED.
   The borough adopts the resolution codified in this section to prohibit a
Category 4 casino within the boundaries of the borough.
(Res. 01-2017, passed 12-11-2017)
§ 112.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of §§
112.01 to
112.04 of this chapter, upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a
magisterial district judge in the manner provided for the enforcement of
summary offenses under the Commonwealth Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be
sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $200 nor more than $1,000 (subject to
change via resolution) plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and
costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 90 days. Each day that a
violation of §§
112.01 to
112.04 continues or each section of §§
112.01 to
112.04 which shall be found to have been violated shall constitute a separate
offense.
(Prior Code, § 13-105)
(Ord. 41, passed 2-10-1948; Ord. 100, passed 8-19-1966; Ord. 204A, passed 2-13-
1989; Ord. 2015-04, passed 12-14-2015)
CHAPTER 113: JUNK DEALERS AND JUNKYARDS
Section
   
113.01   License required to operate junkyards and similar establishments
   
113.02   Conditions for issuance of license
   
113.03   Manner of conducting business; premises open to inspection
   
113.04   Unlawful to purchase junk from minors, unknown or irresponsible
persons
   
113.05   Premises not to be open for business between certain hours
   
113.06   Licenses not transferable; exhibition to police; suspension
   
113.07   Establishments covered
   
113.08   Exceptions
 
   
113.99   Penalty
§ 113.01 LICENSE REQUIRED TO OPERATE JUNKYARDS AND SIMILAR ESTABLISHMENTS.
   (A)   On and after the passage of this chapter, it shall not be lawful for
any person or persons, firms or corporations, either as principal or agent, to
carry on, operate or conduct junkyards, salvage yards or other places used and
maintained for the collection, storage and disposal of used and second-hand
goods and materials within the borough, whether on public or private property,
until a certificate of license shall have been granted by the Mayor.
   (B)   All junk dealers, junkyards, salvage yards and other places used and
maintained for the collection, storage and disposal of used and second-hand
goods and materials shall be licensed within 30 days from the effective date of
this chapter and annually thereafter by December 31 of each year.
   (C)   Registration shall be on a form supplied by the borough. Separate
registration shall be filed for each and every junk business, junkyard, salvage
yard or other place used and maintained for the collection, storage and
disposal of used and second-hand goods and materials.
   (D)   No person or persons, firms or corporations shall, by virtue of one
license, keep more than one place of business.
   (E)   Each application shall be accompanied by the sum in an amount as
established from time to time by resolution of the Borough Council, which sum
shall be paid into the Borough Treasury for use of the borough.
   (F)   At the expiration of each calendar year, said certificate of license
shall be null and void.
(Prior Code, § 13-201) (Ord. 53, passed 9-12-1955; Ord. 2015-04, passed 12-14-
2015) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.02 CONDITIONS FOR ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.
   Before a license shall be issued, the applicant must conform with the
following requirements.
   (A)   The junkyard, salvage yard or other places used and maintained for the
collection, storage and disposal of used and second-hand goods and materials
shall be confined to an area enclosed by a tightly-built solid fence or wall
constructed of brick, stone, concrete, cement block or other similar materials,
which shall be of a minimum height of six feet.
   (B)   No advertising of any nature shall be displayed on the enclosure fence
or wall.
   (C)   The business shall be conducted in such a way as to discourage the
harboring of cats, skunks and other vermin, and the breeding of mosquitoes and
other animals or insects.
(Prior Code, § 13-202) (Ord. 53, passed 9-12-1955) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.03 MANNER OF CONDUCTING BUSINESS; PREMISES OPEN TO INSPECTION.
   Every person or persons, firms or corporations being licensed under the
provisions of this chapter shall so conduct the business of such license that
the same shall not amount to a nuisance, and the places of business, premises,
vehicles and carriers of such licensees shall be subject, during the business
hours herein provided, to inspection by the borough police or any authorized
representatives of the Borough Council.
(Prior Code, § 13-203) (Ord. 53, passed 9-12-1955) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.04 UNLAWFUL TO PURCHASE JUNK FROM MINORS, UNKNOWN OR IRRESPONSIBLE
PERSONS.
   No person or persons, firm or corporation being licensed under the
provisions of this chapter shall purchase or receive from any minor any
material commonly known as “junk.”
(Prior Code, § 13-204) (Ord. 53, passed 9-12-1955) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.05 PREMISES NOT TO BE OPEN FOR BUSINESS BETWEEN CERTAIN HOURS.
   The premises of any person or persons, firm or corporation being licensed
hereunder shall not be open for the transaction of business before 7:00 a.m.
and shall close promptly at 6:00 p.m.
(Prior Code, § 13-205) (Ord. 53, passed 9-12-1955) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.06 LICENSES NOT TRANSFERABLE; EXHIBITION TO POLICE; SUSPENSION.
   Licenses granted hereunder are not transferable and shall be exhibited upon
the request of any police officer. The Council may suspend, upon motion, any
license issued when it deems it to be of benefit to the public health, safety
or morals.
(Prior Code, § 13-206) (Ord. 53, passed 9-12-1955)
§ 113.07 ESTABLISHMENTS COVERED.
   Automobile wrecking and dismantling businesses and yards and places dealing
in used automobile parts shall come within the definition of “junkyards,
salvage yards or other places used and maintained for the collection, storage
and disposal of used and second-hand goods and materials.”
(Prior Code, § 13-207) (Ord. 53, passed 9-12-1955)
§ 113.08 EXCEPTIONS.
   This chapter shall not be construed to prohibit a person, or persons, firm
or corporation depositing any used or second-hand goods or materials upon his,
her or its premises within the borough where said person, firm or corporation
is not engaged in the business of junk dealing, the operation of junkyards,
salvage yards or other places used and maintained for the collection, storage
and disposal of used and second-hand goods and materials; but the same is
deposited by the said person, firm or corporation incidental to his, her or its
use and enjoyment of his, her or its property within the borough, and provided
such does not violate any other ordinance of the borough.
(Prior Code, § 13-209) (Ord. 53, passed 9-12-1955)
§ 113.99 PENALTY.
   Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
chapter, upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a magisterial
district judge in the manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses
under the Commonwealth Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a
fine of not less than $200 nor more than $1,000 (subject to change via
resolution) plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a
term of imprisonment not to exceed 90 days. Each day that a violation of this
chapter continues or each section of this chapter which shall be found to have
been violated shall constitute a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 13-208) (Ord. 53, passed 9-12-1955; Ord. 204A, passed 2-13-1989;
Ord. 2015-04, passed 12-14-2015)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
      
130.   OFFENSES AGAINST PEOPLE AND PUBLIC SAFETY
      
131.   OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
CHAPTER 130: OFFENSES AGAINST PEOPLE AND PUBLIC SAFETY
Section
General Provisions
   
130.01   Disorderly conduct
   
130.02   Firearms and dangerous projectiles
   
130.03   Ball playing, snowballing and throwing missiles
Curfew for Minors
   
130.15   Definitions
   
130.16   Unlawful conduct of minors
   
130.17   Unlawful conduct of parents
   
130.18   Unlawful conduct of operators of establishments
   
130.19   Duties of police
   
130.20   Special events
   
130.21   Exemptions
 
   
130.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 130.01 DISORDERLY CONDUCT.
   (A)   Disorderly conduct, as defined in § 5503 of the Crimes Code, 18
Pa.C.S.A. § 5503, is hereby prohibited within the borough. A person is guilty
of disorderly conduct if, with intent to cause public inconvenience, annoyance
or alarm, or recklessly creating a risk thereof, he or she:
      (1)   Engages in fighting or threatening, or in violent or tumultuous
behavior;
      (2)   Makes unreasonable noise; or
      (3)   Creates a hazardous or physically offensive condition by any act
which serves no legitimate purpose of the actor.
   (B)   Provided, as used in this section, the word PUBLIC means affecting or
likely to affect persons in a place to which the public or a substantial group
has access. Among the places included are streets, alleys and sidewalks,
transport facilities, schools, prisons, apartment houses, places of business or
amusement, any neighborhood or any premises which are open to the public.
(Prior Code, § 6-101) (Ord. 2015-04, passed 12-14-2015) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.02 FIREARMS AND DANGEROUS PROJECTILES.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      BOW AND ARROW. All bows and arrows capable of causing personal injury or
property damage.
      FIREARM. An instrument used in the propulsion of shot, shell, bullet or
any other object by the action of gun powder exploded, explosive powder or the
expansion of gas therein.
(Prior Code, § 6-201)
   (B)   The use or discharge of any bow and arrow or firearm within the
borough is prohibited.
(Prior Code, § 6-202)
   (C)   The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to the following
uses or activities involving firearms and/or bows and arrows where otherwise
legal:
      (1)   Authorized law enforcement officers acting in their line of duty or
in training;
      (2)   Discharging of firearms in the defense of persons or property;
      (3)   Discharging of firearms or bow and arrow by members of a duly
organized gun, rifle or archery club, or their bona fide guests, or of military
organizations, upon the ranges of such clubs or organizations under the control
and supervision of the duly constituted officers of such clubs or
organizations, or by the patrons of commercial ranges;
      (4)   A private target practice or archery range constructed entirely
within the confines of an individual residential property and on which the
projectile expended shall be confined to said individual property;
      (5)   Firearm or archery instruction operated by an established civic,
church or school program; or
      (6)   Farmers protecting their property from predators.
(Prior Code, § 6-203)
(Ord. 2015-04, passed 12-14-2015) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.03 BALL PLAYING, SNOWBALLING AND THROWING MISSILES.
   Missiles upon or onto streets or alleys are prohibited. Ball playing,
including the throwing, kicking or knocking of any ball; snowballing; and the
throwing of any stone or other missile of any kind upon or onto any public
street in the borough is prohibited.
(Prior Code, § 6-301) (Ord. 106, passed 8-19-1966; Ord. 204A, passed 2-13-1989;
Ord. 2015-04, passed 12-14-2015) Penalty, see §
130.99
CURFEW FOR MINORS
§ 130.15 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   In this subchapter, the singular shall include the plural, the plural
shall include the singular and the masculine shall include the feminine and the
neuter.
   (B)   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      AFTER HOURS. The period beginning at 11:00 p.m. on Fridays and Saturdays,
and at 10:00 p.m. on all other evenings, and ending at 5:00 a.m. of the
following day in each case. Except that where any official school function or
activity shall not conclude before 10:30 p.m. on any Friday or Saturday evening
or before 9:30 p.m. on any other evening, the said period shall not begin until
one-half hour after the conclusion of such function or activity.
      ESTABLISHMENT. Any privately owned place of business carried on for
profit; any place of amusement or entertainment to which the public is invited
and any similar place.
      MINOR. Any person under the age of 18 years; for the purpose of this
subchapter, a person shall be deemed to be 18 years of age on the date of his
or her eighteenth birthday and not before that date.
      OPERATOR. Any person, as herein defined, owning, operating, managing or
conducting any establishment.
      PARENT. The natural parent or a guardian or other adult person of the age
of 18 years or older responsible for the care and custody of any minor.
      PERSON. Any natural person, partnership, association, firm or
corporation.
      PUBLIC PLACE. Any public street, highway, road, alley, park, playground,
vacant lot, public building, bus terminal or similar place.
      REMAIN. Loiter, wander, stroll, idle, play or be.
(Prior Code, § 6-601) (Ord. 191, passed 12-9-1985; Ord. 204A, passed 2-13-1989)
§ 130.16 UNLAWFUL CONDUCT OF MINORS.
   It shall be unlawful for any minor to remain in or upon any public place or
establishment in the borough after hours unless accompanied by a parent, or
upon an errand or other legitimate business directed by a parent, or unless
engaged in gainful, lawful employment after hours, in which case, such minor
shall carry written identification and evidence of such employment, or unless
exempted under §
130.21.
(Prior Code, § 6-602) (Ord. 191, passed 12-9-1985; Ord. 204A, passed 2-13-1989)
Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.17 UNLAWFUL CONDUCT OF PARENTS.
   It shall be unlawful for any parent knowingly to permit any minor to remain
in or upon any public place or any establishment in the borough after hours
unless such parent shall accompany the minor or shall direct the minor in
writing to perform an errand or to engage in other legitimate business, which
writing shall be kept in possession of such minor; or unless such minor is
engaged in gainful, lawful employment after hours, in which case such minor
shall carry written identification and evidence of such employment, or unless
exempted under §
130.21.
(Prior Code, § 6-603) (Ord. 191, passed 12-9-1985; Ord. 204A, passed 2-13-1989)
Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.18 UNLAWFUL CONDUCT OF OPERATORS OF ESTABLISHMENTS.
   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any establishment within the
borough knowingly to permit any minor to remain upon the premises of such
establishment after hours, unless exempted under §
130.21.
(Prior Code, § 6-604) (Ord. 191, passed 12-9-1985) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.19 DUTIES OF POLICE.
   Any police officer of the borough who finds any minor violating any
provision of this subchapter shall endeavor to ascertain the name, age, date of
birth and address of such minor, and the names of the minor’s parents. The
minor shall thereupon either be brought to the Police Department and the
parents notified, or he or she shall be taken or instructed to proceed directly
to his or her home. The information obtained from the minor, together with a
full report, shall be transmitted to the Mayor, who shall have made a record
thereof in a book to be kept for that purpose and who shall cause written
notice to be delivered, mailed or otherwise transmitted to the parents of the
minor advising them of the violation of this subchapter. A record of all
violations shall also be kept by the police.
(Prior Code, § 6-605) (Ord. 191, passed 12-9-1985)
§ 130.20 SPECIAL EVENTS.
   When there are special events, programs or functions by properly organized
and supervised organizations to advance legitimate recreation, character
development, religious training and school activities in the building of good
citizenship in young people, the Police Department shall grant special
consideration in those cases upon receipt of notice thereof, and children will
be permitted to proceed directly from the event without incident.
(Prior Code, § 6-607) (Ord. 191, passed 12-9-1985) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.21 EXEMPTIONS.
   It is an exemption to a violation under this subchapter that the person
engaged in the prohibited conduct while:
   (A)   Accompanied by the minor’s parent or guardian;
   (B)   On an errand at the direction of the minor’s parent or guardian,
without any detour or stop;
   (C)   In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;
   (D)   Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home from
an employment activity, without any detour or stop;
   (E)   Involved in an emergency;
   (F)   On the sidewalk abutting the minor’s residence or abutting the
residence of a next-door neighbor if the neighbor did not complain to the
Police Department about the minor’s presence;
   (G)   Attending an official school, religious or other recreational activity
supervised by adults and sponsored by the city, a civic organization or another
similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor, or going to or
returning home from, without any detour or stop, an official school, religious
or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city,
a civic organization or another similar entity that takes responsibility for
the minor;
   (H)   Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States
Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech and the
right of assembly; or
   (I)   Married or had been married or had disabilities of minority removed in
accordance with state law.
§ 130.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of §
130.01 of this chapter, upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a
magisterial district judge in the manner provided for the enforcement of
summary offenses under the Commonwealth Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 (subject to change via
resolution) plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a
term of imprisonment not to exceed 90 days. Each day that a violation of §
130.01 continues shall constitute a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 6-102)
   (C)   Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of §
130.02 of this chapter, upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a
magisterial district judge in the manner provided for the enforcement of
summary offenses under the Commonwealth Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 (subject to change via
resolution) plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a
term of imprisonment not to exceed 90 days. Each day that a violation of §
130.02 continues shall constitute a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 6-204)
   (D)   Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of §
130.03 of this chapter, upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a
magisterial district judge in the manner provided for the enforcement of
summary offenses under the Commonwealth Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be
sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $25 nor more than $1,000 (subject to
change via resolution) plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and
costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 90 days. Each day that a
violation of §
130.03 continues shall constitute a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 6-301)
   (E)   Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of §§
130.15 to
130.21 of this chapter, upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a
magisterial district judge in the manner provided for the enforcement of
summary offenses under the Commonwealth Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of
payment of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 90
days. Each day that a violation of §§
130.15 to
130.21 continues or each section of §§
130.15 to
130.21 which shall be found to have been violated shall constitute a separate
offense.
(Prior Code, § 6-606)
(Ord. 106, passed 8-19-1966; Ord. 191, passed 12-9-1985; Ord. 204A, passed 2-
13-1989; Ord. 2015-04, passed 12-14-2015)
CHAPTER 131: OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
Section
General Provisions
   
131.01   Tampering with public property
   
131.02   Tampering with stakes, posts or monuments
   
131.03   Willful or malicious destruction of property
   
131.04   Removal of property
   
131.05   Exceptions
Abandoned Vehicles
   
131.20   Title
   
131.21   Definitions
   
131.22   Scope
   
131.23   Purpose and findings
   
131.24   Abandoned vehicles prohibited
   
131.25   Notice of violation
   
131.26   Encroachment, obstruction or interference
   
131.27   Order of abatement
   
131.28   Designation of garages; bonding; towing; storage
   
131.29   Effect of payment of towing and storage charges
   
131.30   Permit to store abandoned vehicles
 
   
131.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 131.01 TAMPERING WITH PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   No person or persons shall destroy or injure in any way whatsoever, or
tamper with or deface, any public property of the borough, or any grass, shrub,
tree, walk, lamp, ornamental work, building, streetlight, fire hydrant or water
or gas stop box on or along any street or alley, or in any park, playground or
other public ground in the borough. Provided, DEFACEMENT shall include, but not
be limited to, the making of graffiti or other markings upon any of the
property referred to in this section, or upon the surface of any street, alley,
sidewalk or curb in the borough.
(Prior Code, § 6-401) (Ord. 163, passed 9-10-1979; Ord. 204A, passed 2-13-1989)
Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.02 TAMPERING WITH STAKES, POSTS OR MONUMENTS.
   No person or persons shall in any manner interfere with or meddle with or
pull, drive, change, alter or destroy any stake, post, monument or other
evidence of any elevation, grade, line, location, corner or angle in the
borough made, placed or set, or hereafter made, placed or set, or caused to be
done, by the authorities of the borough in any survey of or in any street,
alley or public ground in the borough to evidence the location, elevation,
line, grade, corner or angle of any public street, alley, sidewalk, curb,
gutter, drain or other public work, matter or thing.
(Prior Code, § 6-402) (Ord. 163, passed 9-10-1979; Ord. 204A, passed 2-13-1989)
Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.03 WILLFUL OR MALICIOUS DESTRUCTION OF PROPERTY.
   No person or persons shall willfully or maliciously destroy, remove, deface,
obliterate or cover up any lamp, flare, warning sign or barricade erected by
the borough or by any person doing work by permission of the borough on any
street, alley, sidewalk or bridge in the borough or on any public ground of the
borough as a warning of danger.
(Prior Code, § 6-403) (Ord. 163, passed 9-10-1979; Ord. 204A, passed 2-13-1989)
Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.04 REMOVAL OF PROPERTY.
   No person or persons shall take any earth, stone or other material from any
street, alley or public ground in the borough.
(Prior Code, § 6-404) (Ord. 163, passed 9-10-1979; Ord. 204A, passed 2-13-1989)
Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.05 EXCEPTIONS.
   This subchapter shall not apply to normal activities in connection with the
construction, maintenance and repair of streets, alleys, sidewalks and public
grounds and the structures and fixtures located thereon or therein, or to
incidental results of work done thereon or therein, upon permit from or by
authority of the borough.
(Prior Code, § 6-405) (Ord. 163, passed 9-10-1979; Ord. 204A, passed 2-13-1989)
ABANDONED VEHICLES
§ 131.20 TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Abandoned Vehicle
Ordinance.”
(Prior Code, § 6-501) (Ord. 2012-01, passed 3-12-2012)
§ 131.21 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONED PROPERTY. That to which an owner has relinquished all rights,
title, claim and possession, with no intention of reclaiming it or resuming
ownership or possession.
   ABANDONED VEHICLE. Section 102 of the Vehicle Code, 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 102,
defines an ABANDONED VEHICLE in the following manner:
      (1)   A vehicle (other than a pedalcycle) shall be presumed to be
ABANDONED under any of the following circumstances, but the presumption is
rebuttable by a preponderance of the evidence.
         (a)   The vehicle is physically inoperable and is left unattended on a
highway or other public property for more than 48 hours.
         (b)   The vehicle has remained illegally on a highway or other public
property for a period of more than 48 hours.
         (c)   The vehicle is left unattended on or along a highway or other
public property for more than 48 hours and does not bear all of the following:
            1.   A valid registration certificate;
            2.   A valid license plate;
            3.   A current certificate of inspection; and
            4.   An ascertainable vehicle identification number.
         (d)   The vehicle has remained on private property without the consent
of the owner or person in control of the property for more than 24 hours.
      (2)   Vehicles and equipment used or to be used in construction, or in
the operation or maintenance of highways or public utility facilities, which
are left in a manner which does not interfere with the normal movement of
traffic shall not be considered ABANDONED;
      (3)   A mobile home or modular-style home or structure that has not been
occupied for a period of at least one year or more or for which the owner has
no certificate of title; and
      (4)   The vehicle or mobile or modular structure is so unsightly or
blighted as to create a nuisance for surrounding property owners.
   ABANDONMENT. Involves an intention to abandon together with an act or
omission to act by which such intention is carried into effect.
   BOROUGH. The Borough of Oklahoma, Pennsylvania.
   COUNCIL. The duly elected Borough Council of Oklahoma, Pennsylvania.
   ENCLOSED BUILDING OR STRUCTURE. A building constructed of brick, wood,
cement or some other common building material and is not considered to be a
hazard, nuisance or dangerous structure.
   JUNK MOTOR VEHICLE. A motor vehicle that is without a valid registration
plate or valid and current inspection and is unable to move under its own
power, with the exception of vehicles specifically excluded from the definition
by the Borough Council after request for exception has been made by the Code
Enforcement Officer.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Any type of mechanical device, propelled by a motor, in which
persons or property may be transported upon public streets or highways, and
including trailers or semi-trailers pulled thereby.
   OWNER. A person owing, leasing, occupying or having charge of any premises
within the borough.
   PERSON. Any natural person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
   PREMISES. Any real property, building or structure.
   PRIVATE PARKING LOT. A parking lot open to the public or used for parking
without charge, or a parking lot used for parking with charge (§ 3353(b) of the
Vehicle Code, 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 3353(b)).
   PUBLIC PROPERTY. Any property owned or leased by the federal government or
one of its agencies, the commonwealth or one of its agencies, the county or the
borough, including rights-of-way of record.
   SALVOR. A person engaged in the business of acquiring abandoned vehicles for
the purposes of taking apart, recycling, selling, rebuilding or exchanging the
vehicles or parts thereof (§ 102 of the Vehicle Code, 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 102).
   WAREHOUSE. A person engaged in the business of storing goods for hire. See
13 Pa.C.S. § 7102.
(Prior Code, § 6-502) (Ord. 2012-01, passed 3-12-2012)
§ 131.22 SCOPE.
   (A)   This subchapter shall apply to all abandoned vehicles within the
borough which are not parked on public property and which are visible from the
highway or other public property or privately owned property, except privately
owned property of the owner of the abandoned vehicle. The term “abandoned
vehicle” is a term of art to include everything with the definition. The
heading of any section in this subchapter is not controlling, but used merely
for convenience.
   (B)   Vehicles suspected of being abandoned vehicles which are located in or
on public property, where applicable, shall be reported to law enforcement
along with a request that the vehicle be considered for impoundment.
(Prior Code, § 6-503) (Ord. 2012-01, passed 3-12-2012)
§ 131.23 PURPOSE AND FINDINGS.
   (A)   The Council recognizes the importance and significance of adopting
ordinances relating to the safety and quality of life for the residents of the
borough.
   (B)   It has come to the attention of the Council that there are several
abandoned vehicles on private property within the borough and that these
abandoned vehicles are unsightly and a health hazard because weeds are allowed
to grow up in them, rodents can live in them and they are a potential danger
for children.
   (C)   The Council has received many complaints from neighbors who are
aggrieved by abandoned vehicles and unsightly mobile or modular homes or
trailers littering the borough, and said complainants have demanded that the
Council take action.
   (D)   The Council has determined that action must be taken to abate the
nuisance created by the abandoned vehicles, but that every effort to provide
due process to the owner of the abandoned vehicle shall be afforded.
(Prior Code, § 6-504) (Ord. 2012-01, passed 3-12-2012)
§ 131.24 ABANDONED VEHICLES PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Except as provided in this subchapter, it shall be an offense to
permit an abandoned vehicle to remain in or on any private property within the
borough for a period of 30 days or longer.
   (B)   Nothing in this subchapter shall prohibit the parking or storage of an
abandoned vehicle within a completely enclosed building or structure or in a
completely fenced-in area where members of the public cannot see it, nor shall
it apply to a person holding a valid permit issued under this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 6-505) (Ord. 2012-01, passed 3-12-2012) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.25 NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
   (A)   In the event that a borough representative or agent authorized to
issue a citation in the borough determines that a person is in violation of
this subchapter, the borough shall notify the violator of the offense under
this subchapter, where possible, by regular first-class mail and by certified
mail.
   (B)   The notice shall provide the violator with a copy of this subchapter,
and a period of five days from the date of the notice to either abate the
abandoned vehicle by removing it or placing it indoors where the public cannot
see it. The notice shall advise the violator to notify the borough within five
days of the date on the notice of the disposition of any abandoned vehicle.
   (C)   If, within five days of the date of the notice provided above, the
violator does not contact the borough to report the disposition of the
abandoned vehicle, a citation may be issued.
(Prior Code, § 6-506) (Ord. 2012-01, passed 3-12-2012)
§ 131.26 ENCROACHMENT, OBSTRUCTION OR INTERFERENCE.
   (A)   No unregistered and/or uninspected motor vehicle shall be parked, kept
or stored on any public or private property or any public or private roadway,
and no vehicle shall at any time be parked, kept or stored in a state of major
disassembly, disrepair or in the process of being stripped or dismantled;
provided, however, that an exception is granted to a vehicle of any type which
is undergoing a major overhaul, including body work; provided, that such work
is performed inside a structure or similarly enclosed area designed and
approved for such purposes.
   (B)   No motor vehicle, whether or not registered and/or inspected, shall be
parked, kept or stored on any property or public or private roadway in such a
manner as to interfere with pedestrian or vehicular traffic lawfully using such
public or private roadway or in such a way to interfere with necessary public
services, including snow removal.
(Prior Code, § 6-508) (Ord. 2012-01, passed 3-12-2012) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.27 ORDER OF ABATEMENT.
   (A)   In the event that a citation is issued against the person as provided
in §
131.99(C)(2) of this chapter, or if the owner of the vehicle can not be
determined or located, the borough may elect to seek relief in the Court of
Common Pleas of the county, either seeking an order of the court requiring the
defendant to remove the vehicle or authorizing the borough to enter upon the
grounds of the defendant, seize the abandoned vehicle and dispose of the same.
   (B)   In the event that any abandoned vehicle is determined to be in
violation of this subchapter, then the borough shall have the authority to
remove and impound any vehicle or to order the removal and impounding of any
vehicle illegally, provided that no such vehicle shall be removed or impounded
except in strict adherence to the provisions of this subchapter.
   (C)   The notice, sent by regular and certified mail to the last known owner
of the vehicle and to all lien holders, where possible, shall provide the make,
model, title number, vehicle identification number and registration plate
number, if known, and the place where the vehicle was impounded from and taken
to, along with a statement that the vehicle is considered to be abandoned but
can be reclaimed within 30 days of the date of advertisement upon payment of
the towing and storage charges and of the fine and costs, if applicable, as
well as the 10% penalty authorized by this code of ordinances, together with
the borough’s actual attorney fees and court costs. The notice shall state
where the fees are to be paid.
   (D)   In the event that the owner of the abandoned vehicle cannot be
determined by the borough, notice of the impoundment shall be advertised in a
newspaper of general circulation one time, using the same procedure required of
salvors under the Vehicle Code, 75 Pa.C.S.A. §§ 101 et seq.
   (E)   At the expiration of the 30-day notice period, the borough shall seek
title to the vehicle free and clear of any liens.
   (F)   After title to the vehicle is vested in the borough, the vehicle shall
be sold at auction, with the proceeds used to pay the towing and storage fees
and penalties and the borough’s actual attorney fees, costs and fines, if
applicable.
(Prior Code, § 6-509) (Ord. 2012-01, passed 3-12-2012)
§ 131.28 DESIGNATION OF GARAGES; BONDING; TOWING; STORAGE.
   Only approved storage garages that shall be designated from time to time by
the Borough Council shall do removal and impounding of vehicles under this
subchapter. Prior to a designation, a garage must show proof that it is bonded
or adequately insured for the year of use. The designated garage shall provide
the Council its charges for towing, and once approved by the Council, then the
charges shall be adhered to for the year. No different charges shall be
demanded of or collected from any person whose vehicle is removed or impounded
under this subchapter. The Borough Council shall delete from its list of
approved storage garages any garage that makes any unapproved charge in
connection with any vehicle removed or impounded under this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 6-510) (Ord. 2012-01, passed 3-12-2012) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.29 EFFECT OF PAYMENT OF TOWING AND STORAGE CHARGES.
   The payment of any towing and storage charges authorized by this subchapter
shall, unless payment is made under protest, be final and conclusive and shall
constitute a waiver of any right to recover the money so paid. If payment of
any towing or storage charges is made under protest, the offender shall be
entitled to a hearing before a magisterial district judge. Payment of the
towing and storage charges shall not relieve the owner or driver of any vehicle
from liability for any fine or penalty for the violation of the provision of
this subchapter for which the vehicle was removed or impounded.
(Prior Code, § 6-511) (Ord. 2012-01, passed 3-12-2012; Ord. 2015-04, passed 12-
14-2015)
§ 131.30 PERMIT TO STORE ABANDONED VEHICLES.
   (A)   Any person may apply for a permit to store an abandoned vehicle on his
or her property.
   (B)   Applications for permits to store one or more abandoned vehicles shall
be in writing, on a form designed and provided by the borough, and shall
contain the following information:
      (1)   Name and address of the applicant;
      (2)   Whether the applicant is the owner of the property where the
vehicle is to be stored, and if not, a statement from the owner consenting to
the storage of the vehicle on the property;
      (3)   The make, model and VIN of the vehicle or vehicles the applicant is
requesting a permit to store;
      (4)   The approximate period of time that the permit is requested to
cover;
      (5)   The reason for storing the vehicle; and
      (6)   Evidence, satisfactory to the borough, to show that the vehicle is
titled in the name of the applicant.
   (C)   The application shall be submitted to the Borough Secretary along with
the nonrefundable application fee. The fee for every permit issued under this
subchapter shall be in an amount as established from time to time by resolution
of the Borough Council.
   (D)   The application shall be considered at the next regularly scheduled
borough meeting, provided that at least ten days elapsed between the day of the
filing of the application and the meeting.
   (E)   If the Council grants the permit, it shall be effective for a period
of one year from the date of issuance, and the fee shall be in an amount as
established from time to time by resolution of the Borough Council.
   (F)   Not more than six cars shall be permitted to be stored under this
subchapter.
   (G)   In considering the application for a permit to store one or more
abandoned vehicle(s), the Council may consider whether the applicant has had a
permit in the past, whether the abandoned vehicles will constitute a
significant health hazard, whether there are citizen complaints about the
abandoned vehicles, whether the abandoned vehicles constitute a heath hazard,
the degree to which the vehicles can be seen by the public and the utility
served by the abandoned vehicles, if any, versus the inconvenience to the
community.
   (H)   (1)   The Council shall vote on each application after an opportunity
to hear from the applicant and any objectors. The applicant may be represented
by counsel.
      (2)   The Council shall afford the applicant five minutes to explain why
the permit should be issued. At the end of the five minutes, the applicant may
request an extension of time, which may be granted by at least three Council
members.
   (I)   The vote on the permit shall be a roll call vote taken in public. No
reason for the grant or denial is required to be given to the applicant or to
the public.
(Prior Code, § 6-512) (Ord. 2012-01, passed 3-12-2012; Ord. 2015-04, passed 12-
14-2015) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of §§
131.01 to
131.05 of this chapter, upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a
magisterial district judge in the manner provided for the enforcement of
summary offenses under the Commonwealth Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 (subject to change via
resolution) plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a
term of imprisonment not to exceed 90 days. Each day that a violation of §§
131.01 to
131.05 continues or each section of §§
131.01 to
131.05 which shall be found to have been violated shall constitute a separate
offense.
(Prior Code, § 6-406)
   (C)   (1)   Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision
of §§
131.20 to
131.30 of this chapter, upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a
magisterial district judge in the manner provided for the enforcement of
summary offenses under the Commonwealth Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 (subject to change via
resolution) plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a
term of imprisonment not to exceed 90 days. Each day that a violation of §§
131.20 to
131.30 continues or each section of §§
131.20 to
131.30 which shall be found to have been violated shall constitute a separate
offense.
      (2)   In the enforcement of §§
131.20 to
131.30 of this chapter, the Code Enforcement Officer of the borough may, at his
or her sole discretion, utilize a citation notice, in a form to be approved by
the Borough Council, notifying the persons responsible as to the violation of
§§
131.20 to
131.30 and providing that person an opportunity to remedy said violation within
five days of the date of that notice and to impose a fine not to exceed $1,000
(subject to change via resolution), payable to the borough, without the
necessity of a court proceeding and the imposition of attorney fees and court
costs.
(Prior Code, § 6-507)
(Ord. 163, passed 9-10-1979; Ord. 204A, passed 2-13-1989; Ord. 2012-01, passed
3-12-2012; Ord. 2015-04, passed 12-14-2015)
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION
      
151.   HOUSING
      
152.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
      
153.   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
      
154.   STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
      
155.   SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT
      
156.   ZONING
CHAPTER 150: BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION
Section
Construction Code
   
150.01   Uniform Construction Code adopted
   
150.02   Effect on current and prior borough building codes
Existing Structures Code
   
150.15   Existing Structures Code adopted
   
150.16   Modifications to BOCA National Existing Structures Codes
Smoke Detector Installation
   
150.30   Occupancies required to install smoke detectors
   
150.31   Mandatory installations
   
150.32   Owner-occupied dwelling units
   
150.33   Installation requirements
   
150.34   Responsibility
   
150.35   Registration of devices
   
150.36   Annual certification
   
150.37   Periodic tests
   
150.38   Remedies
 
   
150.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Fire prevention and protection, see
Chapter 92
   Grass, weeds and other vegetation on premises, see
Chapter 91
   Housing occupancy reports, see
Chapter 151
CONSTRUCTION CODE
§ 150.01 UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE ADOPTED.
   (A)   The borough hereby elects to administer and enforce the provisions of
the Construction Code Act, Act of Nov. 10, 1999, P.L. 491, No. 45, 35 P.S. §§
7210.101 to 7210.1103, as amended from time to time, and its regulations.
   (B)   The Uniform Construction Code, contained in 34 Pa. Code Chapters 401
to 405, as amended from time to time, is hereby adopted and incorporated herein
by reference as the municipal Building Code.
   (C)   Administration and enforcement of the Building Code within the borough
shall be undertaken in any of the following ways as determined by the Borough
Council from time to time by resolution:
      (1)   By the designation of an employee of the borough to serve as the
Municipal Code Official to act on behalf of the borough;
      (2)   By the retention of one or more construction code officials or
third-party agencies to act on behalf of the borough;
      (3)   By agreement with one or more other municipalities for the joint
administration and enforcement of the Act through an inter-municipal agreement;
      (4)   By entering into a contract with another municipality for the
administration and enforcement of the Act on behalf of this borough; and
      (5)   By entering into an agreement with the Commonwealth Department of
Labor and Industry for plan review, inspections and enforcement of structures
other than one-family or two-family dwelling units and utility and
miscellaneous-use structures.
   (D)   A Board of Appeals shall be established by resolution of the governing
body of this borough in conformity with the requirements of the relevant
provisions of the Building Code, as amended from time to time, and for the
purposes set forth therein. If at any time enforcement and administration is
undertaken jointly with one or more other municipalities, said Board of Appeals
shall be established by joint action of the participating municipalities.
   (E)   (1)   All Building Code ordinances or portions of ordinances which
were adopted by this borough on or before July 1, 1999, and which equal or
exceed the requirements of the Building Code incorporated by this section shall
continue in full force and effect until such time as such provisions fail to
equal or exceed the minimum requirements of the Building Code incorporated by
this section, as amended from time to time.
      (2)   All Building Code ordinances or portions of ordinances which are in
effect as of the effective date of this section and whose requirements are less
than the minimum requirements of the Building Code incorporated by this section
are hereby amended to conform with the comparable provisions of the Building
Code incorporated by this section.
      (3)   All relevant ordinances, regulations and policies of this borough
not governed by the Building Code incorporated by this section shall remain in
full force and effect.
   (F)   Fees assessable by the borough for the administration and enforcement
undertaken pursuant to this section and the Building Code incorporated by this
section shall be established by the governing body by resolution from time to
time.
(Ord. 1 of 2024, passed 4-8-2024)
§ 150.02 EFFECT ON CURRENT AND PRIOR BOROUGH BUILDING CODES.
   (A)   All Building Code ordinances or other code ordinances or portions of
ordinances which were adopted by the borough on or before July 1, 1999, and
which equal or exceed the requirements of the UCC and the international
ordinances incorporated therein shall continue in full force and effect until
such time as such provisions fail to equal or exceed the minimum requirements
of the UCC or the international ordinances incorporated therein, as amended
from time to time.
   (B)   All building code ordinances or portions of ordinances which are in
effect as of the effective date of this section and whose requirements are less
than the minimum requirements of the UCC or the international ordinances
incorporated therein are hereby amended to conform with the comparable
provisions of the UCC.
(Ord. 1 of 2024, passed 4-8-2024)
EXISTING STRUCTURES CODE
§ 150.15 EXISTING STRUCTURES CODE ADOPTED.
   The borough adopts as its existing structures code the BOCA National
Existing Structures Code, 1987 (Second Edition), subject to provisions in this
subchapter amending, deleting, adding to and making insertions in that code.
Copies of that code have been placed on file with the Borough Secretary, and
will remain on file there. That entire existing structures code, except for
those portions that are deleted, amended or modified in the following sections
of this subchapter, is adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out verbatim
in this subchapter, and from the date on which this subchapter takes effect,
shall be controlling throughout the limits of the borough in all matters to
which that code is made applicable. In this subchapter, the BOCA National
Existing Structures Code may be referred to as “the Code” or “this Code.”
(Prior Code, § 5-101) (Ord. 207A, passed 2-13-1989)
§ 150.16 MODIFICATIONS TO BOCA NATIONAL EXISTING STRUCTURES CODES.
   The Code is amended and modified in the following respects.
   (A)   Whenever the words “name of jurisdiction” appear in brackets in the
code, the words “Borough of Oklahoma” shall be inserted in place of those
bracketed words. Likewise, the words “Borough of Oklahoma” shall be substituted
for the word “jurisdiction” wherever that word appears singly in the Code
without being preceded by the words “under the.”
   (B)   Wherever the term “code official” or the term “administrative
authority” appears in the Code, the term “building official” shall be
substituted for that term.
   (C)   Wherever the term “the legislative body of the jurisdiction” or the
term “chief authority of the jurisdiction” appears in the code, the term
“Borough Council” shall be substituted for that term.
   (D)   Wherever the term “the jurisdiction’s legal representative” or the
term “the jurisdiction’s attorney-at-law” appears in the code, the term
“Borough Solicitor” shall be substituted for that term.
   (E)   Section ES-100.1. of the code is amended to read as follows:
      ES-100.1. Title. This code shall be known as the “Existing Structures
Code of the Borough of Oklahoma,” hereinafter referred to as “the code” or
“this code.”
   (F)   Section ES-100.4. of the code is amended to read as follows:
      ES-100.4. Validity of other laws, regulations and ordinances. Nothing in
this code shall be construed to prevent the enforcement of other laws, State
regulations and ordinances of this borough which prescribe more restrictive or
stricter requirements or limitations. When the provisions specified in this
code for health, safety and welfare are more restrictive than the other
provisions, this code shall control, but in any case, the most rigid
requirements of either this code or other laws, regulations or ordinances shall
apply whenever they may be in conflict.
   (G)   Section ES-100.5. of the code is amended to read as follows:
      ES-100.5. Application of other codes. Any repairs or alterations to a
structure, or changes of use therein, which are caused directly or indirectly
by the enforcement of this code, shall be done in accordance with procedures
and provisions of the borough’s building code.
   (H)   Section ES-101.2. of the code is amended to read as follows:
      ES-101.2. Saving clause. Nothing in this code or in the code adopting it
by reference shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding pending in any
court at the time of enacting that code, or any rights acquired, liability
incurred or any cause or causes of action accrued or existing, under any
ordinance repealed by that ordinance. No right or remedy of any character shall
be lost, impaired or affected by that ordinance.
   (I)   Section ES-104.1. of the code is amended to read as follows:
      ES-104.1. Enforcement Officer. It shall be the duty and responsibility of
the code official to enforce the provisions of this code. Where, in the course
of his or her enforcement duties, the code official finds a violation in the
strict provisions or application of this code which violation, if corrected,
would not substantially serve to further the purpose of this code in protecting
the public health, safety and welfare, and where the elimination of that
violation would constitute a practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship, the
code official shall recommend to the Appeal Board that a variance be granted.
In considering such recommendations, the Appeal Board shall give consideration
to the special physical characteristics of existing older dwellings in the
borough which would require extensive structural alterations to conform to the
strict provisions or application of this code.
   (J)   Section ES-105.3.2. of the code is amended to read as follows:
      ES-105.3.2. Right of entry. If any owner, occupant or other person in
charge of a structure subject to the provisions of this code refuses, impedes,
inhibits, interferes with, restricts or obstructs entry and free access to any
part of the structure or premises where inspection authorized by this code is
sought, the Borough Solicitor may initiate proper action to seek, in a court of
competent jurisdiction, an order that such owner, occupant or other person in
charge cease and desist with such interference.
   (K)   Section ES-105.5. of the code is amended to read as follows:
      ES-105.5. Coordination of enforcement. Inspection of premises, and the
issuance and enforcement of notices and orders shall be the responsibility of
the code official. Whenever, in the opinion of the code official initiating an
inspection under this code, it is deemed necessary or desirable to have
inspections by other department or officer of Borough government, the code
official shall make reasonable effort to arrange for the coordination of such
inspections so as to minimize the number of visits by inspectors, and to confer
with the other department or officer for the purpose of eliminating conflicting
orders before any are issued. A department or officer shall not, however, delay
the issuance of any emergency orders which it determines must be issued.
   (L)   Section ES-105.6. of the code is amended by adding the following
sentence at the end of that section: “Furthermore, Borough Council shall have
authority, at its discretion, to abrogate any rule or regulation, or part
thereof, in which case that rule or regulation or part thereof shall cease to
be in effect in the Borough.”
   (M)   Section ES-105.7. of the code is amended to read as follows:
      ES-105.7. Annual report. At least once a year, and oftener if required by
Borough Council, the code official shall submit to Council a written statement
operations in such form and content as shall be prescribed by Council.
   (N)   Section ES-106.1. of the code is amended to read as follows:
      ES-106.1. General. When a structure or part thereof is found by the code
official to be unsafe, or when a structure or part thereof is found unfit for
human occupancy or use, or is found unlawful, and the procedures prescribed by
the Building Code under the heading “Unsafe Buildings and Structure” shall be
found to be inadequate or unsuitable to remedy the situation, that structure or
part thereof may be condemned pursuant to the provisions of this code and may
be placarded and vacated. It shall not be re-occupied without approval of the
code official. Unsafe equipment shall be placarded and placed out of service.
   (O)   Section ES-110.2. of the code is amended to read as follows:
      ES-110.2. Penalty for violation. Any person who violates any provision of
this code or of the code adopting this code, or who violates or fails to comply
with any order made thereunder, or who builds in violation of any detailed
statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder, or any
certificate or permit issued thereunder, and from which no appeal has been
taken, or who fails to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified by the
Appeal Board or by a court of competent jurisdiction, within the time fixed
herein, shall severally, for each and every such violation and noncompliance,
respectively, upon conviction in a summary proceeding before a magisterial
district judge under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, be sentenced
to pay a fine of not less than $200 nor more than $1,000 and costs of
prosecution, and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, to imprisonment
for not more than 90 days. The imposition of one penalty for any violation
shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue; and all such persons
shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a
reasonable time; and when not otherwise specified, each ten days that
prohibited conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate offense.
   (P)   Section ES-111.1. of the code is amended to add the following sentence
at the end of that section: “Provided, the intent of this § ES-111.1.,
“Demolition,” is to provide a procedure to be available for use in cases where
the procedures prescribed by the Building Code under the heading “Unsafe
Buildings and Structures” or under the heading “Demolition” shall be found to
be inadequate or unsuitable to remedy the situation.”
   (Q)   Section ES-111.4. of the code is amended by substituting for the word
“number,” enclosed in brackets, the following: “10.”
   (R)   Section ES-112.1. of the code is amended to read as follows:
      ES-112.1. Appeals. Any person affected by any notice which has been
issued in connection with the enforcement of any provision of this code, or of
any rule or regulation adopted by authority of this code, shall have the right
to appeal and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the Board of
Appeals established by the BOCA National Building Code, which shall be composed
of the Borough Council, ex officio, and shall be the “Appeal Board” as referred
to in this code. The appeal shall proceed in the same manner and subject to the
same limitations as prescribed in the building code for appeals from the orders
and decisions of the building official under that code. The appeal shall be
filed with the borough, in writing, within 30 days of the rendition of the
order or decision of the code official.
   (S)   Sections ES-112.2.1. through ES-112.2.3. of the code are deleted.
   (T)   Section ES-112.3. of the code is amended to read as follows:
      ES-112.3. Records. The Borough Secretary shall serve as the secretary of
the Appeals Board, and in the absence of the secretary, the assistant secretary
shall so serve. The minutes of each meeting of Council, sitting as Appeals
Board, shall clearly show the basis for each decision made by the Board.
   (U)   Section ES-200.3. of the code is amended to read as follows:
      ES-200.3. Terms defined in other codes. Where terms are not defined in
this code and are defined in the BOCA National Building Code, the BOCA National
Mechanical Code or the BOCA National Plumbing Code, each of the latter two
codes containing provisions incorporated by reference into the BOCA National
Building Code, they shall have the same meanings ascribed to them in those
codes.
   (V)   Section ES-200.4. of the code is amended to read as follows:
      ES-200.4. Terms not defined. Where terms are not defined under the terms
of this code or under the provisions of the building, plumbing and/or
mechanical codes referred to in subsection .3, they shall have prescribed to
them their ordinarily accepted meanings or such as the context herein as may
apply.
   (W)   The following definitions in Section ES-201.1. of the code are amended
to read as follows:
      BASEMENT. The portion of a building which is partly or completely below
grade.
      BUILDING CODE. The building code adopted by ordinance of this Borough,
with amendments, deletions, additions and modifications incorporated into that
ordinance.
      CODE OFFICIAL. The building official, who is designated as the official
charged with the administration and enforcement of this code, or any duly
authorized representative.
   (X)   Section 301.6. of the code is deleted.
   (Y)   Sections ES-301.10., ES-301.10.1. and ES-301.10.2. of the code are
amended to read as follows:
      ES-301.10. Motor vehicles. Motor vehicles shall be subject to the
following requirements of Section ES-301.10.1. and ES-301.10.2.
      ES-301.10.1. Residential areas. Except as provided in other regulations,
not more than one presently inoperable motor vehicle shall be parked on any
property used or intended to be used primarily for the residential purposes and
that parked vehicle shall not at any time be in a state of major disassembly,
disrepair nor shall it be in the process of being stripped or dismantled. A
vehicle of any type shall not at any time undergo major overhaul, including
body work, in any such residential area.
      ES-301.10.2. Nonresidential areas. Except as provided in other
regulations and approved by the building official, not more than two inoperable
motor vehicles shall be permitted on any property used or intended to be used
primarily for non-residential purposes, and any vehicle shall not at any time
be in a state of major disassembly, disrepair nor shall it be in the process of
being stripped or dismantled.
   (Z)   Section ES-302.4.7. of the code is amended to read as follows:
      ES-302.4.7. Guards for basement windows. Where the building official has
evidence which leads him or her to believe that a rodent infestation problem
exists in a building, every basement or cellar window in that building that is
openable shall be supplied with corrosion-resistive rodent-proof shields of not
less than No. 22 U.S. gauge perforated steel sheets, or No. 20 B & S gauge
aluminum, or No. 16 U.S. gauge expanded metal or wire mesh screens, with not
more than one-half-inch mesh openings; or with other material affording
equivalent protection against the entry of rodents, including storm windows.
   (AA)   Section ES-303.8.1. of the code is amended to read as follows:
      ES-303.8.1. Handrails and guardrails. Where the code official has
evidence which leads him or her to believe that a handrail is required for
safety purposes, every stairwell and every flight of stairs, which is more than
two risers high, shall have handrails or railings located in accordance with
the provisions of the Building Code. Every handrail or guardrail shall be
firmly fastened and must be maintained in good condition. Properly balustraded
guardrails, capable of bearing normally imposed loads as required by the
Building Code, shall be placed on the open portions of stairs, balconies,
landings and stairwells.
   (BB)   The following new section is added to the code directly after Section
ES-303.8.1.:
      Section ES-304-0. Protective coating for surfaces. All exterior and
interior surfaces of a structure that are not of a species inherently resistant
to decay, rust, tarnish or other form of deterioration shall be treated
periodically with paint, preservative or other suitable protective coating to
prevent or control such forms of deterioration. Surfaces shall be deemed to be
in need of such a protective coating if there is evidence of excessive peeling
of paint, chipping or scaling of plaster, or weathering or deterioration of any
protective coating previously applied.
   (CC)   Section ES-502.2. of the code is amended to read as follows:
      ES-502.2. Location of bath and second sleeping room. Wherever possible,
without creating a practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship, in the opinion
of the code official, no residence building or dwelling unit containing two or
more sleeping rooms shall have such room arrangement that access to a bathroom
or water closet compartment intended for use by occupants of more than one
sleeping room can be had only by going through another sleeping room; nor shall
the room arrangement be such that access to a sleeping room can be had only by
going through another sleeping room or a bathroom or water closet compartment.
No bathroom shall be so located that access thereto is solely through a
kitchen.
   (DD)   Section ES-701.2. of the code is amended by adding the following at
the end of the section: “Every dwelling unit shall have one or more approved
means of egress, with minimum head room of six feet, six inches, leading to
safe and open space at ground level and every dwelling unit in a multiple
dwelling shall have immediate access to two or more approved means of egress
with minimum head room of six feet, six inches, leading to safe and open space
at ground level, as required by the laws of this state and this borough.”
(Prior Code, § 5-102) (Ord. 207A, passed 2-13-1989; Ord. 2015-04, passed 12-14-
2015)
SMOKE DETECTOR INSTALLATION
§ 150.30 OCCUPANCIES REQUIRED TO INSTALL SMOKE DETECTORS.
   In all occupancies listed in §
150.31 of this chapter, unless otherwise stated therein, it shall be mandatory
to have not less than one automatic smoke detection device, properly installed
and maintained, which, when activated, provides an audible alarm adequate to
warn the occupants therein of a possible fire emergency.
(Prior Code, § 5-201) (Ord. 185, passed 9-12-1983) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.31 MANDATORY INSTALLATIONS.
   The following occupancies shall have mandatory installations:
   (A)   Residential occupancies. Each dwelling unit or individual apartment
within buildings used as multiple dwellings, or in any other dwelling units
which are not owner-occupied;
   (B)   Mercantile occupancies. All buildings or portions thereof used for
commercial purposes shall have not less than one smoke detection device
installed for each floor, including the basement;
   (C)   Assembly occupancies. The occupancy or use of a building or structure
or any portion thereof by a gathering of persons shall have not less than one
smoke detection device installed for each floor, including the basement;
   (D)   Business occupancies. Occupancy or use of a building or structure or
any portion thereof for the transaction of business or the rendering or
receiving of professional services shall have not less than one smoke detection
device installed for each floor, including the basement;
   (E)   Other occupancies. In all other occupancies and existing buildings,
upon change of ownership of the real estate upon which the building is erected;
and
   (F)   New construction. In all newly constructed buildings occupied
subsequent to the enactment of this section.
(Prior Code, § 5-202) (Ord. 185, passed 9-12-1983) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.32 OWNER-OCCUPIED DWELLING UNITS.
   It is recommended that in residential occupancies consisting of a dwelling
unit occupied by the owner or owners on the date of the enactment of this
section that not less than one automatic smoke detection device be properly
installed and maintained, which, when activated, sounds an audible alarm
adequate to warn the occupants therein of a possible fire emergency.
(Prior Code, § 5-203) (Ord. 185, passed 9-12-1983) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.33 INSTALLATION REQUIREMENTS.
   All installations shall be in accordance with manufacturers’ recommendations
and latest applicable standards, including the current editions of the National
Fire Codes issued by the National Fire Protection Association.
(Prior Code, § 5-204) (Ord. 185, passed 9-12-1983) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.34 RESPONSIBILITY.
   It shall be the responsibility of the owner to purchase, install and
maintain each mandated smoke detection device.
(Prior Code, § 5-205) (Ord. 185, passed 9-12-1983) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.35 REGISTRATION OF DEVICES.
   (A)   Within ten days after the mandated and/or recommended installation, it
shall be the responsibility of the owner or his or her agent to register such
devices and installation with the Building Official at his or her office.
   (B)   The registration date shall become the anniversary date for annual
recertification as authorized in §
150.36 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 5-206) (Ord. 185, passed 9-12-1983) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.36 ANNUAL CERTIFICATION.
   Annual certification of the operability of each smoke detection device in
any of the occupancies listed in §
150.31 of this chapter shall be made by the owner or his or her agent. Such
certification shall be in card form, executed by both the owner or his or her
agent and the tenant of the occupancy, said card to be registered with the
Building Official for the borough at his or her office at the Borough Building,
Thorn Street, Oklahoma, Pennsylvania, within ten days of the anniversary date
of the registration date of the original installation. Said registration must
be accomplished each and every year.
(Prior Code, § 5-207) (Ord. 185, passed 9-12-1983) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.37 PERIODIC TESTS.
   It shall be the duty of a tenant in each occupancy or unit thereof to
periodically test the smoke detection device to ensure its operability. In the
event of a malfunction, it shall be the responsibility of the tenant of the
occupancy to immediately inform the owner or his or her agent or representative
of said malfunction. The owner shall be responsible for restoring the smoke
detection device to reliable operation.
(Prior Code, § 5-208) (Ord. 185, passed 9-12-1983) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.38 REMEDIES.
   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed to prevent the enforcement of
state laws and regulations and/or other ordinances and codes of the borough
which prescribe more restrictive or stricter requirements or limitations.
(Prior Code, § 5-209) (Ord. 185, passed 9-12-1983) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   All persons being owners of real estate upon which a building is
erected who violates any provision of §§
150.30 to
150.38 of this chapter, with the exception of §
150.32, upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a magisterial
district judge in the manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses
under the Commonwealth Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a
fine of not more than $1,000 (subject to change via resolution) plus costs and,
in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to
exceed 90 days. Each day that a violation of §§
150.30 to
150.38 continues or each section of §§
150.30 to
150.38 which shall be found to have been violated shall constitute a separate
offense.
(Prior Code, § 5-210)
(Ord. 185, passed 9-12-1983; Ord. 204A, passed 2-13-1989; Ord. 2015-04, passed
12-14-2015)
CHAPTER 151: HOUSING
Section
   
151.01   Definition
   
151.02   Landlords/landladies to file occupancy reports
   
151.03   Annual certification if no change in occupancy
   
151.04   Information on occupancy report
   
151.05   Availability of occupant names and addresses; duty of Secretary
 
   
151.99   Penalty
§ 151.01 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   LANDLORD/LANDLADY. Any person or persons, natural or corporate, who, or it,
allows other persons, natural or corporate, to occupy real estate or portions
of real estate owned by or in the control of the landlord/landlady.
(Prior Code, § 11-101) (Ord. 175, passed 7-12-1982)
§ 151.02 LANDLORDS/LANDLADIES TO FILE OCCUPANCY REPORTS.
   A landlord/landlady shall file occupancy reports with the Borough Secretary
within 30 days after a change in occupancy by either a new or additional
person, natural or corporate, occupies all, or a portion of, real estate owned
by or in the control of the landlord/landlady.
(Prior Code, § 11-102) (Ord. 175, passed 7-12-1982) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.03 ANNUAL CERTIFICATION IF NO CHANGE IN OCCUPANCY.
   If no new or additional person or persons, natural or corporate, have
occupied all or a portion of the real estate owned by or in the control of the
landlord/landlady since the filing of the most recent occupancy report, then
annually, on or before January 31 each year, the landlord/landlady shall file a
certification to that effect with the Borough Secretary on forms available at
the office of the Borough Secretary.
(Prior Code, § 11-103) (Ord. 175, passed 7-12-1982) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.04 INFORMATION ON OCCUPANCY REPORT.
   An occupancy report shall contain the following information:
   (A)   The name of all persons, natural or corporate, having a right to
occupy real estate owned by, or in the control of, the landlord/landlady;
   (B)   The complete mailing address of all persons, natural or corporate, so
occupying;
   (C)   The name, address and telephone number of the landlord/landlady; and
   (D)   The signature of the landlord/landlady.
(Prior Code, § 11-104) (Ord. 175, passed 7-12-1982)
§ 151.05 AVAILABILITY OF OCCUPANT NAMES AND ADDRESSES; DUTY OF SECRETARY.
   The Borough Secretary shall supply the names and addresses of all persons,
natural or corporate, occupying real estate obtained by him or her hereunder to
the Borough Tax Collector and to all other officials and departments of the
borough requesting the same for the proper performance of their duties.
(Prior Code, § 11-106) (Ord. 175, passed 7-12-1982)
§ 151.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of
this chapter, upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a magisterial
district judge in the manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses
under the Commonwealth Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a
fine of not less than $100 nor more than $1,000 (subject to change via
resolution) plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a
term of imprisonment not to exceed 90 days.
   (B)   Each day that a violation of this chapter continues or each section of
this chapter which shall be found to have been violated shall constitute a
separate offense. It shall be a separate violation:
      (1)   As to each person, natural or corporate, occupying all or a portion
of real estate owned by, or in the control of, the landlord/landlady;
      (2)   As to each failure to provide an occupancy report or certification
of no change in occupancy when due; and
      (3)   As to each successive 30-day period following the due date of an
occupancy report or certification of no change in occupancy.
(Prior Code, § 11-105) (Ord. 175, passed 7-12-1982; Ord. 204A, passed 2-13-
1989; Ord. 2015-04, passed 12-14-2015)
CHAPTER 152: STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Section
Street Excavations and Openings
   
152.01   Title
   
152.02   Definitions
   
152.03   Street opening permit required
   
152.04   Application
   
152.05   Public utilities or municipal authorities
   
152.06   Fees
   
152.07   Repair and restoration of borough street
   
152.08   Regulations
   
152.09   Notice
Use of Streets
   
152.25   Sledding restricted on streets and alleys
   
152.26   Repairing or working on vehicles in rights-of-way unlawful
Driveways
   
152.40   Title
   
152.41   Definitions
   
152.42   Permit required
   
152.43   Application
   
152.44   Application processing procedures scope
   
152.45   Fees
   
152.46   Sight distance
   
152.47   Construction
   
152.48   Separate permits
   
152.49   Inspection
   
152.50   Notice of violation
 
   
152.99   Penalty
STREET EXCAVATIONS AND OPENINGS
§ 152.01 TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known as the “Oklahoma Borough Street Opening
Ordinance.”
(Ord. 2 of 2024, passed 11-11-2024)
§ 152.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APPLICANT. Any person, as defined in this section, who makes an application
for a street opening permit.
   EMERGENCY. A condition arising from actual or imminent failure and resulting
in a health or safety hazard which requires immediate action.
   PERSON. Any natural person, partnership, firm, association, corporation or
utility.
   STREET. Any public street, avenue, road, square, alley, highway or other
public place located in the borough and established for the use of vehicles
including the sidewalks adjacent thereto.
(Ord. 2 of 2024, passed 11-11-2024)
§ 152.03 STREET OPENING PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful, except in cases of emergency, for any person to
make any opening or excavation of any kind in or under any borough street or
right-of-way without first securing a street opening permit.
   (B)   Minor excavations not within the paved or otherwise improved portion
of any street and not greater than one foot in depth made for the purposes of
installing, maintaining or replacing a driveway, sidewalk, mailbox or other
similar appurtenance, which may be authorized or permitted under other
ordinances of the borough, shall be exempt.
   (C)   Any person making application for a street opening permit shall agree
to the terms of this subchapter as hereinafter provided.
(Ord. 2 of 2024, passed 11-11-2024) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.04 APPLICATION.
   (A)   Any person who proposes to access or make any opening or excavation in
any of the streets in the borough shall make an application to the Borough
Secretary, in writing, for that purpose.
   (B)   Such application shall be made upon blanks to be furnished by the
borough and shall set forth the name of the applicant, the purpose of such
opening, the exact location of the proposed opening or excavation, the
approximate size or depth thereof, the date or dates during which such opening
is to be made, the time when said opening or excavation may remain open, the
date and time when temporary and/or final resurfacing is to be performed and
such other information as the Borough Council may require.
   (C)   Issuance of a street opening permit, shall constitute an agreement
between the applicant and the borough that the work shall be done in full
compliance with all applicable ordinances of the borough and the laws of the
commonwealth in relation thereto, and that the applicant shall hold harmless
the borough from, and indemnify it against any and all actions, suits, demands,
payments, costs and charges for or by reason of the proposed access, opening or
excavation, and all damages to persons or property resulting in any manner
therefrom, or occurring in the performance of the work connected therewith, or
from any other matter, or cause relating thereto, by providing the borough a
bond in such sum, and with such sureties as recommended by the Borough Engineer
and as may be approved by the President of Council and the Borough Solicitor.
   (D)   The applicant shall provide and maintain public liability and property
damage insurance in an amount sufficient to indemnify and save harmless the
borough from all liability for damages or injury done to persons and property
which may be incurred by reason of such opening or any failure to properly
protect, maintain, barricade, light, backfill and/or otherwise properly effect
the same. The insurance shall be in an amount not less than $1,000,000 for
injury to persons and $100,000 for injury to property. The applicant shall name
the borough as additionally insured and provide proof of said insurance to the
borough.
   (E)   The applicant shall secure a street opening permit for each and every
project undertaken by the applicant at any one time. In cases of emergency, the
designated borough official shall be notified, and a street opening permit
shall be secured on the first official workday thereafter.
(Ord. 2 of 2024, passed 11-11-2024)
§ 152.05 PUBLIC UTILITIES OR MUNICIPAL AUTHORITIES.
   (A)   Prior to January 1 of each year, all municipal authorities and public
or private utilities which own and/or maintain facilities, equipment or
transmission lines located within any borough owned and maintained right-of-
way, shall apply for and receive three street opening permits for use in
emergency situations.
   (B)   Said permits shall be considered active for one calendar year and if
unused, shall be renewed for one additional calendar year whereupon they shall
expire, and three additional street opening permits shall be secured with fees
for unused permits credited to new permit fees.
   (C)   Where all three initial street opening permits are utilized for
activities regulated by this subchapter, within a single calendar year, three
additional street opening permits shall be secured by the original applicant or
duly authorized representative of the original applicant.
   (D)   No new underground waterline, sanitary sewer, storm sewer, electric,
cable TV, internet or gas main shall hereafter be laid or constructed, and no
existing underground transmission or collection facility line shall be extended
in any of the streets of the borough until the exact location has been
identified and the plan therefore shall have been first reviewed by the Borough
Engineer and approved by the Borough Council.
(Ord. 2 of 2024, passed 11-11-2024) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.06 FEES.
   (A)   Before any permit shall be issued to access, open or excavate any
portion of any street in the borough, the applicant shall pay to the Borough a
permit fee as set from time to time by resolution of Borough Council to cover
the cost of processing an application for such permit and other incidental
services in connection therewith.
   (B)   When an application is made to access, open or excavate any
longitudinal opening or excavation in excess of 20 linear feet, as a scheduled
line extension or replacement, before any permit shall be issued to access,
open or excavate, the applicant shall deposit, in addition to paying such
permit fee, an amount commensurate with inspection costs during such work and
upon completion, during the restoration, backfilling and repaving.
   (C)   The amount of the deposit shall be based on the Borough Engineer’s
estimate of costs for inspection services and the Borough Solicitor shall
approve the form of the deposit.
(Ord. 2 of 2024, passed 11-11-2024)
§ 152.07 REPAIR AND RESTORATION OF BOROUGH STREET.
   (A)   Any person who shall access, open or excavate any improved street in
the borough shall thoroughly and completely backfill the opening or excavation,
using accepted materials and compaction techniques so as to prevent any
settling thereafter; and shall restore the surface to the same condition as it
was before the access, opening or excavation.
   (B)   Such restoration shall be in accordance with the specifications of the
Department of Highways of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania Form 408 which are
hereby adopted as specifications of the borough for restoration of surfaces of
streets in the borough. The surface shall conform to the existing grade and
curb elevations and be of the same surface materials and treatment as the part
of the thoroughfare immediately adjoining the access, opening or excavation.
   (C)   If, within one year after the restoration of the street surface as
herein provided is completed, defects shall appear therein resulting from
defective backfilling or restoration by the applicant, the applicant shall
reimburse the borough for the cost of all necessary repairs to the permanent
cartway pavement as determined by the Borough Engineer.
   (D)   All other work in connection with access, opening or excavation of any
street, including emergency excavation, protection of vehicular and pedestrian
traffic, backfilling and temporary pavement, shall be done by the applicant at
his or her expense, and all such work shall be subject to the provisions of
this subchapter and to the supervision and approval of the borough, provided
that the Borough Council may require that the cutting of the surface of
improved streets and the backfilling of all excavation therein shall be done by
the borough, and the charge therefore shall be paid by the applicant on the
basis of actual cost of the work plus 20% for inspection, design and
administrative services.
(Ord. 2 of 2024, passed 11-11-2024)
§ 152.08 REGULATIONS.
   (A)   No access, opening or excavation of any street shall extend from the
curb line into the street a distance greater than one foot beyond the
centerline of the paved portion of the street before being backfilled and the
surface of the street restored to a condition safe and convenient for vehicular
and pedestrian travel.
   (B)   No more than 450 linear feet shall be opened in any street at any one
time, unless otherwise specified by agreement or contract.
   (C)   The work of excavation and restoration shall be so conducted as not to
interfere with the water mains, sanitary and storm sewers, or their connections
with structures, or any other subsurface lines or facilities, until permission
is authorized by the utility, agency or person owning and maintaining such
lines.
   (D)   No tunneling or boring shall be allowed without the express approval
of the Borough Council and permission therefore is indicated upon the street
opening permit. The backfilling of a tunnel excavation or bore shall be made
only in the presence of the Borough Engineer or representative thereof where
commonwealth or borough owned facilities are involved.
   (E)   All openings or excavation shall be backfilled promptly with 2A
limestone or approved materials and thoroughly compacted in layers with an
approved mechanical back tamper, each of which shall not exceed six inches in
depth. On improved streets, the backfill material shall be placed to within ten
inches of the surface.
   (F)   On improved streets, a temporary paving of approved material
thoroughly bound and compacted, shall be installed flush with the surface of
the adjoining paving. Permanent paving shall be completed at such time as the
Borough Engineer so directs.
   (G)   During excavation in any street, every necessary and reasonable
precaution shall be taken by the applicant and/or the applicant’s contractor to
keep the street in a safe and passable condition both day and night by guards,
barriers, warning signs, safety lights, lanterns and other devices, and all
excavating permits are granted under and subject to the express condition that
the person to whom the same is issued shall indemnify, and hold harmless the
borough, from any loss in damages, or otherwise, which may occur at any time by
reason of said excavation, or by any leak, explosion or other injury from any
pipe, apparatus, conduit or any other material placed in the said excavation.
   (H)   The applicant shall notify the borough when the opening or excavation
is ready for backfilling and before any backfilling is done, in order for
inspection to occur while the work is being completed by approved backfilling
and compaction in the case of unimproved streets and by restoration of
temporary or permanent paving in the case of improved streets.
   (I)   In the event that any work performed by or for a permit holder shall,
in the opinion of the Borough Engineer be unsatisfactory and the same shall not
be corrected in accordance with the Engineer’s instructions within the time
fixed by the Borough Engineer, or in the event that the work for which the
permit was issued is not completed within the time fixed by the street opening
permit, the borough may proceed to correct such unsatisfactory work or complete
any such work not completed, and charge the actual cost thereof, plus 20% for
inspection services, to the applicant.
   (J)   In the case of any emergency involving a leak, explosion or other
accident in any subsurface pipe, line, construction or facility, it shall be
lawful for the person owning or responsible for such pipe, line, construction
or facility to commence an excavation to remedy such condition utilizing one of
the three street opening permits required to be secured for such situation.
   (K)   All other provisions of this subchapter shall be complied with. If any
such emergency condition shall not be immediately attended to by the owner or
person responsible for such pipe, line, construction or facility, the Borough
Council, after such notice to affected property owners as it shall deem
necessary under the circumstances of the particular case, shall proceed to do
the work necessary and required by such emergency, and charge the same on the
basis of cost plus 20% for inspection services to such owner, operator or
person.
   (L)   Payment for all work done by the borough under the specific provisions
of this subchapter shall be made by the person responsible or liable therefore
under these provisions within 30 days after an itemized bill is sent to such
person by the borough. Upon failure to pay such charges within such time, the
same shall be collectible by the borough in the manner provided by law for the
collection of municipal claims.
   (M)   If more than one opening within 100 LF is made in a lane then the
entire lane is to be milled and paved with wearing course from opening to
opening.
(Ord. 2 of 2024, passed 11-11-2024)
§ 152.09 NOTICE.
   (A)   The Borough Council shall give timely notice to all persons owning
property abutting on any street within the borough about to be paved or
improved, and to all public utility companies operating in the borough and all
such persons and utility companies shall make all water, gas, storm or sanitary
sewer connections, as well as any repairs thereto which would necessitate
excavation of the said street within 30 days from the issuance of such notice,
unless such time is extended in writing for cause shown by the Borough Council.
   (B)   New paving shall not be opened for a period of five years after the
completion thereof, except in case of emergency, the existence of which
emergency and the necessity for the opening of such paving to be determined by
the Borough Engineer. If it is sought to excavate or open a street within five
years after the completion of the paving thereof for any other reason than an
emergency as herein stated, the applicant shall make written application to
Borough Council, and a permit for such opening shall only be issued after
review by the Borough Engineer and the express approval of Borough Council.
(Ord. 2 of 2024, passed 11-11-2024)
USE OF STREETS
§ 152.25 SLEDDING RESTRICTED ON STREETS AND ALLEYS.
   No person shall coast or ride upon any sled or similar conveyance upon any
street or alley in the borough unless such street or alley shall have been
especially set apart and designated by the Mayor as a “play highway” and shall
have been blocked off or adequately protected from vehicular traffic.
(Prior Code, § 21-201) (Ord. 113, passed 8-19-1966; Ord. 2015-04, passed 12-14-
2015) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.26 REPAIRING OR WORKING ON VEHICLES IN RIGHTS-OF-WAY UNLAWFUL.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to repair or work upon any motor vehicle
or other vehicle while that vehicle is standing on any street, alley or roadway
in the borough, except that the following repairs or types of repairs shall not
be prohibited:
   (A)   Emergency repairs necessary to prevent the obstruction of traffic;
   (B)   Emergency repairs necessary to permit the removal of a vehicle from a
street, alley or roadway; and
   (C)   Minor repairs, such as tire changes.
(Prior Code, § 21-221) (Ord. 184, passed 9-12-1983) Penalty, see §
152.99
DRIVEWAYS
§ 152.40 TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Driveway Ordinance.”
(Prior Code, § 21-301) (Ord. 2014-04, passed 12-8-2014)
§ 152.41 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BOROUGH. The Council of Oklahoma, Westmoreland County, Pennsylvania.
   CONTRACTOR. The party, person, firm, partnership or corporation who or which
installs a driveway, including all agents, officers or employees of said party,
person, firm, partnership or corporation.
   DRIVEWAY. Any area of land designated or used as a means of ingress and/or
egress for either vehicles or pedestrian traffic from a public road to a piece,
parcel of tract of land.
   OWNER. The owner of the land upon which a driveway is located within borough
premises.
   PERSON. Any natural person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
society, group, entity, company or organization of any kind.
   PUBLIC ROAD. Any road, street, alley or public thoroughfare, whether
actually maintained by the borough as part of its road system or whether shown
on a subdivision or land development plan and intended to be offered or
dedicated to the borough in the future as part of the borough road system.
(Prior Code, § 21-302) (Ord. 2014-04, passed 12-8-2014)
§ 152.42 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person, owner or contractor shall hereafter install, initiate any work or
allow the installation or initiation of any work toward the installation of a
driveway without first obtaining a permit therefor from the Borough Secretary.
(Prior Code, § 21-303) (Ord. 2014-04, passed 12-8-2014) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.43 APPLICATION.
   Any person, owner or contractor shall, prior to obtaining a driveway permit,
file an application, on an application form supplied by a Borough Secretary,
reflecting and showing the location of the driveway relative to the premises
and designating the course, grade, structure, materials and drainage
facilities, if any, involved in the construction of the driveway.
(Prior Code, § 21-304) (Ord. 2014-04, passed 12-8-2014) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.44 APPLICATION PROCESSING PROCEDURES SCOPE.
   (A)   The application shall be reviewed by the Engineer.
   (B)   The Engineer shall determine if the proposed method of constructing or
making said connection, as reflected on the application, is such that it will:
      (1)   Minimize the adverse effect of stormwater and runoff resulting from
said connection;
      (2)   Not cause damage to the road to which the driveway is to be
connected;
      (3)   Not create or increase hazardous driving conditions for those
persons using the road to which the driveway is to be connected;
      (4)   Not obstruct the roadside ditches or cause stormwater to divert
onto the improved portion of the roadway;
      (5)   Be of the same elevation as compared to the elevation of the road
surface;
      (6)   Demonstrate drainage facilities of adequate size to carry all
stormwater under the driveway, with the drainage pipe to be of a minimum
diameter of 15 inches; and
      (7)   Result in adequate sight distance for vehicles entering and leaving
the public road.
   (C)   If found satisfactory by the Engineer, he or she shall so advise the
Borough Secretary, and the Borough Secretary will issue, or cause to be issued,
the permit.
   (D)   If the plan is found to be deficient, or if, in the opinion of the
Borough Engineer, the plan can be improved so as to more adequately address the
items reviewed in division (B) above, the Engineer shall, by written
communication to the applicant, notify the applicant of the changes to be made.
   (E)   The applicant shall immediately make such changes and return the
revised plan to the Borough Secretary.
   (F)   When such plan is in acceptable form, the Borough Engineer shall
approve or cause the same to be approved and the permit issued by the Borough
Secretary.
(Prior Code, § 21-305) (Ord. 2014-04, passed 12-8-2014) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.45 FEES.
   The application shall be accompanied by an application processing fee, a
post-construction inspection fee and a security deposit. The security deposit
will be refunded to the applicant under completion of the post-construction
inspection and approval of the driveway connection. The amounts of said
application processing fee, post-construction inspection fee and security
deposit shall be as set from time to time by resolution of the Borough Council.
(Prior Code, § 21-306) (Ord. 2014-04, passed 12-8-2014) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.46 SIGHT DISTANCE.
   (A)   Sight distance shall be adequate to safely allow each permitted
movement to be made into or out of the driveway.
   (B)   Minimum acceptable sight distance shall be computed from the following
chart.
 
Posted Speed (mph) Safe Sight Distance—Left (feetSafe Sight Distance—Right
                                                   (feet)
25                 250                             195
35                 440                             350
45                 635                             570
55                 845                             875
 
(Prior Code, § 21-307) (Ord. 2014-04, passed 12-8-2014) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.47 CONSTRUCTION.
   All construction in any way incidental to the installation of the driveway
shall be performed in strict conformance with the approved plans.
(Prior Code, § 21-308) (Ord. 2014-04, passed 12-8-2014) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.48 SEPARATE PERMITS.
   Each driveway, whether serving the same premises or not, shall require an
individual permit.
(Prior Code, § 21-309) (Ord. 2014-04, passed 12-8-2014) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.49 INSPECTION.
   (A)   Upon completion of the work, the applicant shall give written notice
thereof to the Borough Secretary.
   (B)   The Borough Engineer shall inspect the construction and, when
necessary, enforce compliance with the conditions, restrictions and regulations
prescribed by the permit and by this subchapter.
   (C)   Where any defect or lack of compliance is discovered, the applicant
shall rectify the discrepancy within 60 days’ written notice from the borough
to do so and, in default thereof, the borough may do the work and shall impose
upon the applicant the cost thereof together with an additional 20% of such
cost.
(Prior Code, § 21-310) (Ord. 2014-04, passed 12-8-2014) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.50 NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
   In the event that a borough representative or agent authorized to issue a
citation in the borough determines that a person is in violation of this
subchapter, the borough shall notify the violator of the offense under this
subchapter, where possible, by regular first-class mail and by certified mail.
(Prior Code, § 21-311) (Ord. 2014-04, passed 12-8-2014) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of §
152.25 of this chapter, upon conviction thereof in a summary proceeding
commenced under the Commonwealth Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be
sentenced to a fine of not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of
payment of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 90
days.
(Prior Code, § 21-201)
   (C)   Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of §
152.26 of this chapter, upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a
magisterial district judge in the manner provided for the enforcement of
summary offenses under the Commonwealth Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be
sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $25 nor more than $1,000 plus costs
and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment
not to exceed 90 days. Each day that a violation of §
152.26 continues shall constitute a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 21-222)
   (D)   (1)   Any owner, person or contractor who shall violate any provision
of §§
152.40 to
152.50 of this chapter, upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a
magisterial district judge in the manner provided for the enforcement of
summary offenses under the Commonwealth Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of
payment of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 90
days. Each day that a violation of §§
152.40 to
152.50 continues or each section of §§
152.40 to
152.50 which shall be found to have been violated shall constitute a separate
offense. All fines collected for the violation of §§
152.40 to
152.50 shall be paid to the Treasurer of the Borough for the general use of the
borough.
      (2)   Each day that the violation continues past the date that the
citation was issued constitutes a new and separate offense unless the court
determines otherwise, and further notice to the offender shall not be necessary
in order to constitute such an offense.
      (3)   In the enforcement of §§
152.40 to
152.50, the Code Enforcement Officer of the borough may, at his or her sole
discretion, utilize a citation notice, in a form to be approved by the Council,
notifying the persons responsible as to the violation of §§
152.40 to
152.50 and providing that person an opportunity to remedy said violation within
five days of the date of that notice and to impose a fine not to exceed $1,000,
payable to the borough, without the necessity of a court proceeding and the
imposition of attorney fees and court costs.
(Prior Code, § 21-312)
(Ord. 113, passed 8-19-1966; Ord. 184, passed 9-12-1983; Ord. 204A, passed 2-
13-1989; Ord. 2014-04, passed 12-8-2014; Ord. 2015-04, passed 12-14-2015)
CHAPTER 153: FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
Section
General Provisions
   
153.001   Statutory authorization
   
153.002   Intent
   
153.003   Applicability
   
153.004   Abrogation and greater restrictions
   
153.005   Warning and disclaimer of liability
   
153.006   Definitions
   
153.007   Enactment
Administration
   
153.020   Floodplain Administrator designated
   
153.021   Permits required
   
153.022   Floodplain Administrator duties and responsibilities
   
153.023   Application procedures and requirements
   
153.024   Review by County Conservation District
   
153.025   Review of application by others
   
153.026   Changes
   
153.027   Placards
   
153.028   Start of construction
   
153.029   Enforcement
   
153.030   Appeals
Identification of Floodplain Areas
   
153.045   Identification
   
153.046   Description and special requirements
   
153.047   Changes in identification of area
   
153.048   Boundary disputes
Technical Provisions
   
153.060   General technical provisions
   
153.061   Elevation and floodproofing requirements
   
153.062   Design and construction standards
   
153.063   Development which may endanger human life
   
153.064   Subdivision special requirements
   
153.065   Manufactured home special requirements
   
153.066   Recreational vehicle special requirements
Activities Requiring Special Permits
   
153.080   Certain activities prohibited without special permit
   
153.081   Application requirements for special permit
   
153.082   Application review procedures
   
153.083   Special technical requirements
Existing Structures in Identified Floodplain Areas
   
153.095   Existing Structures
   
153.096   Improvements
Variances
   
153.110   Variances granted for exceptional hardship
   
153.111   Variance procedures and conditions
 
   
153.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 153.001 STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.
   The Legislature of the commonwealth has, by the passage of the Floodplain
Management Act of 1978, Act of Oct. 4, 1978, P.L. 851, No. 166, 32 P.S. §§
679.101 et seq., delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to
adopt floodplain management regulations to promote public health, safety and
the general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the Council of the borough
does hereby order as follows.
(Prior Code, § 8-101) (Ord. 2010-10, passed 12-14-2010)
§ 153.002 INTENT.
   The intent of this chapter is to:
   (A)   Promote the general health, welfare and safety of the community;
   (B)   Encourage the utilization of appropriate construction practices in
order to prevent or minimize flood damage in the future;
   (C)   Minimize danger to public health by protecting the water supply and
natural drainage;
   (D)   Reduce financial burdens imposed on the community, its governmental
units and its residents by preventing excessive development in areas subject to
flooding; and
   (E)   Comply with federal and state floodplain management requirements.
(Prior Code, § 8-201) (Ord. 2010-10, passed 12-14-2010)
§ 153.003 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, business or
corporation to undertake, or cause to be undertaken, any construction or
development anywhere within the borough unless a permit has been obtained from
the Floodplain Administrator.
   (B)   A permit shall not be required for minor repairs to existing buildings
or structures.
(Prior Code, § 8-202) (Ord. 2010-10, passed 12-14-2010) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.004 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
   This chapter supersedes any other conflicting provisions which may be in
effect in identified floodplain areas. However, any other ordinance provisions
shall remain in full force and effect to the extent that those provisions are
more restrictive. If there is any conflict between any of the provisions of
this chapter, the more restrictive shall apply.
(Prior Code, § 8-203) (Ord. 2010-10, passed 12-14-2010)
§ 153.005 WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   (A)   The degree of flood protection sought by the provisions of this
chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on
acceptable engineering methods of study. Larger floods may occur or flood
heights may be increased by human-made or natural causes, such as ice jams and
bridge openings restricted by debris. This chapter does not imply that areas
which are outside any identified floodplain areas, or that land uses permitted
within such areas, will be free from flooding or flood damages.
   (B)   This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the borough or
any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance
on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
(Prior Code, § 8-204) (Ord. 2010-10, passed 12-14-2010)
§ 153.006 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   Unless specifically defined below, words and phrases used in this
chapter shall be interpreted so as to give this chapter its most reasonable
application.
(Prior Code, § 8-901)
   (B)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE. A use or structure on the same lot with, and
of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the principal use or
structure.
      BASE FLOOD. A flood which has a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in
any given year. Also called the 100-YEAR FLOOD.
      BASE FLOOD ELEVATION or BFE. The elevation shown on the flood insurance
rate map (FIRM) for Zones AE, AH and A1-30 that indicates the water surface
elevation resulting from a flood that has a 1% or greater chance of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year.
      BASEMENT. Any area of the building having its floor below ground level on
all sides.
      BUILDING. A combination of materials to form a permanent structure having
walls and a roof. Included shall be all manufactured homes and trailers to be
used for human habitation.
      DEVELOPMENT. Any human-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, the construction, reconstruction, renovation,
repair, expansion or alteration of buildings or other structures; the placement
of manufactured homes; streets and other paving; utilities; filling, grading
and excavation; mining; dredging; drilling operations; storage of equipment or
materials; and the subdivision of land.
      EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park
or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots
on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date
of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
      EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. The
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
      FLOOD. A temporary inundation of normally dry land areas.
      FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP or FIRM. The official map on which the Federal
Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated
both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable
to the community.
      FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY or FIS. The official report provided by the Federal
Insurance Administration that includes flood profiles, the flood insurance rate
map, the flood boundary and floodway map and the water surface elevation of the
base flood.
      FLOODPLAIN AREA. A relatively flat or low land area which is subject to
partial or complete inundation from an adjoining or nearby stream, river or
watercourse; and/or any area subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation of
surface waters from any source.
      FLOODPROOFING. Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions,
changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities,
structures and their contents.
      FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot.
      HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE. The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
      HISTORIC STRUCTURES. Any structure that is:
         (a)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places
(a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;
         (b)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to
qualify as a registered historic district;
         (c)   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in
states which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
         (d)   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation that have been certified either:
            1.   By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
            2.   Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without
approved programs.
      LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest floor of the lowest fully enclosed area
(including basement). An unfinished, flood-resistant, partially enclosed area
used solely for the parking of vehicles, building access and incidental storage
in an area other than a basement area is not considered the LOWEST FLOOR of a
building, provided that such space is not designed and built so that the
structure is in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements
of this chapter.
      MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more sections,
which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a
permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term includes
park trailers, travel trailers, recreational and other similar vehicles which
are placed on a site for more than 180 consecutive days.
      MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A parcel (or contiguous parcels)
of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
      MINOR REPAIR. The replacement of existing work with equivalent materials
for the purpose of its routine maintenance and upkeep, but not including the
cutting away of any wall, partition or portion thereof; the removal or cutting
of any structural beam or bearing support; or the removal or change of any
required means of egress, or rearrangement of parts of a structure affecting
the exit way requirements; nor shall MINOR REPAIRS include addition to,
alteration of, replacement of or relocation of any standpipe, water supply,
sewer, drainage, drain leader, gas, oil, waste, vent or similar piping,
electric wiring or mechanical or other work affecting public health or general
safety.
      NEW CONSTRUCTION. Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after January 30, 1984, and includes any subsequent
improvements thereto.
      NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective
date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
      PERSON. An individual, partnership, public or private association or
corporation, firm, trust, estate, municipality, governmental unit, public
utility or any other legal entity whatsoever which is recognized by law as the
subject of rights and duties.
      RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle which is:
         (a)   Built on a single chassis;
         (b)   Not more than 400 square feet, measured at the largest
horizontal projections;
         (c)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-
duty truck; and
         (d)   Not designed for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary
living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.
      REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION. The base flood elevation (BFE) plus a
freeboard safety factor of one and one-half feet.
      REPETITIVE LOSS. Flood-related damages sustained by a structure on two
separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of repairs at
the time of each such flood event, on average, equals or exceeds 25% of the
market value of the structure before the damages occurred. Include this
definition when optional provisions for repetitive loss (§§ 153.022(C) and
153.096(F) of this chapter) are used.
      SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA or SFHA. An area in the floodplain subject to a
l% or greater chance of flooding in any given year. It is shown on the FIRM as
Zone A, AO, A1-30, AE, A99 or AH.
      SPECIAL PERMIT. A special approval which is required for hospitals,
nursing homes, jails and new manufactured home parks and subdivisions, and
substantial improvements to such existing parks, when such development is
located in all or a designated portion of a floodplain.
      START OF CONSTRUCTION. Includes substantial improvement and other
proposed new development, and means the date the permit was issued, provided
the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, placement or other improvement was within 180 days from the date of
the permit. The ACTUAL START means either the first placement of permanent
construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings,
the installation of piles, the construction of columns or any work beyond the
stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation.
Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing,
grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or
walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or
foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the
installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds
not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a
substantial improvement, the ACTUAL START OF CONSTRUCTION means the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building,
whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
      STRUCTURE. A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid
storage tank that is principally aboveground, as well as a manufactured home.
      SUBDIVISION. The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel of land
by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land,
including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether immediate or
future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs or devisees,
transfer of ownership or building or lot development; provided, however, that
the SUBDIVISION by lease of land for agricultural purposes into parcels of more
than ten acres, not involving any new street or easement of access or any
residential dwelling, shall be exempted.
      SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage from any cause sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition
would equal or exceeds 50% or more of the market value of the structure before
the damage occurred.
      SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT.
         (a)   Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or other
improvement of a structure the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the
market value of the structure before the start of construction of the
improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred substantial
damage (or repetitive loss) regardless of the actual repair work performed.
         (b)   The term does not, however, include either:
            1.   Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications
which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are
the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
            2.   Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the
alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a
historic structure.
      VIOLATION. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community’s floodplain management regulations. A structure
or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications or
other evidence of compliance required in 44 C.F.R. § 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)
(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4) or (e)(5) is presumed to be in violation until
such time as that documentation is provided.
(Prior Code, § 8-902)
(Ord. 2010-10, passed 12-14-2010)
§ 153.007 ENACTMENT.
   This chapter shall be effective on March 17, 2011, and shall remain in force
until modified, amended or rescinded by the borough.
(Prior Code, § 8-1001) (Ord. 2010-10, passed 12-14-2010)
ADMINISTRATION
§ 153.020 FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR DESIGNATED.
   The Zoning Officer within the borough is hereby appointed to administer and
enforce this chapter and is referred to herein as the Floodplain Administrator.
(Prior Code, § 8-301) (Ord. 2010-10, passed 12-14-2010)
§ 153.021 PERMITS REQUIRED.
   A permit shall be required before any construction or development is
undertaken within any area of the borough.
(Prior Code, § 8-302) (Ord. 2010-10, passed 12-14-2010)
§ 153.022 FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES.
   (A)   The Floodplain Administrator shall issue a permit only after it has
been determined that the proposed work to be undertaken will be in conformance
with the requirements of this chapter and all other applicable codes and
ordinances.
   (B)   Prior to the issuance of any permit, the Floodplain Administrator
shall review the application for the permit to determine if all other necessary
government permits required by state and federal laws have been obtained, such
as those required by the Sewage Facilities Act of January 24, 1966, P.L. (1965)
1535, 35 P.S. §§ 750.1 et seq.; the Dam Safety and Encroachments Act, Act of
November 26, 1978, P.L. 1375, 32 P.S. §§ 693.1 et seq.; the Clean Streams Act,
Act of June 22, 1937, P.L.1937 35 P.S. §§ 691.1 et seq.; and the United States
Clean Water Act, § 404, 33 U.S.C. § 1344. No permit shall be issued until this
determination has been made.
   (C)   In the case of existing structures, prior to the issuance of any
development/permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall review the history of
repairs to the subject building so that any repetitive loss issues can be
addressed before the permit is issued.
   (D)   During the construction period, the Floodplain Administrator or other
authorized official shall inspect the premises to determine that the work is
progressing in compliance with the information provided on the permit
application and with all applicable municipal laws and ordinances. He or she
shall make as many inspections during and upon completion of the work as are
necessary.
   (E)   In the discharge of his or her duties, the Floodplain Administrator
shall have the authority to enter any building, structure, premises or
development in the identified floodplain area, upon presentation of proper
credentials, at any reasonable hour to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
   (F)   In the event the Floodplain Administrator discovers that the work does
not comply with the permit application or any applicable laws and ordinances,
or that there has been a false statement or misrepresentation by any applicant,
the Floodplain Administrator shall revoke the permit and report such fact to
the Council for whatever action it considers necessary.
   (G)   The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain all records associated
with the requirements of this chapter, including, but not limited to,
permitting, inspection and enforcement.
   (H)   The Floodplain Administrator shall consider the requirements of 34 Pa.
Code and the 2006 IBC and the 2006 IRC, or latest revisions thereof.
(Prior Code, § 8-303) (Ord. 2010-10, passed 12-14-2010)
§ 153.023 APPLICATION PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Application for such a permit shall be made, in writing, to the
Floodplain Administrator on forms supplied by the borough. Such application
shall contain the following:
      (1)   Name and address of the applicant;
      (2)   Name and address of the owner of the land on which proposed
construction is to occur;
      (3)   Name and address of the contractor;
      (4)   Site location, including address;
      (5)   Listing of other permits required;
      (6)   Brief description of proposed work and estimated cost, including a
breakout of flood-related cost and the market value of the building before the
flood damage occurred, where appropriate; and
      (7)   A plan of the site showing the exact size and location of the
proposed construction as well as any existing buildings or structures.
   (B)   If any proposed construction or development is located entirely or
partially within any identified floodplain area, applicants for permits shall
provide all the necessary information in sufficient detail and clarity to
enable the Floodplain Administrator to determine that:
      (1)   All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage and conform with the requirements of this chapter and all other
applicable codes and ordinances;
      (2)   All utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and
water systems, are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood
damage;
      (3)   Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood
hazards;
      (4)   Structures will be anchored to prevent floatation, collapse or
lateral movement;
      (5)   Building materials are flood-resistant;
      (6)   Appropriate practices that minimize flood damage have been used;
and
      (7)   Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning
equipment and other service facilities have been designed and/or located to
prevent water entry or accumulation.
   (C)   Applicants shall file the following minimum information plus any other
pertinent information as may be required by the Floodplain Administrator to
make the above determination:
      (1)   A completed permit application form;
      (2)   A plan of the entire site, clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of
one inch being equal to 100 feet or less, showing the following:
         (a)   North arrow, scale and date;
         (b)   Topographic contour lines, if available;
         (c)   The location of all existing and proposed buildings, structures
and other improvements, including the location of any existing or proposed
subdivision and development;
         (d)   The location of all existing streets, drives and other access
ways; and
         (e)   The location of any existing bodies of water or watercourses,
identified floodplain areas and, if available, information pertaining to the
floodway and the flow of water, including direction and velocities.
      (3)   Plans of all proposed buildings, structures and other improvements,
drawn at suitable scale showing the following:
         (a)   The proposed lowest floor elevation of any proposed building
based upon North American Vertical Datum of 1988;
         (b)   The elevation of the base flood; and
         (c)   Supplemental information as may be necessary under 34 Pa. Code,
the 2006 IBC or the 2006 IRC.
      (4)   The following data and documentation:
         (a)   If available, information concerning flood depths, pressures,
velocities, impact and uplift forces and other factors associated with a base
flood elevation;
         (b)   Detailed information concerning any proposed floodproofing
measures and corresponding elevations;
         (c)   Documentation, certified by a registered professional engineer
or architect, to show that the cumulative effect of any proposed development
within a Special Floodplain Area (Zone AE), when combined with all other
existing and anticipated development, will not increase the base flood
elevation more than one foot at any point;
         (d)   A document, certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect, which states that the proposed construction or development has been
adequately designed to withstand the pressures, velocities, impact and uplift
forces associated with the base flood elevation. Such statement shall include a
description of the type and extent of floodproofing measures which have been
incorporated into the design of the structure and/or the development;
         (e)   Detailed information needed to determine compliance with §§
153.062(F) and
153.063 of this chapter, including:
            1.   The amount, location and purpose of any materials or
substances referred to in §§
153.062(F) and
153.063 of this chapter which are intended to be used, produced, stored or
otherwise maintained on site; and
            2.   A description of the safeguards incorporated into the design
of the proposed structure to prevent leaks or spills of the dangerous materials
or substances listed in §
153.063 of this chapter during a base flood.
         (f)   The appropriate component of the Department of Environmental
Protection’s “Planning Module for Land Development;” and
         (g)   Where any excavation or grading is proposed, a plan meeting the
requirements of the Department of Environmental Protection to implement and
maintain erosion and sedimentation control.
      (5)   Applications for permits shall be accompanied by a fee, payable to
the municipality, which is based upon the estimated cost of the proposed
construction as determined by the Floodplain Administration.
(Prior Code, § 8-304) (Ord. 2010-10, passed 12-14-2010)
§ 153.024 REVIEW BY COUNTY CONSERVATION DISTRICT.
   A copy of all applications and plans for any proposed construction or
development in any identified floodplain area to be considered for approval
shall be submitted by the Floodplain Administrator to the County Conservation
District for review and comment prior to the issuance of a permit. The
recommendations of the Conservation District shall be considered by the
Floodplain Administrator for possible incorporation into the proposed plan.
(Prior Code, § 8-305) (Ord. 2010-10, passed 12-14-2010)
§ 153.025 REVIEW OF APPLICATION BY OTHERS.
   A copy of all plans and applications for any proposed construction or
development in any identified floodplain area to be considered for approval may
be submitted by the Floodplain Administrator to any other appropriate agencies
and/or individuals (e.g., Planning Commission, Borough Engineer and the like)
for review and comment.
(Prior Code, § 8-306) (Ord. 2010-10, passed 12-14-2010)
§ 153.026 CHANGES.
   After the issuance of a permit by the Floodplain Administrator, no changes
of any kind shall be made to the application, permit or any of the plans,
specifications or other documents submitted with the application without the
written consent or approval of the Floodplain Administrator. Requests for any
such change shall be in writing and shall be submitted by the applicant to the
Floodplain Administrator for consideration.
(Prior Code, § 8-307) (Ord. 2010-10, passed 12-14-2010) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.027 PLACARDS.
   In addition to the permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall issue a
placard, which shall be displayed on the premises during the time construction
is in progress. This placard shall show the number of the permit and the date
of its issuance and be signed by the Floodplain Administrator.
(Prior Code, § 8-308) (Ord. 2010-10, passed 12-14-2010)
§ 153.028 START OF CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   Work on the proposed construction and/or development shall begin
within 180 days after the date of issuance and shall be completed within 12
months after the date of issuance of the permit or the permit shall expire
unless a time extension is granted, in writing, by the Floodplain
Administrator. Construction and/or development shall be considered to have
started with the preparation of land, land clearing, grading, filling,
excavation of a basement, footings, piers or foundations, erection of temporary
forms, the installation of piling under proposed subsurface footings or the
installation of sewer, gas and water pipes, or electrical or other service
lines from the street.
   (B)   Time extensions shall be granted only if a written request is
submitted by the applicant, which sets forth sufficient and reasonable cause
for the Floodplain Administrator to approve such a request.
(Prior Code, § 8-309) (Ord. 2010-10, passed 12-14-2010)
§ 153.029 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Whenever the Floodplain Administrator or other authorized municipal
representative determines that there are reasonable grounds to believe that
there has been a violation of any provision of this chapter, or of any
regulations adopted pursuant thereto, the Floodplain Administrator shall give
notice of such alleged violation as hereinafter provided.
   (B)   Such notice shall:
      (1)   Be in writing;
      (2)   Include a statement of the reasons for its issuance;
      (3)   Allow a reasonable time, not to exceed a period of 30 days, for the
performance of any act it requires;
      (4)   Be served upon the property owner or his or her agent as the case
may require; provided, however, that such notice or order shall be deemed to
have been properly served upon such owner or agent when a copy thereof has been
served with such notice by any other method authorized or required by the laws
of this state; and
      (5)   Contain an outline of remedial action which, if taken, will effect
compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 8-310) (Ord. 2010-10, passed 12-14-2010; Ord. 2015-04, passed
12-14-2015)
§ 153.030 APPEALS.
   (A)   Any person aggrieved by any action or decision of the Floodplain
Administrator concerning the administration of the provisions of this chapter
may appeal to the Council. Such appeal must be filed, in writing, within 30
days after the decision, determination or action of the Floodplain
Administrator.
   (B)   Upon receipt of such appeal, the Council shall set a time and place,
within not less than ten or not more than 30 days, for the purpose of
considering the appeal. Notice of the time and place at which the appeal will
be considered shall be given to all parties.
   (C)   Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Council may seek relief
therefrom by appeal to court as provided by the laws of this state, including
the Floodplain Management Act, Act of Oct. 4, 1978, P.L. 851, No. 166, 32 P.S.
§§ 679.101 et seq.
(Prior Code, § 8-311) (Ord. 2010-10, passed 12-14-2010)
IDENTIFICATION OF FLOODPLAIN AREAS
§ 153.045 IDENTIFICATION.
   (A)   The identified floodplain area shall be any areas of the borough
classified as special flood hazard areas (SFHAs) in the flood insurance study
(FIS) and the accompanying flood insurance rate maps (FIRMs), dated March 17,
2011, and issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), or the most
recent revision thereof, including all digital data developed as part of the
flood insurance study.
   (B)   The above-referenced FIS and FIRMs, and any subsequent revisions and
amendments, are hereby adopted by the borough and declared to be a part of this
chapter.
(Prior Code, § 8-401) (Ord. 2010-10, passed 12-14-2010)
§ 153.046 DESCRIPTION AND SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   For the purposes of this chapter, the 100-year flood elevation shall
be used as the basis for regulation. When available, information from other
federal, state and other acceptable sources shall be used to determine the 100-
year elevation, as well as a floodway area if possible. When no other
information is available, the 100-year elevation shall be determined by using a
point on the boundary of the identified floodplain area which is nearest the
construction site in question.
   (B)   In lieu of the above, the municipality may require the applicant to
determine the elevation with hydrologic and hydraulic engineering techniques.
Hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be undertaken only by professional
engineers or others of demonstrated qualifications, who shall certify that the
technical methods used correctly reflect currently accepted technical concepts.
Studies, analyses, computations and the like shall be submitted in sufficient
detail to allow a thorough technical review by the municipality.
(Prior Code, § 8-402) (Ord. 2010-10, passed 12-14-2010)
§ 153.047 CHANGES IN IDENTIFICATION OF AREA.
   The identified floodplain area may be revised or modified by the Council
where studies or information provided by a qualified agency or person documents
the need for such revision. However, prior to any such change, approval must be
obtained from FEMA. Additionally, as soon as practicable, but not later than
six months after the date such information becomes available, a community shall
notify FEMA of the changes by submitting technical or scientific data.
(Prior Code, § 8-403) (Ord. 2010-10, passed 12-14-2010)
§ 153.048 BOUNDARY DISPUTES.
   Should a dispute concerning any identified floodplain boundary arise, an
initial determination shall be made by the Borough Planning Commission, and any
party aggrieved by this decision or determination may appeal to the Council.
The burden of proof shall be on the appellant.
(Prior Code, § 8-404) (Ord. 2010-10, passed 12-14-2010)
TECHNICAL PROVISIONS
§ 153.060 GENERAL TECHNICAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Regarding the alteration or relocation of a watercourse:
      (1)   No encroachment, alteration or improvement of any kind shall be
made to any watercourse until all adjacent municipalities which may be affected
by such action have been notified by the municipality, and until all required
permits or approvals have been first obtained from the Department of
Environmental Protection, Regional Office;
      (2)   No encroachment, alteration or improvement of any kind shall be
made to any watercourse unless it can be shown that the activity will not
reduce or impede the flood carrying capacity of the watercourse in any way; and
      (3)   In addition, FEMA and the Commonwealth Department of Community and
Economic Development shall be notified prior to any alteration or relocation of
any watercourse.
   (B)   Submit technical or scientific data to FEMA for a letter of map
revision (LOMR) within six months of the completion of any new construction,
development or other activity resulting in changes in the BFE.
   (C)   Any new construction, development, uses or activities allowed within
any identified floodplain area shall be undertaken in strict compliance with
the provisions contained in this chapter and any other applicable codes,
ordinances and regulations.
   (D)   Within any identified floodplain area, no new construction or
development shall be located within the area measured 50 feet landward from the
top-of-bank of any watercourse unless a permit is obtained from the Department
of Environmental Protection Regional Office.
(Prior Code, § 8-501) (Ord. 2010-10, passed 12-14-2010)
§ 153.061 ELEVATION AND FLOODPROOFING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Residential structures.
      (1)   In AE, A1-30 and AH Zones, any new construction or substantial
improvement shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated up to, or
above, the regulatory flood elevation.
      (2)   In A Zones, where no base flood elevations are specified on the
FIRM, any new construction or substantial improvement shall have the lowest
floor (including basement) elevated up to, or above, the regulatory flood
elevation in accordance with §
153.046 of this chapter.
      (3)   In AO Zones, any new construction or substantial improvement shall
have the lowest floor (including basement) at or above the highest adjacent
grade at least as high as the depth number specified on the FIRM.
   (B)   Nonresidential structures.
      (1)   In AE, A1-30 and AH Zones, any new construction or substantial
improvement of a nonresidential structure shall have the lowest floor
(including basement) elevated up to, or above, the regulatory flood elevation,
or be designed and constructed so that the space enclosed below the regulatory
flood elevation:
         (a)   Is floodproofed so that the structure is watertight, with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water; and
         (b)   Has structural components with the capability of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy.
      (2)   In A Zones, where no base flood elevations are specified on the
FIRM, any new construction or substantial improvement shall have the lowest
floor (including basement) elevated or completely floodproofed up to, or above,
the regulatory flood elevation in accordance with §
153.046 of this chapter.
      (3)   In AO Zones, any new construction or substantial improvement shall
have their lowest floor elevated or completely floodproofed above the highest
adjacent grade to at least as high as the depth number specified on the FIRM.
      (4)   Any nonresidential structure, or part thereof, made watertight
below the regulatory flood elevation shall be floodproofed in accordance with
the WI or W2 space classification standards contained in the publication
entitled Floodproofing Regulations published by the United States Army Corps of
Engineers (June 1972, as amended March 1992) or with some other equivalent
standard. All plans and specifications for such floodproofing shall be
accompanied by a statement certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect which states that the proposed design and methods of construction are
in conformance with the above-referenced standards.
   (C)   Space below the lowest floor.
      (1)   Fully enclosed space below the lowest floor (excluding basements)
which will be used solely for the parking of a vehicle, building access or
incidental storage in an area other than a basement shall be designed and
constructed to allow for the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters for the
purpose of equalizing hydrostatic forces on exterior walls. The term FULLY
ENCLOSED SPACE also includes crawl spaces.
      (2)   Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a
registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria:
         (a)   A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed space;
         (b)   The bottom of all openings shall be not higher than one foot
above grade; and
         (c)   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers and the like, or
other coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic entry and
exit of floodwaters.
   (D)   Accessory structures. Structures accessory to a principal building
need not be elevated or floodproofed to remain dry, but shall comply, at a
minimum, with the following requirements:
      (1)   The structure shall not be designed or used for human habitation,
but shall be limited to the parking of vehicles, or to the storage of tools,
material and equipment related to the principal use or activity;
      (2)   Floor area shall not exceed 100 square feet;
      (3)   The structure will have a low damage potential;
      (4)   The structure will be located on the site so as to cause the least
obstruction to the flow of floodwaters;
      (5)   Power lines, wiring and outlets will be elevated to the regulatory
flood elevation;
      (6)   Permanently affixed utility equipment and appliances such as
furnaces, heaters, washers, dryers and the like are prohibited;
      (7)   Sanitary facilities are prohibited; and
      (8)   The structure shall be adequately anchored to prevent flotation or
movement and shall be designed to automatically provide for the entry and exit
of floodwater for the purpose of equalizing hydrostatic forces on the walls.
Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum
criteria:
         (a)   A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed space;
         (b)   The bottom of all openings shall be not higher than one foot
above grade; and
         (c)   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers and the like, or
other coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic entry and
exit of floodwaters.
(Prior Code, § 8-502) (Ord. 2010-10, passed 12-14-2010)
§ 153.062 DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.
   The following minimum standards shall apply for all construction and
development proposed within any identified floodplain area.
   (A)   Fill. If fill is used, it shall:
      (1)   Extend laterally at least 15 feet beyond the building line from all
points;
      (2)   Consist of soil or small rock materials only. Sanitary landfills
shall not be permitted;
      (3)   Be compacted to provide the necessary permeability and resistance
to erosion, scouring or settling;
      (4)   Be no steeper than one vertical to two horizontal feet unless
substantiated data, justifying steeper slopes, are submitted to and approved by
the Floodplain Administrator; and
      (5)   Be used to the extent to which it does not adversely affect
adjacent properties.
   (B)   Drainage facilities. Storm drainage facilities shall be designed to
convey the flow of stormwater runoff in a safe and efficient manner. The system
shall ensure proper drainage along streets and provide positive drainage away
from buildings. The system shall also be designed to prevent the discharge of
excess runoff onto adjacent properties.
   (C)   Water and sanitary sewer facilities and systems.
      (1)   All new or replacement water supply and sanitary sewer facilities
and systems shall be located, designed and constructed to minimize or eliminate
flood damages and the infiltration of flood waters.
      (2)   Sanitary sewer facilities and systems shall be designed to prevent
the discharge of untreated sewage into floodwaters.
      (3)   No part of any on-site sewage system shall be located within any
identified floodplain area except in strict compliance with all state and local
regulations for such systems. If any such system is permitted, it shall be
located so as to avoid impairment to it, or contamination from it, during a
flood.
      (4)   The design and construction provisions of the UCC and FEMA #348,
“Protecting Building Utilities from Flood Damages,” and the International
Private Sewage Disposal Code shall be utilized.
   (D)   Other utilities. All other utilities, such as gas lines and electrical
and telephone systems, shall be located, elevated (where possible) and
constructed to minimize the chance of impairment during a flood.
   (E)   Streets. The finished elevation of all new streets shall be not more
than one foot below the regulatory flood elevation.
   (F)   Storage. All materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive or, in
times of flooding, could be injurious to human, animal or plant life, and not
listed in §
153.063 of this chapter, shall be stored at or above the regulatory flood
elevation and/or floodproofed to the maximum extent possible.
   (G)   Placement of buildings and structures. All buildings and structures
shall be designed, located and constructed so as to offer the minimum
obstruction to the flow of water and shall be designed to have a minimum effect
upon the flow and height of floodwater.
   (H)   Anchoring.
      (1)   All buildings and structures shall be firmly anchored in accordance
with accepted engineering practices to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral
movement.
      (2)   All air ducts, large pipes, storage tanks and other similar objects
or components located below the regulatory flood elevation shall be securely
anchored or affixed to prevent flotation.
   (I)   Floors, walls and ceilings.
      (1)   Wood flooring used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be installed to accommodate a lateral expansion of the flooring, perpendicular
to the flooring grain without causing structural damage to the building.
      (2)   Plywood used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be of
a “marine” or “water-resistant” variety.
      (3)   Walls and ceilings at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be designed and constructed of materials that are “water-resistant” and will
withstand inundation.
      (4)   Windows, doors and other components at or below the regulatory
flood elevation shall be made of metal or other “water-resistant” material.
   (J)   Paints and adhesives.
      (1)   Paints and other finishes used at or below the regulatory flood
elevation shall be of “marine” or “water-resistant” quality.
      (2)   Adhesives used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be
of a “marine” or “water-resistant” variety.
      (3)   All wooden components (doors, trim, cabinets and the like) shall be
finished with a “marine” or “water-resistant” paint or other finishing
material.
   (K)   Electrical components.
      (1)   Electrical distribution panels shall be at least three feet above
the base flood elevation.
      (2)   Separate electrical circuits shall serve lower levels and shall be
dropped from above.
   (L)   Equipment. Water heaters, furnaces, air conditioning and ventilating
units and other electrical, mechanical or utility equipment or apparatus shall
not be located below the regulatory flood elevation.
   (M)   Fuel supply systems. All gas and oil supply systems shall be designed
to prevent the infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharges from
the system into floodwaters. Additional provisions shall be made for the
drainage of these systems in the event that floodwater infiltration occurs.
(Prior Code, § 8-503) (Ord. 2010-10, passed 12-14-2010)
§ 153.063 DEVELOPMENT WHICH MAY ENDANGER HUMAN LIFE.
   (A)   (1)   In accordance with the Floodplain Management Act, Act of Oct. 4,
1978, P.L. 851, No. 166, 32 P.S. §§ 679.101 et seq., and the regulations
adopted by the Department of Community and Economic Development as required by
the Act, any new or substantially improved structure shall be subject to the
provisions of this section, in addition to all other applicable provisions,
which:
         (a)   Will be used for the production or storage of any of the
following dangerous materials or substances;
         (b)   Will be used for any activity requiring the maintenance of a
supply of more than 550 gallons, or other comparable volume, of any of the
following dangerous materials or substances on the premises; or
         (c)   Will involve the production, storage or use of any amount of
radioactive substances.
      (2)   The following list of materials and substances are considered
dangerous to human life:
         (a)   Acetone;
         (b)   Ammonia;
         (c)   Benzene;
         (d)   Calcium carbide;
         (e)   Carbon disulfide;
         (f)   Celluloid;
         (g)   Chlorine;
         (h)   Hydrochloric acid;
         (i)   Hydrocyanic acid;
         (j)   Magnesium;
         (k)   Nitric acid and oxides of nitrogen;
         (l)   Petroleum products (gasoline, fuel oil and the like);
         (m)   Phosphorus;
         (n)   Potassium;
         (o)   Sodium;
         (p)   Sulphur and sulphur products;
         (q)   Pesticides (including insecticides, fungicides and
rodenticides); and
         (r)   Radioactive substances, insofar as such substances are not
otherwise regulated.
   (B)   (1)   Where permitted within any floodplain area, any new or
substantially improved structure of the kind described in division (A) above
shall be:
         (a)   Elevated or designed and constructed to remain completely dry up
to at least one and one-half feet above the base flood elevation; and
         (b)   Designed to prevent pollution from the structure or activity
during the course of a base flood elevation.
      (2)   Any such structure or part thereof that will be built below the
regulatory flood elevation shall be designed and constructed in accordance with
the standards for completely dry floodproofing contained in the publication
Floodproofing Regulations (United States Army Corps of Engineers, June 1972, as
amended March 1992), or with some other equivalent watertight standard.
   (C)   Within any floodplain area, any new or substantially improved
structure of the kind described in division (A) above shall be prohibited
within the area measured 50 feet landward from the top-of-bank of any
watercourse.
(Prior Code, § 8-504) (Ord. 2010-10, passed 12-14-2010)
§ 153.064 SUBDIVISION SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS.
   All subdivision proposals and development proposals containing at least 50
lots or at least five acres, whichever is the lesser, in flood hazard areas
where base flood elevation data is not available shall be supported by
hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses that determine base flood
elevations and floodway information.
   (A)   The analyses shall be prepared by a licensed professional engineer in
a format required by FEMA for a conditional letter of map revision or letter of
map revision.
   (B)   Submittal requirements and processing fees shall be the responsibility
of the applicant.
(Prior Code, § 8-505) (Ord. 2010-10, passed 12-14-2010)
§ 153.065 MANUFACTURED HOME SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Within approximate floodplain (Zone A) or special floodplain (Zone AE)
areas, manufactured homes shall be prohibited within the area measured 50 feet
landward from the top-of-bank of any watercourse.
   (B)   Where permitted within any floodplain area, all manufactured homes,
and any improvements thereto, shall be:
      (1)   Placed on a permanent foundation;
      (2)   Elevated so that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is at
least one and one-half feet above the base flood elevation; and
      (3)   Anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement.
   (C)   The installation of manufactured homes shall be done in accordance
with the manufacturers’ installation instructions as provided by the
manufacturer. Where the applicant cannot provide the above information, the
requirements of Appendix E of the 2006 International Residential Building Code
or the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development’s Permanent
Foundations for Manufactured Housing, 1984 Edition, draft or latest revision
thereto, shall apply, and 34 Pa. Code Chapters 401 to 405.
   (D)   Consideration shall be given to the installation requirements of the
2006 IBC and the 2006 IRC, or the most recent revisions thereto, and 34 Pa.
Code, as amended, where appropriate and/or applicable to units where the
manufacturers’ standards for anchoring cannot be provided or were not
established for the units’ proposed installation.
(Prior Code, § 8-506) (Ord. 2010-10, passed 12-14-2010)
§ 153.066 RECREATIONAL VEHICLE SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS.
   Recreational vehicles in Zones A1-30, AH and AE must either:
   (A)   Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days;
   (B)   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
   (C)   Meet the permit requirements for manufactured homes in §
153.065 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 8-507) (Ord. 2010-10, passed 12-14-2010)
ACTIVITIES REQUIRING SPECIAL PERMITS
§ 153.080 CERTAIN ACTIVITIES PROHIBITED WITHOUT SPECIAL PERMIT.
   In accordance with the administrative regulations promulgated by the
Department of Community and Economic Development to implement the Floodplain
Management Act, Act of Oct. 4, 1978, P.L. 851, No. 166, 32 P.S. §§ 679.101 et
seq., the following activities shall be prohibited within any identified
floodplain area unless a special permit has been issued by the borough:
   (A)   The commencement of any of the following activities; or the
construction, enlargement or expansion of any structure used, or intended to be
used, for any of the following activities:
      (1)   Hospitals;
      (2)   Nursing homes; and
      (3)   Jails or prisons.
   (B)   The commencement of, or any construction of, a new manufactured home
park or manufactured home subdivision, or substantial improvement to an
existing manufactured home park or manufactured home subdivision.
(Prior Code, § 8-601) (Ord. 2010-10, passed 12-14-2010) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.081 APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS FOR SPECIAL PERMIT.
   Applicants for special permits shall provide five copies of the following
items:
   (A)   A written request, including a completed permit application form;
   (B)   A small-scale map showing the vicinity in which the proposed site is
located;
   (C)   A plan of the entire site, clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of one
inch being equal to 100 feet or less, showing the following:
      (1)   North arrow, scale and date;
      (2)   Topography based upon the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of
1988 showing existing and proposed contours at intervals of two feet;
      (3)   All property and lot lines, including dimensions, and the size of
the site expressed in acres or square feet;
      (4)   The location of all existing streets, drives, other access ways and
parking areas, with information concerning widths, pavement types and
construction, and elevations;
      (5)   The location of any existing bodies of water or watercourses,
buildings, structures and other public or private facilities, including
railroad tracks and facilities, and any other natural and human-made features
affecting, or affected by, the proposed activity or development;
      (6)   The location of the floodplain boundary line, information and spot
elevations concerning the base flood elevation, and information concerning the
flow of water, including direction and velocities;
      (7)   The location of all proposed buildings, structures, utilities and
any other improvements; and
      (8)   Any other information which the municipality considers necessary
for adequate review of the application.
   (D)   Plans of all proposed buildings, structures and other improvements,
clearly and legibly drawn at suitable scale, showing the following:
      (1)   Sufficiently detailed architectural or engineering drawings,
including floor plans, sections and exterior building elevations, as
appropriate;
      (2)   For any proposed building, the elevation of the lowest floor
(including basement) and, as required, the elevation of any other floor;
      (3)   Complete information concerning flood depths, pressures,
velocities, impact and uplift forces and other factors associated with the base
flood elevation;
      (4)   Detailed information concerning any proposed floodproofing
measures;
      (5)   Cross section drawings for all proposed streets, drives, other
accessways and parking areas, showing all rights-of-way and pavement widths;
      (6)   Profile drawings for all proposed streets, drives and vehicular
accessways, including existing and proposed grades; and
      (7)   Plans and profiles of all proposed sanitary and storm sewer
systems, water supply systems and any other utilities and facilities.
   (E)   The following data and documentation:
      (1)   Certification from the applicant that the site upon which the
activity or development is proposed is an existing separate and single parcel
owned by the applicant or the client he or she represents;
      (2)   Certification from a registered professional engineer, architect or
landscape architect that the proposed construction has been adequately designed
to protect against damage from the base flood elevation;
      (3)   A statement, certified by a registered professional engineer,
architect, landscape architect or other qualified person, which contains a
complete and accurate description of the nature and extent of pollution that
might possibly occur from the development during the course of a base flood
elevation, including a statement concerning the effects such pollution may have
on human life;
      (4)   A statement certified by a registered professional engineer,
architect or landscape architect which contains a complete and accurate
description of the effects the proposed development will have on base flood
elevations and flows;
      (5)   A statement certified by a registered professional engineer,
architect or landscape architect which contains a complete and accurate
description of the kinds and amounts of any loose buoyant materials or debris
that may possibly exist or be located on the site below the base flood
elevation and the effects such materials and debris may have on base flood
elevations and flows;
      (6)   The appropriate component of the Department of Environmental
Protection’s “Planning Module for Land Development;”
      (7)   Where any excavation or grading is proposed, a plan meeting the
requirements of the Department of Environmental Protection to implement and
maintain erosion and sedimentation control;
      (8)   Any other applicable permits such as, but not limited to, a permit
for any activity regulated by the Department of Environmental Protection under
§ 302 of Act of Oct. 4, 1978, P.L. 166, , 32 P.S. § 679.302, as amended; and
      (9)   An evacuation plan which fully explains the manner in which the
site will be safely evacuated before or during the course of a base flood.
(Prior Code, § 8-602) (Ord. 2010-10, passed 12-14-2010)
§ 153.082 APPLICATION REVIEW PROCEDURES.
   Upon receipt of an application for a special permit by the borough, the
following procedures shall apply in addition to those of §§
153.002 to
153.005 of this chapter.
   (A)   Within three working days following receipt of the application, a
complete copy of the application and all accompanying documentation shall be
forwarded to the County Planning Commission by registered or certified mail for
its review and recommendations. Copies of the application shall also be
forwarded to the Borough Planning Commission and Borough Engineer for review
and comment.
   (B)   If an application is received that is incomplete, the borough shall
notify the applicant, in writing, stating in what respect the application is
deficient.
   (C)   If the borough decides to disapprove an application, it shall notify
the applicant, in writing, of the reasons for the disapproval.
   (D)   If the borough approves an application, it shall file written
notification, together with the application and all pertinent information, with
the Department of Community and Economic Development by registered or certified
mail within five working days after the date of approval.
   (E)   Before issuing the special permit, the borough shall allow the
Department of Community and Economic Development 30 days, after receipt of the
notification by the Department, to review the application and decision made by
the borough.
   (F)   If the borough does not receive any communication from the Department
of Community and Economic Development during the said 30-day review period, it
may issue a special permit to the applicant.
   (G)   If the Department of Community and Economic Development should decide
to disapprove an application, it shall notify the borough and the applicant, in
writing, of the reasons for the disapproval, and the borough shall not issue
the special permit.
(Prior Code, § 8-603) (Ord. 2010-10, passed 12-14-2010)
§ 153.083 SPECIAL TECHNICAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   In addition to the requirements of §§
153.045 to
153.048 of this chapter, the following minimum requirements shall also apply to
any proposed development requiring a special permit. If there is any conflict
between any of the following requirements and those in §§
153.045 to
153.048 of this chapter, or any other code, ordinance or regulation, the more
restrictive provision shall apply.
   (B)   No application for a special permit shall be approved unless it can be
determined that the structure or activity will be located, constructed and
maintained in a manner which will:
      (1)   Fully protect the health and safety of the general public and any
occupants of the structure. At a minimum, all new structures shall be designed,
located and constructed so that:
         (a)   The structure will survive inundation by waters of the base
flood elevation without any lateral movement or damage to either the structure
itself or to any of its equipment or contents below the BFE;
         (b)   The lowest floor (including basement) will be elevated to at
least one and one-half feet above the base flood elevation; and
         (c)   The occupants of the structure can remain inside for an
indefinite period of time and be safely evacuated at any time during the base
flood elevation.
      (2)   Prevent any significant possibility of pollution, increased flood
levels or flows or debris endangering life and property.
   (C)   All hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be undertaken only by
professional engineers, or others of demonstrated qualifications, who shall
certify that the technical methods used correctly reflect currently accepted
technical concepts. Studies, analyses, computations and the like shall be
submitted in sufficient detail to allow a thorough technical review by the
borough and the Department of Community and Economic Development.
(Prior Code, § 8-604) (Ord. 2010-10, passed 12-14-2010)
EXISTING STRUCTURES IN IDENTIFIED FLOODPLAIN AREAS
§ 153.095 EXISTING STRUCTURES.
   The provisions of this chapter do not require any changes or improvements to
be made to lawfully existing structures. However, when an improvement is made
to any existing structure, the provisions of §
153.096 of this chapter shall apply.
(Prior Code, § 8-701) (Ord. 2010-10, passed 12-14-2010)
§ 153.096 IMPROVEMENTS.
   The following provisions shall apply whenever any improvement is made to an
existing structure located within any identified floodplain area.
   (A)   No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be allowed
within any floodway area that would cause any increase in the elevation of the
base flood elevation.
   (B)   No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be allowed
within any special floodplain area (Zone AE) that would, together with all
other existing and anticipated development, increase the BFE more than one foot
at any point.
   (C)   Any modification, alteration, reconstruction or improvement of any
kind to an existing structure, to an extent or amount of 50% or more of its
market value, shall constitute a substantial improvement and shall be
undertaken only in full compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
   (D)   The above activity shall also address the requirements of 34 Pa. Code,
as amended, and the 2006 IBC and the 2006 IRC.
   (E)   Any modification, alteration, reconstruction or improvement of any
kind to an existing structure to an extent or amount of less than 50% of its
market value shall be elevated and/or floodproofed to the greatest extent
possible.
   (F)   Any modification, alteration, reconstruction or improvement of any
kind that meets the definition of “repetitive loss” shall be undertaken only in
full compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 8-702) (Ord. 2010-10, passed 12-14-2010)
VARIANCES
§ 153.110 VARIANCES GRANTED FOR EXCEPTIONAL HARDSHIP.
   If compliance with any of the requirements of this chapter would result in
an exceptional hardship to a prospective builder, developer or landowner, the
borough may, upon request, grant relief from the strict application of the
requirements.
(Prior Code, § 8-801) (Ord. 2010-10, passed 12-14-2010)
§ 153.111 VARIANCE PROCEDURES AND CONDITIONS.
   (A)   Requests for variances shall be considered by the borough in
accordance with the procedures contained in §
153.030 of this chapter and the following.
      (1)   No variance shall be granted for any construction, development, use
or activity within any floodway area that would cause any increase in the BFE.
      (2)   No variance shall be granted for any construction, development, use
or activity within any special floodplain area (Zone AE) that would, together
with all other existing and anticipated development, increase the BFE more than
one foot at any point.
      (3)   Except for a possible modification of the regulatory flood
elevation requirement involved, no variance shall be granted for any of the
other requirements pertaining specifically to development regulated by special
permit (§§
153.080 to
153.083 of this chapter) or to development which may endanger human life (§
153.063 of this chapter).
      (4)   If granted, a variance shall involve only the least modification
necessary to provide relief.
      (5)   In granting any variance, the borough shall attach whatever
reasonable conditions and safeguards it considers necessary in order to protect
the public health, safety and welfare, and to achieve the objectives of this
chapter.
      (6)   Whenever a variance is granted, the borough shall notify the
applicant in writing that:
         (a)   Granting of the variance may result in increased premium rates
for flood insurance; and
         (b)   Such variances may increase the risks to life and property.
      (7)   In reviewing any request for a variance, the borough shall
consider, at a minimum, the following:
         (a)   That there is good and sufficient cause;
         (b)   That failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional
hardship to the applicant; and
         (c)   That the granting of the variance will neither result in an
unacceptable or prohibited increase in flood heights, additional threats to
public safety or extraordinary public expense, nor create nuisances, cause
fraud on or victimize the public or conflict with any other applicable state or
local ordinances and regulations.
      (8)   A complete record of all variance requests and related actions
shall be maintained by the borough. In addition, a report of all variances
granted during the year shall be included in the annual report to FEMA.
   (B)   Notwithstanding any of the above, however, all structures shall be
designed and constructed so as to have the capability of resisting the 1%
annual chance flood.
(Prior Code, § 8-802) (Ord. 2010-10, passed 12-14-2010)
§ 153.999 PENALTY.
   Any person who fails to comply with any or all of the requirements or
provisions of this chapter or who fails or refuses to comply with any notice,
order or direction of the Floodplain Administrator or any other authorized
employee of the borough, upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a
magisterial district judge in the manner provided for the enforcement of
summary offenses under the Commonwealth Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be
sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $25 nor more than $1,000 (subject to
change via resolution) plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and
costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 90 days. In addition to the
above penalties, all other actions are hereby reserved, including an action in
equity for the proper enforcement of this chapter. The imposition of a fine or
penalty for any violation of, or noncompliance with, this chapter shall not
excuse the violation or noncompliance or permit it to continue, and all such
persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations and
noncompliances within a reasonable time. Any development initiated or any
structure or building constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, altered or
relocated in noncompliance with this chapter may be declared by the Council to
be a public nuisance and abatable as such.
(Prior Code, § 8-310) (Ord. 2010-10, passed 12-14-2010; Ord. 2015-04, passed
12-14-2015)
CHAPTER 154: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
Section
General Provisions
   
154.001   Short title
   
154.002   Findings
   
154.003   Purpose
   
154.004   Statutory authority
   
154.005   Applicability
   
154.006   Compatibility with other requirements
   
154.007   Erroneous permit
   
154.008   Prohibitions
   
154.009   Liability disclaimer
   
154.010   Definitions
Stormwater Management Performance Standards
   
154.025   Stormwater management performance districts
   
154.026   Requirements generally
   
154.027   Exemptions from performance standards
   
154.028   No-harm option
   
154.029   Waivers; modifications; demonstrated equivalency
   
154.030   Small projects
   
154.031   Standards generally
   
154.032   Watershed standards
   
154.033   Design criteria for stormwater management facilities, BMPs
   
154.034   Erosion and sedimentation controls
   
154.035   Water obstructions and encroachments
Stormwater Management Plan Requirements
   
154.050   Requirements generally
   
154.051   Stormwater Management Plan contents
   
154.052   Other permits, approvals
   
154.053   Operation and maintenance program
   
154.054   Financial guarantees
Stormwater Management Plan Submission and Review Procedures
   
154.065   Preapplication phase
   
154.066   Stormwater Management Plan submission and review
   
154.067   Status of Stormwater Management Plan after approval
   
154.068   Modification of Stormwater Management Plan
   
154.069   Inspection of stormwater management facilities and BMPs
   
154.070   Record drawings; completion certificate; final inspection
Operation and Maintenance of Stormwater Facilities and BMPs
   
154.085   Operation and maintenance responsibilities
   
154.086   Stormwater facility, BMP operations and maintenance plan requirements
   
154.087   Operation and maintenance agreement for privately owned stormwater
facilities, BMPs
   
154.088   Borough Stormwater and BMP Operation and Maintenance Fund
Fees, Financial Guarantees and Dedication of Public Improvements
   
154.100   Guarantee of completion
   
154.101   Release of completion guarantee
   
154.102   Default of completion guarantee
   
154.103   Dedication of public improvements
   
154.104   Maintenance guarantee
   
154.105   Fee Schedule
Enforcement Procedures and Remedies
   
154.120   Right of entry
   
154.121   Enforcement generally
   
154.122   Suspension and revocation
   
154.123   Preventative remedies
   
154.124   Violations
   
154.125   Additional remedies
   
154.126   Appeals
 
   
154.999   Penalty
   
Appendix A:   No-Harm Project Form
   
Appendix B:   Landowner Letter of Acknowledgment; Operation and Maintenance
Agreement
   
Appendix C:   Small Project Stormwater Management Site Plan and Worksheet
   
Appendix D:   Stormwater Management Plan Checklist
   
Appendix E:   Fees, Financial Guarantees
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 154.001 SHORT TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Oklahoma Borough
Stormwater Management Ordinance.”
(Ord. 2020-04, passed 1-11-2021; Ord. 2021-01, passed 8-9-2021)
§ 154.002 FINDINGS.
   (A)   Stormwater runoff from lands modified by human activities threatens
public health and safety by causing decreased infiltration of rainwater and
increased runoff flows and velocities, which overtaxes the carrying capacity of
existing streams and storm sewers, causes property damage and risks to public
safety and greatly increases the cost to the public to manage stormwater.
   (B)   Inadequate planning and management of accelerated stormwater runoff
resulting from land development and redevelopment throughout a watershed can
also harm surface water resources by changing the natural hydrologic patterns,
accelerating stream flows (which increases scour and erosion of stream beds and
stream banks, thereby elevating sedimentation), destroying aquatic habitats and
elevating aquatic pollutant concentrations and loadings, such as sediments,
nutrients, heavy metals and pathogens. Groundwater resources are also impacted
through loss of recharge.
   (C)   The borough is located in the Kiskiminetas River watershed(s), and as
such, will endeavor to cooperate with other municipalities located in the
watershed(s) to address issues of stormwater management, water quality,
pollution and flooding.
   (D)   Non-stormwater discharges to municipal separate storm sewer systems
can contribute to the pollution of waters of the commonwealth in the borough.
   (E)   Stormwater can be an important water resource by providing groundwater
recharge for water supplies and base flow of streams, which also protects and
maintains surface water quality.
   (F)   Public education on the control of pollution of stormwater is an
essential component in successfully managing stormwater.
   (G)   A comprehensive program of stormwater management, including reasonable
regulation of land development and redevelopment causing loss of natural
infiltration, is fundamental to the public health, safety, welfare and the
protection of the people of the borough and all the people of the commonwealth,
their resources and the environment.
   (H)   (1)   The use of open space conservation, green infrastructure, low
impact development (LID) and riparian buffers are intended to address the root
cause of water quality impairment by using systems and practices which use or
mimic natural processes to:
         (a)   Infiltrate and recharge;
         (b)   Evapotranspire; and
         (c)   Harvest and use precipitation near where it falls to earth.
      (2)   Green infrastructure practices, LID and riparian buffers contribute
to the restoration or maintenance of pre-development hydrology.
   (I)   Stormwater structures are considered vital infrastructure and can pose
a significant hazard. Outlets and waterways which carry stormwater shall be
maintained free of obstructions to allow for the non-restricted flow of
stormwater to avoid the impoundment of water.
   (J)   Occupancy and modification of floodplains shall be avoided wherever
there is a practicable alternative to reduce long- and short-term adverse
impacts in order to reduce the risk of flood loss, minimize the impact of
floods on human safety, health and welfare and to restore and preserve the
natural and beneficial values served by floodplains.
   (K)   Federal and state regulations require certain municipalities to
implement a program of stormwater controls. These municipalities are required
to obtain a permit for stormwater discharges from their municipal separate
storm sewer systems (MS4) under the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination
System (NPDES). The borough is subject to MS4 requirements.
   (L)   The Westmoreland Conservation District (WCD) is a recognized
regulatory agency with authority in the county and in this borough to regulate
erosion and sediment controls and stormwater management related to land
development activities. Because the WCD’s authority crosses municipal
boundaries, the WCD is enabled to oversee environmental issues for the general
benefit of all county residents.
   (M)   (1)   The Westmoreland County Integrated Water Resources Plan (current
edition) addresses all water resources and provides a decision-making tool for
development and redevelopment with respect to those resources, including
stormwater and its management.
      (2)   Refer to www.paiwrp.com and www.westmorelandstormwater.org.
(Ord. 2020-04, passed 1-11-2021; Ord. 2021-01, passed 8-9-2021)
§ 154.003 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to promote health, safety and welfare within
the borough and its watersheds by minimizing the harms and maximizing the
benefits described in this section through provisions designed to:
   (A)   Manage stormwater runoff impacts at their source by regulating
activities that cause the problems, reduce runoff volumes and mimic natural
hydrology;
   (B)   Maintain existing flows and quality of streams and watercourses;
   (C)   Prevent scour and erosion of stream banks and stream beds;
   (D)   Utilize and preserve the existing natural drainage systems as much as
possible;
   (E)   Restore and preserve the natural and beneficial values served by
stream-side and waterbody floodplains;
   (F)   Focus on the infiltration of stormwater to maintain groundwater
recharge, to prevent degradation of surface and groundwater quality and to
otherwise protect water resources;
   (G)   Promote stormwater runoff prevention and emphasize infiltration and
evapotranspiration through the protection and conservation of natural resource
systems and the use of non-structural BMPs and other creative methods of
improving water quality and managing stormwater runoff;
   (H)   Promote the use of green infrastructure in development and
redevelopment where it can also improve stormwater management within the
broader watershed in which the project is located;
   (I)   Meet legal water quality requirements under state law, including
regulations at 25 Pa. Code Chapter 93.4a, to protect and maintain existing uses
and maintain the level of water quality to support those uses in all streams,
and to protect and maintain water quality in special protection streams;
   (J)   Provide review procedures and performance standards for stormwater
planning and management;
   (K)   Provide for proper operations and maintenance of all permanent
stormwater management BMPs that are implemented in the borough;
   (L)   Provide a mechanism to identify the controls necessary to meet the
NPDES and MS4 permit requirements, and to encourage infrastructure improvements
that lead to the separation of storm sewer systems from sanitary sewer systems;
and
   (M)   Assist in detecting and eliminating illicit stormwater discharges into
the borough’s separate storm sewer system.
(Ord. 2020-04, passed 1-11-2021; Ord. 2021-01, passed 8-9-2021)
§ 154.004 STATUTORY AUTHORITY.
   (A)   The borough is empowered to regulate land use activities that affect
stormwater runoff by the authority of the Stormwater Management Act, §§ 1 et
seq., of the Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864 (No. 167), 32 P.S. §§ 680.1 et
seq., as amended, and the Act of July 31, 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, 53 P.S. §§
10101 et seq., the Commonwealth Municipalities Planning Code, as amended.
   (B)   The borough is also empowered to regulate land use activities that
affect stormwater runoff by the authority of other municipal code or
empowerment or Act of July 31, 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, 53 P.S. §§ 10101 et
seq., the Commonwealth Municipalities Planning Code, as amended.
(Ord. 2020-04, passed 1-11-2021; Ord. 2021-01, passed 8-9-2021)
§ 154.005 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   All regulated activities as defined by this chapter are subject to
regulation by this chapter.
   (B)   This chapter applies to any land development or regulated earth
disturbance activities within the borough, and all stormwater runoff entering
into the borough’s separate or combined storm sewer system from lands within
the boundaries of the borough.
   (C)   Earth disturbance activities and associated stormwater management
controls are also regulated under existing state law and implementing
regulations. This chapter shall operate in coordination with those parallel
requirements; the requirements of this chapter shall be no less restrictive in
meeting the purposes of this chapter than state law.
(Ord. 2020-04, passed 1-11-2021; Ord. 2021-01, passed 8-9-2021)
§ 154.006 COMPATIBILITY WITH OTHER REQUIREMENTS.
   Approvals issued and actions taken under this chapter do not relieve the
applicant of the responsibility to secure required permits or approvals for
activities regulated by any other code, law, regulation or ordinance. To the
extent that this chapter imposes more rigorous or stringent requirements for
stormwater management, the specific requirements contained in this chapter
shall be followed. Conflicting provisions in other municipality ordinances or
regulations shall be construed to retain the requirements of this chapter
addressing state water quality requirements.
(Ord. 2020-04, passed 1-11-2021; Ord. 2021-01, passed 8-9-2021)
§ 154.007 ERRONEOUS PERMIT.
   Any permit or authorization issued or approved based on false, misleading or
erroneous information provided by an applicant is void without the necessity of
any proceedings for revocation. Any work undertaken or use established pursuant
to such permit or other authorization is unlawful. No action may be taken by a
board, agency or employee of the borough purporting to validate such a
violation.
(Ord. 2020-04, passed 1-11-2021; Ord. 2021-01, passed 8-9-2021) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.008 PROHIBITIONS.
   Shall be consistent with PAG-13 NPDES general permit for stormwater
discharges from MS4 communities and as listed here.
   (A)   Prohibited discharges.
      (1)   No person in the borough shall introduce, permit or allow, or cause
to introduce, permit or allow, stormwater discharges into the municipality
separate storm sewer system which are not composed entirely of stormwater,
except as permitted by this chapter, or:
         (a)   As provided in division (A)(2) below; or
         (b)   Discharges as authorized under a state or federal permit.
      (2)   Permissible discharges, based on a finding by the borough that the
discharge(s) do not significantly contribute to pollution to surface waters of
the commonwealth, are recommended to be discharged safely to a vegetated area
or infiltration BMP, but can also be discharged to a storm sewer system,
include but are not limited to:
         (a)   Discharges from firefighting activities;
         (b)   Potable water sources, including dechlorinated water line and
fire hydrant flushings;
         (c)   Non-contaminated irrigation drainage from agricultural
practices;
         (d)   Routine external building washdown (which does not use
detergents or other compounds);
         (e)   Non-contaminated air conditioning condensate;
         (f)   Water from individual residential car, boat or other residential
vehicle washing that does not use detergents or other compounds;
         (g)   Springs;
         (h)   Non-contaminated water from basement or crawlspace sump pumps;
         (i)   Non-contaminated water from foundation or from footing drains;
         (j)   Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands;
         (k)   Lawn watering;
         (l)   Pavement wash waters where spills or leaks of toxic or hazardous
materials have not occurred (unless all spill material has been removed) and
where detergents are not used;
         (m)   Splash pad (recreational spray patio with no standing water)
discharges; and
         (n)   Non-contaminated groundwater.
      (3)   In the event that the borough determines that any of the discharges
identified in division (A)(2) above significantly contribute to pollution of
the waters of the commonwealth, or is so notified by the DEP, the borough will
notify the landowner and/or the responsible person to cease the discharge.
      (4)   Upon notice provided by the borough under division (A)(3) above,
the discharger will have a reasonable time, as determined by the borough, to
cease the discharge consistent with the degree of pollution caused by the
discharge.
      (5)   Nothing in this section shall affect, limit or alleviate a
discharger’s responsibilities under state or federal law.
   (B)   Prohibited connections. The following sources, activities or
connections are prohibited, except as provided in divisions (A)(1) and (A)(2)
above:
      (1)   Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface,
which allows any non-stormwater discharge, including, but not limited to,
sewage, process wastewater and wash water, to enter the separate storm sewer
system, and any connections to the storm drain system from indoor drains and
sinks;
      (2)   Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial, industrial or
other nonresidential land use to the separate storm sewer system which has not
been documented in plans, maps or equivalent records, and approved by the
borough; and
      (3)   Drains carrying stormwater or groundwater shall not be connected to
or discharge to any public or private sanitary sewer system or facility.
   (C)   Prohibited activities.
      (1)   A landowner may not alter the natural flow of surface water on his
or her property by concentrating it in an artificial channel and discharging it
upon lower land of his or her neighbor even though no more water is thereby
collected than would naturally have flowed upon the neighbor’s land in a
diffused shallow broad path or sheet flow condition.
      (2)   A landowner may not alter any BMPs, facilities or structures that
were installed under this chapter without written approval of the borough.
   (D)   Roof drains and sump pumps. Roof drains and sump pumps shall discharge
to infiltration or vegetative BMPs wherever feasible.
(Ord. 2020-04, passed 1-11-2021; Ord. 2021-01, passed 8-9-2021) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.009 LIABILITY DISCLAIMER.
   (A)   Neither the granting of any approval under the stormwater management
provisions of this chapter, nor compliance with the provisions of this chapter,
or with any condition imposed by any public body of the borough or by a borough
official, employee or consultant hereunder, shall relieve any person from any
responsibility for damage to persons or property resulting therefrom, or as
otherwise imposed by law, nor impose any liability upon the borough for damages
to persons or property.
   (B)   The granting of a permit which includes any stormwater management does
not constitute a representation, guarantee or warranty of any kind by the
borough or the WCD, or by an official or employee thereof, of the
practicability or safety of any structure, use or other plan proposed and shall
create no liability upon or cause of action against such public body, official
or employee for any damage that may result pursuant thereto.
(Ord. 2020-04, passed 1-11-2021; Ord. 2021-01, passed 8-9-2021)
§ 154.010 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter, the terms and words used herein shall
be interpreted as follows.
      (1)   Words used in the present tense include the future tense; the
singular number includes the plural, and the plural number includes the
singular; words of masculine gender include feminine gender, and words of
feminine gender include masculine gender.
      (2)   The word INCLUDES or INCLUDING shall not limit the term to the
specific example but is intended to extend its meaning to all other instances
of like kind and character.
      (3)   The words SHALL and MUST are mandatory; the words MAY and SHOULD
are permissive.
   (B)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      ACCELERATED EROSION. The removal of the surface of the land through the
combined action of human activities and natural processes at a rate greater
than would occur because of the natural process alone.
      ACT 167. The Stormwater Management Act, Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864,
No. 167, as amended by the Act of May 24, 1984, No. 63, 32 P.S. §§ 680.1 et
seq. The borough is empowered to regulate land use activities that affect
runoff and surface and groundwater quality and quantity by the authority of the
Act, the “Stormwater Management Act.”
      AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITY. Activities associated with agriculture such as
agricultural cultivation, agricultural operation and animal-heavy use areas.
This includes the work of producing crops and raising livestock, including
tillage, land clearing, plowing, disking, harrowing, planting, harvesting crops
or the pasturing and raising of livestock and installation of conservation
practices. Except for high tunnels that are exempt pursuant to the provisions
of Act of Apr. 18, 2018, P.L. 91, No. 15, 32 P.S. § 680.11 the construction of
new buildings or impervious areas is not considered an AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITY.
      ANIMAL CONCENTRATION (HEAVY USE) AREAS. A barnyard, feedlot, loafing
area, exercise lot or other similar animal confinement area that will not
maintain a growing crop, or where deposited manure nitrogen is in excess of
crop needs, but excluding areas managed as pastures or other cropland, and
pasture access ways, if they do not cause direct flow of nutrients to surface
water or groundwater.
      APPLICANT. A landowner, developer or other person who has filed an
application for development or for approval to engage in any regulated earth
disturbance activity at a project site in the borough.
      BMP or BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE. Activities, facilities, designs,
measures or procedures used to manage stormwater impacts from regulated
development activities, to meet state water quality requirements, to promote
groundwater recharge and to otherwise meet the purposes of this chapter. BMPs
include, but are not limited to, infiltration, filter strips, low impact
design, bioretention, wet ponds, permeable paving, grassed swales, forested
buffers, sand filters and detention basins.
      CHANNEL. A perceptible natural or artificial waterway which periodically
or continuously contains moving water or which forms a connecting link between
two bodies of water. It has a definite bed and banks which confine the water.
      CHAPTER 102. Title 25 Pa. Code Chapter 102, Erosion and Sedimentation
Control.
      CHAPTER 105.  Title 25 Pa. Code Chapter 105, Dam Safety and Waterway
Management.
      COMBINED SEWER SYSTEM. A sewer system designed to serve as both sanitary
sewer and storm sewer.
      CONSERVATION DISTRICT. The Westmoreland Conservation District (WCD), as
defined in § 3(c) of the Conservation District Law (3 P.S. § 851(c)), that has
the authority under a delegation agreement executed with the DEP to administer
and enforce all or a portion of the regulations promulgated under 25 Pa. Code
Chapter 102.
      CONSERVATION PLAN. A plan written by an NRCS- or SCS-certified planner
that identifies conservation practices and includes site-specific BMPs for
agricultural plowing or tilling activities and animal concentration areas.
      CONSERVATION PRACTICES. Practices installed on agricultural lands to
improve farmland, soil and/or water quality which have been identified in a
current conservation plan.
      CONVEYANCE.
         (a)   Any structure that carries a flow.
         (b)   The ability of a pipe, culvert, swale or similar facility to
carry the peak flow from the design storm.
      CSO or COMBINED SEWER OVERFLOW. An intermittent flow or other untreated
discharge from a municipal combined sewer system (including domestic,
industrial and commercial wastewater and stormwater) which results from a flow
in excess of the dry weather carrying capacity of the system.
      CULVERT. A closed conduit for the free passage of surface drainage under
a highway, railroad, canal or other embankment.
      DEMONSTRATED EQUIVALENCY. A stormwater management project on an
alternative site(s) within the same watershed as the proposed development that
will provide equal or better achievement of the purpose of this chapter and
will not substantially or permanently impair the appropriate use or development
of adjacent property. Examples include streambank stabilization, creation or
enhancement of riparian buffers, removal of existing impervious surfaces and
establishment of “green” easements, installation of stormwater management and
water quality facilities and the like.
      DEP or PENNSYLVANIA DEP. The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection.
      DESIGN CRITERIA.
         (a)   Engineering guidelines specifying construction details and
materials; and
         (b)   Objectives, results or limits which must be met by a facility,
structure or process in performance of its intended functions.
      DESIGN STORM. See STORM FREQUENCY.
      DETENTION. The slowing, dampening or attenuating of runoff flows entering
the natural drainage pattern or storm drainage system by temporarily holding
water on a surface area in a detention basin or within the drainage system.
      DETENTION BASIN. A pond, basin, reservoir or underground system
constructed to impound or retard surface runoff temporarily.
      DEVELOPER. A person that seeks to undertake or undertakes the activities
associated with changes in land use or seeks to undertake or undertakes any
regulated earth disturbance activities at a project site in the borough. The
term DEVELOPER includes, but is not limited to, the term SUBDIVIDER, OWNER and
BUILDER, even though the person involved in successive stages of a project may
change or vary.
      DEVELOPMENT. An earth disturbance activity, as herein defined, and any
activity, construction, alteration, change in land use or practice that affects
stormwater runoff characteristics. The term also includes redevelopment.
      DEVELOPMENT SITE. The specific tract of land where any development or
earth disturbance activities in the borough are planned, conducted, undertaken
or maintained.
      DISCHARGE. The flow or rate of flow from a canal, conduit, channel or
other hydraulic structure.
      DISTURBED AREA. A land area where an earth disturbance activity is
occurring or has occurred.
      DRAINAGE. In general, the removal of surface water from a given area
commonly applied to surface water and groundwater.
      DRAINAGE AREA. Any of the following activities:
         (a)   The area of a drainage basin or watershed, expressed in acres,
square miles or other unit of area (also called CATCHMENT AREA, WATERSHED or
RIVER BASIN); and
         (b)   The area served by a sewer system receiving storm and surface
water, or by a watercourse.
      EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY. A construction or other human activity which
disturbs the surface of the land, including, but not limited to, clearing and
grubbing, grading, excavations, embankments, road maintenance, land
development, building construction, oil and gas activities, well drilling,
mineral extraction and the moving, depositing, stockpiling or storing of soil,
rock or earth materials.
      ENCROACHMENT. Any structure or activity which in any manner changes,
expands or diminishes the course, current or cross-section of any watercourse,
floodway or body of water.
      EROSION. The process by which land, including channels, is worn away by
water, wind or chemical action.
      EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN. A plan for a project site which
identifies BMPs to minimize accelerated erosion and sedimentation of land.
      EROSION CONTROL. The application of measures to reduce the erosion of
land surfaces.
      EXISTING CONDITION. The dominant land cover during the five-year period
immediately preceding a proposed regulated activity.
      FEMA. The Federal Emergency Management Agency.
      FLOODPLAIN. Any land area susceptible to inundation by water from any
natural source or delineated by applicable FEMA maps and studies as being a
special flood hazard area. Also includes areas that comprise Group 13 soils, as
listed in Appendix A of the Commonwealth DEP’s Technical Manual for Sewage
Enforcement Officers (as amended or replaced from time to time by the DEP).
      FLOODWAY. The channel of the watercourse and those portions of the
adjoining floodplains that are reasonably required to carry and discharge the
100-year flood. Unless otherwise specified, the boundary of the FLOODWAY is as
indicated on maps and flood insurance studies provided by FEMA. In an area
where no FEMA maps or studies have defined the boundary of the 100-year
floodway, it is assumed “absent evidence to the contrary” that the FLOODWAY
extends from the stream to 50 feet from the top of the bank of the stream.
      FOREST MANAGEMENT/TIMBER OPERATIONS. Planning and activities necessary
for the management of forestland. These include conducting a timber inventory,
preparation of forest management plans, silvi-cultural treatment, cutting
budgets, logging road design and construction, timber harvesting, site
preparation and reforestation.
      GREEN INFRASTRUCTURE. Systems and practices that use or mimic natural
processes to infiltrate, evapotranspire or reuse stormwater on the site where
it is generated.
      GROUND COVER. Materials and/or vegetation covering the ground surface.
      GROUNDWATER. Subsurface water occupying the saturation zone, from which
wells and springs are fed.
      GROUNDWATER RECHARGE. Replenishment of existing natural underground water
supplies.
      HIGH TUNNEL. A structure which meets the following:
         (a)   Is used for the production, processing, keeping, storing, sale
or shelter of an agricultural commodity as defined in § 2 of the Act of
December 19, 1974 (P.L. 973, No. 319), known as the Farmland and Forestland
Assessment Act of 1974, or for the storage of agricultural equipment and
supplies; and
         (b)   Is constructed consistent with all of the following:
            1.   Has a metal, wood or plastic frame;
            2.   When covered, has plastic, woven textile or other flexible
covering; and
            3.   Has a floor made of soil, crushed stone, matting, pavers or a
floating concrete slab.
      HOT SPOTS. Areas where land use or activities generate highly
contaminated runoff, with concentrations of pollutants that are higher than
those typically found in stormwater (e.g., vehicle salvage yards and recycling
facilities, vehicle fueling stations, fleet storage areas, vehicle equipment
and cleaning facilities, vehicle service and maintenance facilities and certain
industrial/commercial activity areas).
      HYDROLOGIC SOIL GROUP or HSG. Infiltration rates of soils vary widely and
are affected by subsurface permeability as well as surface intake rates. Soils
are classified into four HSGs (A, B, C and D) according to their minimum
infiltration rate, which is obtained for bare soil after prolonged wetting. The
NRCS defines the four groups and provides a list of most of the soils in the
United States and their group classification. The soils in the area of the
development site may be identified from a soil survey report that can be
obtained from local NRCS offices or conservation district offices. Soils become
less permeable as the HSG varies from A to D (NRCS 1,2).
      IMPERVIOUS SURFACE. A surface that prevents the infiltration of water
into the ground. IMPERVIOUS SURFACES (or areas) shall include, but not be
limited to: roofs, additional indoor living spaces, patios, garages, storage
sheds and similar structures; and any new streets or sidewalks. Decks, parking
areas, gravel areas and driveway areas are counted as impervious areas if they
directly prevent infiltration.
      INFILTRATION. Any of the following activities:
         (a)   The flow or movement of water through the interstices or pores
of a soil or other porous medium; or
         (b)   The absorption of liquid by the soil.
      LAND DEVELOPMENT. Any of the following activities:
         (a)   The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots,
tracts or parcels of land for any purpose involving:
            1.   A group of two or more residential or nonresidential
buildings, whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single
nonresidential building on a lot or lots regardless of the number of occupants
or tenure; or
            2.   The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially
or cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or prospective occupants
by means of, or for the purpose of, streets, common areas, leaseholds,
condominiums, building groups or other features.
         (b)   A subdivision of land.
      LAND DISTURBANCE. Any activity involving the changing, grading,
transportation, fill and any other activity which causes land to be exposed to
the danger of erosion.
      LOW IMPACT DEVELOPMENT or LID. Site design approaches and small-scale
stormwater management practices that promote the use of natural systems for
infiltration, evapotranspiration and reuse of rainwater. LID can be applied to
new development, urban retrofits and revitalization projects. LID utilizes
design techniques that infiltrate, filter, evaporate and store runoff close to
its source. Rather than rely on costly large-scale conveyance and treatment
systems, LID addresses stormwater through a variety of small, cost-effective
landscape features located on-site.
      MAINTENANCE. The upkeep necessary for the efficient operation of physical
properties.
      MS4 or MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM. A conveyance or system of
conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch
basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, human-made channels or storm drains):
         (a)   Owned or operated by a state, city, town, borough, county,
parish, district, association or other public body (created by or pursuant to
state law), including special districts under state law, such as a sewer
district, flood-control district or drainage district, or similar entity, or an
Indian tribe or an authorized Indian tribal organization, or a designated and
approved management agency under § 208 of the Clean Water Act, being 33 U.S.C.
§ 1288, that discharges into waters of the United States;
         (b)   Designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater;
         (c)   Which is not a combined sewer; and
         (d)   Which is not part of a publicly owned treatment works (POTW) as
defined at 40 C.F.R. § 122.2.
      MUNICIPALITIES PLANNING CODE. Sections 101 et seq., of the Act of Dec.
21, 1988, P.L. 1329, No. 170, 53 P.S. §§ 10101 et seq.
      MUNICIPALITY. Oklahoma Borough, Westmoreland County, Pennsylvania.
      NATIVE VEGETATION. Plant species that have historically grown in the
commonwealth and are not invasive species, controlled plants or noxious weeds
as defined by PA DCNR, or the Commonwealth Department of Agriculture.
      NATURAL STORMWATER RUNOFF REGIME. A watershed where natural surface
configurations, runoff characteristics and defined drainage conveyances have
attained the conditions of equilibrium.
      NPDES. The National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System, the federal
government’s system for the issuance of permits under the Clean Water Act, 33
U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq., which is delegated to the DEP in the commonwealth.
      NRCS. The Natural Resources Conservation Service (previously Soil
Conservation Service).
      OUTFALL. The “point source,” as described in 40 C.F.R. § 122.2, at the
point where the borough’s storm sewer system discharges to surface waters of
the commonwealth. Also, the point, location or structure where drainage
discharges from a sewer, drain or other conduit as well as the conduit leading
to the ultimate discharge point.
      OUTLET CONTROL STRUCTURE. The means of controlling the relationship
between the head water elevation and the discharge, placed at the outlet or
downstream end of any structure through which water may flow.
      OVERLAND FLOODING. Flooding that occurs for a variety of reasons all
stemming from excessive stormwater runoff, including too much rain in too
little time, added impervious development, changes in land use and malfunction
or clogging of existing stormwater systems.
      PEAK DISCHARGE. The maximum rate of stormwater runoff from a specific
storm event.
      PEAK FLOW. Maximum flow.
      PERFORMANCE STANDARD. A standard which establishes an end result or
outcome which is to be achieved but does not prescribe specific means for
achieving it.
      PERSON. An individual, partnership, public or private association or
corporation, firm, trust, estate, municipality, governmental unit, public
utility or any other legal entity whatsoever which is recognized by law as the
subject of rights and duties. Whenever used in any section prescribing or
imposing a penalty, the term PERSON shall include the members of a partnership;
the officers, members, servants and agents of an association; the officers,
agents and servants of a corporation; and the officers of a municipality or
county, but shall exclude any department, board, bureau or agency of the
commonwealth.
      PERVIOUS AREA. Any material or surface that allows water to pass through
at a rate equal to or greater than natural ground cover.
      POINT SOURCE. Any discernible, confined and discrete conveyance,
including, but not limited to, any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel or conduit from
which stormwater is or may be discharged, as defined in state regulations at 25
Pa. Code § 92a.
      POLLUTANT REDUCTION PLAN or PRP. A plan required by the MS4 permit to
calculate existing pollutants of concern and the minimum reduction in loading
from stormwater discharges, and to select the best management practices to
achieve the minimum reductions.
      PROJECT SITE. The specific area of land where any development or
regulated earth disturbance activities in the borough are planned, conducted,
undertaken or maintained.
      QUALIFIED PROFESSIONAL. Any person licensed by the Commonwealth
Department of State or otherwise qualified under state law to perform the work
required by this chapter.
      RECORD DRAWINGS. Drawings showing the stormwater management system of a
site as built, created after the completion of construction and intended for
use as a permanent record of the stormwater management system.
      REDEVELOPMENT. Earth disturbance activities on land which has previously
been disturbed or developed.
      REGULATED DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITY. Any earth disturbance activities or any
activities that involve the change of land cover, alteration or development of
land in a manner that may affect stormwater runoff as listed in the Regulated
Development Activity Table. This includes earth disturbance on any portion of,
part of or during any stage of a larger common plan of development. With regard
to road maintenance activities, the term only includes activities involving one
acre or more of earth disturbance. Refer to the Regulated Development Activity
Table in §
154.026 of this chapter.
      RELEASE RATE. The percentage of existing conditions’ peak rate of runoff
from a site or subarea to which the proposed conditions’ peak rate of runoff
must be reduced to protect downstream areas.
      RELEASE RATE PERCENTAGE. The watershed factor determined by comparing the
maximum rate of runoff from a subbasin to the contributing rate of runoff to
the watershed peak rate at specific points of interest.
      RESOURCE EXTRACTION. Any activity that involves drawing materials from
the natural environment.
      RETENTION BASIN. A pond or basin, usually enclosed by artificial dikes,
that is used to retard stormwater runoff by temporarily storing the runoff and
releasing it at a predetermined rate.
      RETENTION VOLUME/REMOVED RUNOFF. The volume of runoff that is captured
and not released directly into the surface waters of the commonwealth during or
immediately after a storm event.
      RETURN PERIOD. The average interval in years over which an event of a
given magnitude can be expected to recur.
      RIPARIAN BUFFER. A permanent area of native vegetation, including
herbaceous material, shrubs and/or trees, located adjacent to streams, lakes,
ponds and wetlands.
      ROAD MAINTENANCE. Earth disturbance activities within the existing road
cross-section, such as grading and repairing existing unpaved road surfaces,
cutting road banks, cleaning or clearing drainage ditches and other similar
activities.
      RUNOFF. That part of precipitation which flows over the land.
      RUNOFF CHARACTERISTICS. The surface components of any watershed which
affect the rate, amount and direction of stormwater runoff. These may include,
but are not limited to, vegetation, soils, slopes and human-made landscape
alterations.
      SALDO. The Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.
      SEDIMENT. Mineral or organic solid material that is being transported or
has been moved from its site of origin by air, water or ice and has come to
rest.
      SEDIMENTATION. The process by which mineral or organic matter is
accumulated or deposited by moving water, wind or gravity.
      SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM. A conveyance or system of conveyances
(including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs,
gutters, ditches, human-made channels or storm drains) primarily used for
collecting and conveying stormwater runoff. See MS4.
      SMALL PROJECT. Regulated development activities that, measured on a
cumulative basis from five years prior to the application, create additional
impervious areas of more than 3,000 square feet and less than 5,000 square feet
or involve earth disturbance activity of an area less than 20,000 square feet
and do not involve the alteration of stormwater facilities or water courses.
      STATE WATER QUALITY REQUIREMENTS. As defined under state regulations,
protection of designated and existing uses (see 25 Pa. Code Chapters 93 and
96), including:
         (a)   Each stream segment in the commonwealth has a “designated use,”
such as “cold water fishery” or “potable water supply,” which are listed in 25
Pa. Code Chapter 93. These uses must be protected and maintained under state
regulations;
         (b)   “Existing uses” are those attained as of November 1975,
regardless whether they have been designated in 25 Pa. Code Chapter 93.
Regulated earth disturbance activities must be designed to protect and maintain
existing uses and maintain the level of water quality necessary to protect
those uses in all streams, and to protect and maintain water quality in special
protection streams; and
         (c)   Water quality involves the chemical, biological and physical
characteristics of surface water bodies. After regulated earth disturbance
activities are complete, these characteristics can be impacted by the addition
of pollutants such as sediment and changes in habitat through increased flow
volumes and/or rates as a result of changes in land surface area from those
activities. Therefore, permanent discharges to surface waters must be managed
to protect the stream bank, streambed and structural integrity of the waterway
to prevent these impacts.
      STORAGE FACILITY. Any surface or sub-surface facility that stores
stormwater runoff. See also DETENTION BASIN and RETENTION BASIN.
      STORM FREQUENCY. The average interval in years over which a storm event
of a given precipitation volume can be expected to occur. The magnitude and
temporal distribution of precipitation from a storm event measured in
probability of occurrence (e.g., a five-year storm) and duration (e.g., 24
hours) used in the design and evaluation of stormwater management systems. See
also RETURN PERIOD.
      STORM SEWER. A sewer that carries intercepted surface runoff, street
water and other drainage but excludes domestic sewage and industrial waste.
      STORMWATER. Drainage runoff from the surface of the land resulting from
precipitation or snow or ice melt.
      STORMWATER COLLECTION SYSTEMS. Natural or human-made structures that
collect and transport stormwater through or from a drainage area to the point
of final outlet, including, but not limited to, any of the following conduits
and appurtenant features: canals, channels, ditches, streams, culverts, streets
and pumping stations.
      STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITY. A constructed measure for the detention,
retention, infiltration and water quality treatment of stormwater runoff.
      STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN. The plan for managing stormwater runoff rate,
volume and water quality as required by the Stormwater Management Act, the Act
of Oct. 4, 1978, P.L. 851, 32 P.S. §§ 680.1 et seq.
      SUBDIVISION. As defined in the Commonwealth Municipalities Planning Code,
Act of July 31, 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, as amended by the Act of Dec. 21, 1988
P.L. 1329, No. 170, 53 P.S. §§ 10101 et seq.
      SWALE. A low-lying stretch of land which gathers or carries surface water
runoff.
      USDA. The United States Department of Agriculture.
      WATERCOURSE. A channel or conveyance of surface water, such as a run,
stream or creek, having a defined bed and banks, whether natural or artificial,
with perennial or intermittent flow.
      WATERS OF THE COMMONWEALTH. Any and all rivers, streams, creeks,
rivulets, impoundments, ditches, watercourses, storm sewers, lakes, dammed
water, wetlands, ponds, springs and all other bodies or channels of conveyance
of surface water, or parts thereof, whether natural or artificial, within or on
the boundaries of this commonwealth.
      WATERSHED.
         (a)   The entire region or area drained by a river or other body of
water, whether natural or artificial.
         (b)   A DESIGNATED WATERSHED is an area delineated by the
commonwealth’s DEP and approved by the Environmental Quality Board for which
counties are required to develop watershed stormwater management plans.
      WATERSHED STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN. The plan for managing stormwater
runoff throughout a designated watershed as required by the Stormwater
Management Act (Act 167), the Act of Oct. 4, 1978, P.L. 851, 32 P.S. §§ 680.1
et seq.
      WETLAND. Areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater
at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal
circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life
in saturated soil conditions, including swamps, marshes, bogs and similar
areas.
(Ord. 2020-04, passed 1-11-2021; Ord. 2021-01, passed 8-9-2021)
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
§ 154.025 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PERFORMANCE DISTRICTS.
   (A)   For the purposes of stormwater management, the borough is in the
Kiskiminetas River watershed. For areas not covered by a stormwater performance
district, the release rate shall be 80% (in areas not covered by a stormwater
performance district, an 80% release rate or less is recommended as a standard;
this is to apply a “factor of safety” to stormwater calculations, to account
for the many variables in site design and stormwater management and to avoid a
land development project inadvertently increasing runoff and causing harm
downstream) of the pre-development peak flow as set by the borough.
   (B)   For more information, refer to www.westmorelandstormwater.org.
(Ord. 2020-04, passed 1-11-2021; Ord. 2021-01, passed 8-9-2021)
§ 154.026 REQUIREMENTS GENERALLY.
   (A)   The preparation and implementation of a stormwater management site
plan is required for all regulated activities, unless the preparation of a SWM
site plan is specifically exempted.
   (B)   Projects that propose greater than one acre of earth disturbance are
subject to NPDES permit requirements and will require a stormwater management
plan.
   (C)   No regulated activities, unless exempted, shall commence until the
borough issues written approval of a SWM site plan which demonstrates
compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
   (D)   Regulated development activities shall be as follows.
Regulated Development Activity Table
SWM Plan Requirement New Impervious Area for New and Disturbed Area* Next Steps
                     Redevelopment
Regulated Development Activity Table
SWM Plan            New Impervious Area
Requirement         for New and         Disturbed Area*     Next Steps
                    Redevelopment
                                                            Comply with
Exempt              0                   Less than 1 acre    exemption section
                                                            of this chapter
                    Up to 3,000 square  Less than 5,000     Comply with no-harm
No-harm             feet for suburban/  square feet for     section of this
                    rural areas         suburban/rural      chapter
                                        areas
Small project (per  3,000 square feet   5,000 square feet   Submit small
definition), refer  to 10,000 square    to 20,000 square    project site plan,
to Appendix C       feet                feet                complete with all
                                                            attachments
                    Greater than 10,000
                    square feet if
Stormwater          exempt and small
management plan     project criteria    Greater than 20,000 Consult a qualified
meeting the chapter are not met, or if  square feet         professional
requirements        improvements do not
                    meet no-harm
                    criteria
Waiver;                                                     Comply with waiver;
modification;       Less than 1 acre,                       modification;
demonstrated        subject to borough  Less than 1 acre    demonstrated
equivalency         approval                                equivalency section
                                                            of this chapter
NOTES TO TABLE:
* The above table is only applicable for projects with earth disturbance less
than 1 acre and that have not had cumulative impacts, within 5 years preceding
the permit application date, that are in excess of the square foot limits.
 
(Ord. 2020-04, passed 1-11-2021; Ord. 2021-01, passed 8-9-2021)
§ 154.027 EXEMPTIONS FROM PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
   (A)   The following regulated activities are specifically exempt from the
stormwater management plan preparation and submission requirements articulated
in this chapter:
      (1)   Agricultural activity limited to plowing or tilling activities, for
animal concentrated (heavy) use areas, provided the activities are performed
according to the requirements of Chapter 102, or conservation practices being
installed as part of the implementation of a conservation plan written by an
NRCS or SCS-certified planner. This exemption does not include any other type
of earth disturbance subject to NPDES permit requirements, such as earth
disturbance equal to or greater than one acre;
      (2)   A high tunnel, if proof is provided that the high tunnel is exempt
pursuant to the provisions of Act 15 of 2018. Such an exemption does not exempt
high tunnels from other requirements applicable under federal, state or
municipal laws;
      (3)   Forest management and timber operations, provided the activities
are performed according to the requirements of Chapter 102;
      (4)   Resource extraction activities, provided they are done in
accordance with applicable commonwealth DEP regulations;
      (5)   Roadway resurfacing and maintenance projects which do not increase
impervious area and underground infrastructure projects are exempt from the
provisions of this chapter, provided the activities meet the requirements of
all other municipal, state and federal requirements;
      (6)   Domestic landscaping and/or vegetable gardening; and
      (7)   Voluntary green infrastructure (GI), or the retrofit of stormwater
management infrastructure as conversion to green infrastructure BMPs to correct
existing problems, that are solely intended to better manage runoff from
existing development, are not part of new development or redevelopment and that
do not fall under the requirements of this chapter or other development
ordinances.
   (B)   The borough may deny or revoke any exemption pursuant to this section
at any time for any project that the borough believes may pose a threat to
public health, safety, property or the environment.
(Ord. 2020-04, passed 1-11-2021; Ord. 2021-01, passed 8-9-2021)
§ 154.028 NO-HARM OPTION.
   (A)   Applicants may request approval of a “no-harm option” regarding
stormwater management for their project. “No-harm option” requests must meet
the following criteria deemed appropriate by the borough and in compliance with
all commonwealth laws and regulations:
      (1)   Project located near or adjacent to significantly larger body of
water;
      (2)   Project able to discharge directly into existing flood-control
feature;
      (3)   Project of a small size (less than 3,000 square feet) for suburban
and rural of new impervious surface, or less than 5,000 square feet for
suburban and rural of land use changes. Refer to the Regulated Development
Activity Table in §
154.026 this chapter;
      (4)   Project will generate less than one-half cubic feet per second for
the ten-year storm peak rate increase as compared to the pre-development peak
rate;
      (5)   Project is not part of a larger development being “piecemealed” in
order to avoid stormwater management regulations;
      (6)   Project is not part of a larger development which has grown
“piecemeal” over the past five years without SWM;
      (7)   Project is a small percentage (less than 5%) of a much larger site
and is incidental to the much larger site;
      (8)   Project is not located in a neighborhood, watershed or location
where known stormwater problems exist, such as overland flooding like flooding
of structures or roadways;
      (9)   Project does not discharge to a combined sewer; and
      (10)   Project will not degrade water quality of the receiving stream.
Refer to the Westmoreland County Integrated Water Resources Plan,
www.westmorelandstormwater.org, for maps of impaired streams to determine if
the project area is not within an impaired stream corridor or provide
documentation that further degradation will not occur.
   (B)   (1)   To qualify for the “no-harm” option, the applicant may, at the
request of the borough, submit calculations, drawings and details showing that
the project meets the above criteria.
      (2)   Projects approved for the “no-harm” option may be exempted from
constructing all or some of the usual stormwater management practices regularly
required for similar projects.
   (C)   To be approved, no-harm requests must be reviewed and approved by both
the Borough Engineer and by the WCD, but final approval rests with the borough.
(Ord. 2020-04, passed 1-11-2021; Ord. 2021-01, passed 8-9-2021)
§ 154.029 WAIVERS; MODIFICATIONS; DEMONSTRATED EQUIVALENCY.
   (A)   (1)   If the borough, in conjunction with the Borough Engineer, WCD or
DEP, as applicable, determines that any requirement under this chapter cannot
be achieved for a particular regulated activity, the borough may, after an
evaluation of alternatives, approve measures other than those in this chapter,
subject to divisions (B), (C) and (D) below and in compliance with all
commonwealth laws and regulations.
      (2)   The request for a waiver, modification or demonstrated equivalency
shall originate with the landowner, shall be in writing, include a study of
downstream effects and accompany the stormwater management plan submission to
the borough. The request shall provide the facts on which the request is based,
the provision(s) of this chapter involved and the proposed modification or
demonstrated equivalency. The Borough Engineer and the WCD shall review the
request to determine if it meets the requirements of this chapter, including
divisions (B), (C) and (D) below. If acceptable to the borough and the WCD, and
the regulated stormwater activity involving earth disturbance is less than one
acre, the borough may grant the waiver or modification. If the regulated
stormwater activity involving earth disturbance is equal to or greater than one
acre, the plan will be subject to the NPDES requirements of the DEP.
   (B)   Waivers, modifications or demonstrated equivalency of the requirements
of this chapter may be approved by the borough if enforcement will exact undue
hardship because of unique physical circumstances or preexisting site
conditions peculiar to the land in question, provided that the modifications or
demonstrated equivalency will not be contrary or detrimental to the public
interest and shall achieve the intended outcome, and that the purpose of the
chapter is preserved. Hardship must be due to such unique physical
circumstances or preexisting site conditions and not the circumstances or
conditions generally created by the provisions of this chapter, and there is no
possibility that the property can be developed in strict conformity with the
provisions of this chapter. Cost or financial burden shall not be considered a
hardship. Hardship cannot have been created by the landowner or developer.
Modification or demonstrated equivalency shall not substantially or permanently
impair the appropriate use or development of adjacent property(s) not under the
landowner’s control. Modification or demonstrated equivalency may be considered
if an alternative standard or approach will provide equal or better achievement
of the purpose of this chapter.
   (C)   No waiver, modification or demonstrated equivalency of any regulated
stormwater activity involving earth disturbance greater than or equal to one
acre may be granted by the borough unless that action is approved in advance by
the Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) or the Westmoreland
Conservation District (WCD).
   (D)   (1)   Applicants may request approval of a demonstrated equivalent
stormwater activity for their project in lieu of performing traditional
stormwater management. Demonstrated equivalent stormwater activity requests
will be evaluated by the Borough Engineer and/or the WCD on a case-by-case
basis. Prior approval of a demonstrated equivalent stormwater activity on a
site does not set a precedent for future approval of the same or other
alternative activities on any site. The approval of a demonstrated equivalent
stormwater activity does not excuse the applicant from following standard E&S
and SWM practices as applicable on the original site.
      (2)   Demonstrated equivalent stormwater activities shall only be
approved when the following criteria are met:
         (a)   Traditional stormwater management activities on the site are
precluded by a particular site limitation, such as contaminated soil, steep
slopes, existing buildings/infrastructure or combined sewer;
         (b)   Construction of traditional stormwater management activities on
the site would require extra permits or lead to excessive permitting activities
and delays;
         (c)   The site in question does not already have a stormwater
management problem; and
         (d)   The site in question is not already contributing to water
quality problems in the receiving stream.
      (3)   Approvable demonstrated equivalent stormwater activities may
include the following:
         (a)   Restoration of an existing degraded wetland, stream channel,
floodplain or riparian buffer, including the daylighting of a stream;
         (b)   Restoration, retrofit or upgrade an existing stormwater
management feature (an inadequate detention pond, for example);
         (c)   Creation of new stormwater management features, especially green
infrastructure, for a previously unmanaged site;
         (d)   Provide a water-based benefit to the public other than
stormwater management (for example, extend a public sewer to an area not
already served); or
         (e)   Treatment of abandoned mine drainage.
      (4)   The proposal for demonstrated equivalency shall be accompanied by
documentation or methodology quantifying the equivalency of the proposed
project to what would have been originally required. Acceptable documentation
or methodology may include use of the worksheets and checklist found in the
Commonwealth DEP NPDES permit application, Appendix D of this chapter, or an
approved method showing the proposed equivalency:
         (a)   Controls approximately the same amount of runoff volume as what
would originally have been proposed;
         (b)   Improves approximately the same amount of runoff quality as
would have been originally proposed; or
         (c)   Is located within an impaired watershed or stream segment which
will benefit from the proposed project. IMPAIRMENT may include stream
impairment, reduced stream buffer and pollutant loading. Refer to the
Westmoreland County Integrated Water Resources Plan, which is available at
www.westmorelandstormwater.org.
      (5)   The demonstrated equivalent stormwater activity shall:
         (a)   Be constructed concurrently with the project for which it is
being applied;
         (b)   Be constructed according to plans approved by the borough and
the WCD, including any erosion control and stormwater management practices, as
applicable;
         (c)   Obtain all necessary permits;
         (d)   Be located on land owned by or controlled by the applicant or by
a cooperating public or private entity(s) (a school, church, club, municipality
and the like);
         (e)   Be protected by a perpetual easement or deed restriction, or
landowner agreement;
         (f)   Be located in the same general watershed as project for which it
is being applied; and
         (g)   Have an operation and maintenance plan (O&M) specifying who is
responsible for what tasks.
(Ord. 2020-04, passed 1-11-2021; Ord. 2021-01, passed 8-9-2021)
§ 154.030 SMALL PROJECTS.
   (A)   When a regulated development activity (refer to the table in §
154.026 of this chapter) creates an impervious area between 3,000 and 10,000
square feet, or total earth disturbance between 5,000 and 20,000 square feet,
the stormwater management requirements are as follows. Refer also to Appendix C
of this chapter.
   (B)   For new impervious surfaces, the first one inch(s) of runoff shall be
permanently removed from the runoff flow and shall not be released to waters of
the commonwealth. Removal options include reuse, evaporation, transpiration and
infiltration.
   (C)   Facilities, to the greatest extent possible and subject to borough
approval, shall be designed to drain the permanently removed runoff volume in a
period not greater than 72 hours. Runoff volumes in excess of one inch(s) shall
be safely conveyed to a stable vegetated area, natural watercourse, the curb or
gutter line of the roadway or the existing storm collection/conveyance/control
system, as applicable.
   (D)   This method is exempt from the requirements of §
154.051 of this chapter.
   (E)   A small project stormwater management plan must be submitted to the
borough and the WCD and shall consist of the following items and related
support material needed to determine compliance with §§
154.031 to
154.035 of this chapter. The applicant can also use protocols listed in
Appendix C of this chapter.
         (a)   Narrative. General description of proposed stormwater management
techniques, including calculations, assumptions and criteria used in the design
of the stormwater management facilities and BMPs, and construction
specifications of the materials to be used for stormwater management facilities
and BMPs;
         (b)   Stormwater management plan. Showing locations of all stormwater
management facilities and BMPs, especially green infrastructure, limits of
disturbance, including the type and amount of proposed impervious areas,
structures, roads, paved areas and buildings;
         (c)   Worksheet. Small project stormwater management worksheet;
         (d)   Signature. Signed agreement page for operation and maintenance
of stormwater facilities and BMPs (refer to Appendix B of this chapter); and
         (e)   Erosion and sediment control plan. Include all reviews and
letters of adequacy from the Conservation District.
(Ord. 2020-04, passed 1-11-2021; Ord. 2021-01, passed 8-9-2021)
§ 154.031 STANDARDS GENERALLY.
   (A)   Proposed land development must consider avoiding, minimizing and
mitigating impacts to the site that may increase stormwater runoff from the
proposed project. Applied sequentially, these three low-impact development
strategies should be an overall guide as a project is planned and carried out.
   (B)   (1)   The Westmoreland County Integrated Water Resources Plan provides
an online decision making tool to assist developers, designers and property
owners in addressing all water resources during development and redevelopment
and should be consulted.
      (2)   Refer to www.paiwrp.com and to www.westmorelandstormwater.org.
   (C)   The following provisions shall be considered the overriding
performance standards against which all proposed stormwater control measures
shall be evaluated and shall apply throughout the borough.
      (1)   (a)   Any landowner and any person engaged in the alteration or
development of land which may affect stormwater runoff characteristics shall
implement such measures as are reasonably necessary to prevent injury to
health, safety or other property. For alteration or development taking place in
stages, the cumulative development must be used in determining conformance with
this chapter.
         (b)   Such measures shall include such actions as are required:
            1.   To assure that the maximum rate of stormwater runoff is no
greater after development, as calculated using the standards in this chapter,
than prior to development activities for the two-, ten-, 50- and 100-year
storms. Rainfall data shall be obtained from NOAA Atlas 14, or other source
approved by the borough;
            2.   To manage the water quality, rate and volume and direction of
resulting stormwater runoff in a manner which otherwise adequately protects
health and property from possible injury; and
            3.   To notify adjacent property owners or owners of affected
properties of any alteration or increase of stormwater flows.
      (2)   Runoff treatment BMPs must be employed where necessary to ensure
the water quality, rate and volume requirements are met.
      (3)   Volume control BMPs shall be used to maintain existing hydrologic
conditions for small storm events by promoting groundwater recharge and/or
evapotranspiration. Runoff volume controls shall be implemented using the
Commonwealth DEP Stormwater BMP Manual, 2006, or other approved method such as
those listed in the following chart.
Acceptable Computation Methodologies for Stormwater Management Plans
Method Developed by Applicability
Acceptable Computation Methodologies for Stormwater Management Plans
Method                    Developed by             Applicability
                                                   Applicable in agricultural
EFH2                      USDA NRCS                areas subject to the
                                                   program limits
                                                   Applicable where use of
HEC-1, HEC-HMS            United States Army Corps full hydrologic computer
                          of Engineers             model is desirable or
                                                   necessary
Other methods             Varies                   Other methodologies
                                                   approved by the borough
PA DEP BMP Manual 2006    PA DEP                   Applicable under standards
                                                   established by PA DEP
PennDOT 584 (based on     PennDOT                  Applicable under standards
rational method)                                   established by PennDOT
                                                   Applicable in urban and
SWMM                      EPA                      suburban areas subject to
                                                   limits established by EPA
Win TR-20 (or commercial                           Applicable where use of
computer package based on USDA NRCS                full hydrologic computer
TR-20)                                             model is desirable or
                                                   necessary
Win TR-55 (or commercial                           Applicable for land
computer package based on USDA NRCS                development plans within
TR-55, i.e., VT/PSUHM                              limitations described in
                                                   TR-55
 
   (D)   The project plan shall specify permanent stormwater BMPs to be
implemented, operated and maintained to meet legal water quality, rate and
volume requirements. If methods other than low-impact development (LID) and
green infrastructure methods are proposed to achieve the volume and rate
controls required under this chapter, the SWM site plan must include a detailed
justification demonstrating that the use of LID and green infrastructure is not
practicable.
   (E)   (1)   In order to protect and maintain water quality, additional
stormwater runoff created by the development project must be captured, stored
and treated. In addition, post construction stormwater infiltration of runoff
must replicate the preconstruction infiltration of runoff to the maximum extent
possible, with the exception of hot spots. As a minimum, this shall be a volume
of additional runoff generated by a two-year, 24-hour storm.
      (2)   Preferred BMPs for a hot spot include storm inlet filters,
proprietary stormwater quality devices, underground detention tanks, detention
ponds with forebays, tree planting and green roof. Permeable pavement,
infiltration BMPs and rain gardens are not recommended for hotspots.
   (F)   In addition to the provisions set forth in divisions (A) through(D)
above, inclusive, as set forth above, all regulated development activities
within the borough shall be designed, implemented, operated and maintained to
meet the purposes of this chapter through these two elements:
      (1)   Erosion and sediment control during the earth disturbance
activities (e.g., during construction); and
      (2)   Water quality, rate and volume protection measures after completion
of earth disturbance activities (e.g., post-construction stormwater
management), including operations and maintenance.
   (G)   No regulated development activities within the borough shall commence
until the requirements of this chapter are met.
   (H)   All best management practices (BMPs) used to meet the requirements of
this chapter shall conform to the state water quality requirements, and any
more stringent requirements as determined by the borough.
   (I)   LID and green infrastructure techniques described in the PA DEP
Stormwater BMP Manual, 2006, or most current edition, are encouraged.
   (J)   Projects proposed in municipalities which are subject to the MS4
regulations must comply with that municipality’s approved MS4 permit, including
compliance with the six minimum control measures (MCMs) and with the
municipality’s pollutant reduction plan (PRP).
(Ord. 2020-04, passed 1-11-2021; Ord. 2021-01, passed 8-9-2021)
§ 154.032 WATERSHED STANDARDS.
   (A)   The stormwater management performance standards in this chapter are
intended to implement the provisions, standards and criteria contained in the
Stormwater Management Act (Act 167), the Act of Oct. 4, 1978, P.L. 851, 32 P.S.
§§ 680.1 et seq. If there is any discrepancy between the provisions of this
chapter and the provisions, standards and criteria of the Act, or if a
stormwater management plan is subsequently approved and adopted by the
appropriate governmental agency or body, then the provisions, standards and
criteria of the current watershed plan shall govern.
   (B)   The management of stormwater runoff is the key objective of 25 Pa.
Code Chapter 93 of the DEP regulations because runoff can change the physical,
chemical and biological integrity of waterbodies, thereby impacting rate,
volume and water quality.
   (C)   The project plan shall describe how these rate, volume and water
quality protection requirements will be met. Infiltration BMPs shall be
evaluated and utilized to the maximum extent possible to manage the net change
in stormwater runoff generated so that post construction discharges do not
degrade the physical, chemical or biological characteristics of the receiving
waters. These BMPs may be used to satisfy all or part of the requirements found
within this chapter.
(Ord. 2020-04, passed 1-11-2021; Ord. 2021-01, passed 8-9-2021)
§ 154.033 DESIGN CRITERIA FOR STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITIES, BMPS.
   (A)   General criteria.
      (1)   Applicants may select runoff control techniques, or a combination
of techniques, which are most suitable to control stormwater runoff from the
development site. Refer to the Acceptable Computation Methodologies for
Stormwater Management Plans Table in §
154.031 of this chapter. All controls must be subject to the approval of the
Borough Engineer and the WCD. The Borough Engineer may request specific
information on design and/or operating features of the proposed stormwater
controls in order to determine their suitability and adequacy in terms of the
standards of this chapter.
      (2)   If the proposed development site is located in an impaired water
shed according to Category 4 of the Commonwealth Integrated Water Quality
Monitoring and Assessment Report, or in a watershed with a TMDL according to
Category 5 of the same report, the applicant shall identify the source and
cause of impairment and shall propose, if required or applicable, the use of
BMPs to mitigate any impacts to the waters.
      (3)   The applicant should consider the effect of the proposed stormwater
management techniques on any special soil conditions or geological hazards
which may exist on the development site. In the event such conditions are
identified on the site, the Borough Engineer may require in-depth studies by a
competent geotechnical engineer. Not all stormwater control methods may be
advisable or allowable at a particular development site.
      (4)   The applicant shall consider the effect of the proposed stormwater
management techniques on existing stream impairments and pollutant loading.
Refer to the Westmoreland County Integrated Water Resources Plan (IWRP) at
www.westmorelandstormwater.org.
      (5)   The applicant shall consider existing conditions on the site for
the prior five years to determine prevailing land use and impervious cover and
shall consider 20% of existing impervious cover as meadow for pre-existing
conditions on redevelopment sites.
      (6)   The stormwater management practices to be used in developing a
stormwater management plan for a particular site shall be selected according to
the following order of preference:
         (a)   Site planning for locating proposed buildings, impervious areas
and grading which minimizes disruption of the natural site characteristics
especially utilizing low-impact development techniques;
         (b)   Minimization of impervious areas and promotion of retentive
grading;
         (c)   Implementation of non-structural measures (refer to the
Commonwealth DEP Stormwater BMP Manual, 2006, or current edition);
         (d)   Implementation of innovative/green infrastructure structural
measures (refer to the Commonwealth DEP Stormwater BMP Manual, 2006, or current
edition); and
         (e)   Stormwater detention/retention structures.
      (7)   Any BMP which is a dam, culvert, stream obstruction or encroachment
or outfall as defined in 25 Pa. Code Chapter 105, shall be designed according
to the requirements in those regulations.
      (8)   Drainage easements shall be provided for all stormwater conveyance
and BMPs serving multiple properties and not located within a public right-of-
way. Easements shall include ingress and egress to a public right-of-way and
shall be recorded at the county with the final plan. Terms of the easement
shall prohibit excavation or placement of fill or structures and any alteration
that may adversely affect the flow of stormwater within any portion of the
easement.
      (9)   No person shall install, create, modify, remove, fill, landscape or
otherwise alter or place any structure, soil, rock, material or vegetation in
or on, or otherwise adversely affect, any stormwater management facility or any
area within a stormwater easement without the written approval of the borough
and/or approval of the WCD.
      (10)   Persons engaged in land development activities shall provide the
required financial security and O&M agreements to the borough as outlined in
Appendix B of this chapter.
   (B)   Criteria for stormwater management facilities and BMPs.
      (1)   If stormwater management facilities and BMPs are utilized for the
development site, the facility(s) shall be designed such that post-development
peak runoff rates from the developed site are controlled to those rates defined
by a stormwater management performance district for the two-, ten-, 50- and
100-year storm frequencies. Rainfall data shall be obtained from NOAA Atlas 14,
or other source as approved by the borough.
      (2)   All stormwater management facilities and BMPs shall be equipped
with outlet/overflow structures to provide rate discharge control for the
designated storm frequencies. Provision shall also be made to safely pass the
entire post-development 100-year storm without breaching or otherwise damaging
the facilities, downstream or neighboring properties.
      (3)   Release of stormwater flow from a development site must be to an
existing stormwater conveyance or easement, whether natural or human-made.
Calculations and information shall be presented as to the ownership,
responsible party, capacity and stability of such conveyance. The release of
“sheet flow,” as from a level spreader, will be permitted on a case-by-case
basis as approved by the borough and WCD.
      (4)   All stormwater management facilities and BMPs shall be designed to
control volume and water quality as defined by the stormwater management
performance district.
      (5)   Shared stormwater management facilities and BMPs which provide
control of runoff for more than one development site within a single subarea
may be considered and are encouraged. Such facilities shall meet the criteria
contained in this section. In addition, runoff from the development sites
involved shall be conveyed to the facility in a manner that avoids adverse
impacts (such as flooding or erosion) to channels and properties located
between the development site and the shared storage facilities.
      (6)   Where stormwater management facilities and BMPs will be utilized,
multiple use facilities, such as wetlands, lakes, ballfields or similar
recreational/open space uses, are encouraged wherever feasible, subject to the
approval of the borough.
      (7)   Other considerations which shall be incorporated into the design of
the stormwater management facilities and BMPs include:
         (a)   Inflow and outflow structures shall be designed and installed to
prevent erosion, and embankments, cuts, fills and bottoms of impoundment-type
structures should be protected from soil erosion;
         (b)   Control and removal of debris, both in the storage structure and
in inlet or outlet devices, shall be a design consideration;
         (c)   Inflow and outflow structures, pumping stations and other
structures shall be designed and protected, using safety benches, trash racks,
energy dissipaters and other means to minimize safety hazards;
         (d)   Access may be restricted as specified by the provisions for
fencing swimming pools as found in the Borough Zoning Ordinance, and in
appropriate instances, such restriction of access may include fencing in a
minimum height of six feet;
         (e)   Interior slopes of storage ponds shall not exceed a ratio of
three-to-one (3:1) horizontal to vertical dimension, with a combination of
interior and exterior slopes not exceeding five. Steeper slopes may be approved
by the Borough Engineer if documented to be stable by a geotechnical analysis;
         (f)   Landscaping shall be provided for the facility which stabilizes
disturbed areas and preserves the natural and beneficial values of the
surrounding area;
         (g)   Facility shall be located to facilitate maintenance, considering
the frequency and type of equipment that will be required; and
         (h)   Underground detention/retention/infiltration facilities shall be
equipped with open grate inlet or manhole access to facilitate visual
inspections.
   (C)   Criteria for collection/conveyance facilities.
      (1)   All stormwater runoff collection or conveyance facilities, whether
storm sewers or other open or closed channels, shall be designed in accordance
with the following basic standards.
         (a)   All building sites shall use measures to provide drainage away
from and around the structure in order to prevent any potential flooding damage
as much as practical. Such measures shall include grading the surrounding lawn
or pavement area so that it slopes away from the structure by a minimum of 5%
slope over a minimum distance of ten feet; raising the floor of the structure
so that it is a minimum of six inches above the predominate surrounding land
elevation and above the designated floodplain elevation for those located
within a floodplain; eliminating or waterproofing penetrations through the
structure’s walls or foundation; constructing berms, curbs or swales to divert
surface water around the structure; and arranging roof and area drains to carry
water away from the structure.
         (b)   Developers proposing a land development or subdivision shall
arrange internal drainage within the subdivision so that surface water is
safely directed and channeled away from all structures within and adjacent to
the development site.
         (c)   Developers shall provide to all persons constructing a structure
within a land development site standards, including drawings and
specifications, to ensure that those persons adhere to the general site plans
and stormwater management plans for the development. Persons constructing a
structure within a land development site shall submit to the Borough Engineer
and WCD drawings, calculations and other information to show how they will meet
the stormwater management requirements of the development site.
         (d)   Lots located on the high side or low side of streets shall
extend roof, trench and area drains to a stable vegetated area, natural
watercourse, the curb or gutter line of the roadway or storm collection/
conveyance/control system (if applicable) in accordance with the approved
stormwater management plan for the development site.
         (e)   For all building sites and lots, the inclusion of rain barrels,
rain gardens, drywells and other strategies for infiltration of roof runoff
close to its source is encouraged.
         (f)   Collection/conveyance facilities should not be installed
parallel to and less than ten feet from the top or bottom of an embankment that
is greater than or equal to 15 feet heigh to avoid the possibility of failing,
or causing the embankment to fail, unless documented to be stable by a
geotechnical analysis.
         (g)   All collection/conveyance facilities shall be designed to convey
the 25-year storm peak flow rate from the contributing drainage area and to
carry it to the nearest suitable outlet, such as a stormwater control facility,
curbed street, storm sewer or natural watercourse.
         (h)   Where drainage swales or open channels are used, they shall be
suitably lined to prevent erosion and designed to avoid erosive velocities.
      (2)   Wherever storm sewers are proposed to be utilized, they shall
comply with the following additional criteria:
         (a)   Where practical, designed to traverse under seeded and planted
areas. If constructed within ten feet of road paving, walks or other surfaced
areas, drains shall have a narrow trench and maximum compaction of backfill to
prevent settlement of the superimposed surface or development;
         (b)   Preferably installed after excavating and filling in the area to
be traversed is completed, unless the drain is installed in the original ground
with a minimum of three feet of cover and/or adequate protection during the
fill construction;
         (c)   Designed:
            1.   With cradle when traversing fill areas of indeterminate
stability;
            2.   With anchors when gradient exceeds 20%; and
            3.   With encasement or special backfill requirements when
traversing under a paved area.
         (d)   Designed to adequately handle the anticipated stormwater flow
and be economical to construct and maintain. The minimum pipe size shall be 15
inches in diameter, with the exception of roof drains, foundation drains or
similar conveyance;
         (e)   Drain pipe, trenching, bedding and backfilling requirements and
appropriate grates, catch basins, stormwater inlets, manholes and other
appurtenances shall conform to the requirements of the borough and/or
applicable PennDOT specifications, Publication 408;
         (f)   All corrugated metal pipe shall be polymer coated, and with
paved inverts where prone to erode. Pipe within a borough right-of-way shall be
reinforced concrete pipe or high-performance polypropylene pipe with a minimum
diameter of 15 inches;
         (g)   Storm inlets and structures shall be designed to be adequate,
safe, self-cleaning and unobtrusive and consistent with borough standards, with
sufficient capture and conveyance capacity and spacing of inlets and cleanouts
for maintenance;
         (h)   Where a proposed sewer or conveyance connects with an existing
storm sewer or conveyance system, the applicant shall demonstrate that
sufficient capacity exists in the downstream system to handle the additional
flow; and
         (i)   Storm sewer outfalls shall be equipped with energy dissipation
devices to prevent erosion and conform with applicable requirements of the
Commonwealth DEP for stream encroachments (§ 7 of the Dam Safety and
Encroachments Act, Act of November 26, 1978, P.L. 1375, 32 P.S. §§ 693.1 et
seq., and the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder at 25 Pa. Code §§
105.441 to 105.449, and the Commonwealth DEP Erosion and Sediment Control
Manual, current edition.
   (D)   Criteria for riparian buffers.
      (1)   If a riparian buffer is required by the Commonwealth DEP as part of
an NPDES permit, then DEP regulations will govern.
      (2)   If a riparian buffer is used to meet stormwater management
requirements and/or MS4 pollutant load reduction credits, it shall meet the
following requirements:
         (a)   In order to protect and improve water quality, a riparian buffer
easement may be created and recorded as part of any subdivision or land
development that encompasses a riparian buffer;
         (b)   Except as required by 25 Pa. Code Chapter 102, the riparian
buffer easement shall be measured to a minimum of 35 feet, measured from the
top of the nearest bank (on each side), or an average of 35 feet with no
distance from top of bank less than 25 feet; and
         (c)   Minimum management requirements for riparian buffers:
            1.   Existing native vegetation shall be protected and maintained
within the riparian buffer easement;
            2.   Whenever practicable, invasive vegetation shall be actively
removed and the riparian buffer easement shall be planted with native trees,
shrubs and other vegetation to create a diverse native plant community
appropriate to the intended ecological context of the site; and
            3.   There shall be no earth disturbance beyond which is necessary
to establish or maintain a planted buffer.
      (3)   The riparian buffer easement shall be enforceable by the borough
and shall be recorded in the appropriate county recorder of deeds’ office so
that it shall run with the land and shall limit the use of the property located
therein. The easement shall allow for continued private ownership and shall
count toward the minimum lot area a required by zoning, unless otherwise
specified in the Borough Zoning Ordinance.
      (4)   Any permitted use within the riparian buffer easement shall be
conducted in a manner that will maintain the extent of the existing 100-year
floodplain, improve or maintain the stream stability and preserve and protect
the ecological function of the floodplain.
      (5)   Stormwater drainage pipes and all other linear utility lines as
approved by the borough shall be permitted within the riparian buffer easement,
but they shall cross the easement in the shortest practical distance. Other
stormwater management facilities and BMPs are not permitted within the riparian
buffer easement.
      (6)   The following conditions shall apply when public and/or private
recreation trails are permitted within riparian buffers:
         (a)   Trails shall be for non-motorized use only; and
         (b)   Trails shall be designed to have the least impact on native
plant species and other sensitive environmental features.
      (7)   Septic drainfields and sewage disposal systems shall not be
permitted within the riparian buffer easement and shall comply with setback
requirements established under 25 Pa. Code Chapter 73.
   (E)   Criteria for stream restoration project. A stream restoration project
may be eligible for stormwater management and/or MS4 load reduction credits if
it meets qualifying criteria set by the borough and as follows:
      (1)   Existing conditions, such as channel or streambank erosion and an
actively enlarging or incising urban stream condition, shall be documented
prior to restoration;
      (2)   Projects should be located on first to third order (small) streams
to be effective;
      (3)   Project should address a minimum of 100 linear feet of stream
channel and both sides where the need to do so is evident;
      (4)   Upstream impervious area should be sufficiently treated to address
peak flows that may exceed engineering design thresholds or compromise channel
form and function;
      (5)   Utilize a comprehensive approach employing a mix of techniques
appropriate to the site, creating long-term stability of the streambed,
streambanks and floodplain;
      (6)   Armored length of streams (i.e., using riprap or gabions) may be
used to maintain channel stability, but the same length shall not be included
in the load-reduction calculation;
      (7)   Project shall maximize floodplain reconnection, with minimal
channel invert elevation increase (i.e., bank height ratio = one or less) to
achieve the objective;
      (8)   Project shall include a minimum 35 feet of permanent riparian
buffer; and
      (9)   Project shall include an O&M plan identifying O&M activities,
frequencies and responsible parties.
(Ord. 2020-04, passed 1-11-2021; Ord. 2021-01, passed 8-9-2021)
§ 154.034 EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROLS.
   (A)   No regulated development activities within the borough shall commence
until approval by the borough and the WCD of an erosion and sediment control
plan for construction activities.
   (B)   Any earth disturbance activity of 5,000 square feet or more requires
an erosion and sedimentation control plan under 25 Pa. Code § 102.4(b). Refer
to the Commonwealth DEP Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control Manual, 2012, or
most recent version.
   (C)   In addition, under 25 Pa. Code Chapter 92a, a DEP NPDES construction
activities permit is required for regulated development activities involving
one acre or more of disturbance.
   (D)   Evidence of any necessary permit(s) for regulated development
activities from the appropriate DEP regional office or Westmoreland
Conservation District must be provided to the borough. The issuance of an NPDES
construction permit (or permit coverage under the Statewide General Permit
(PAG-2)) may satisfy the requirements under division (A) above upon review and
approval by the borough.
   (E)   A copy of the erosion and sediment control plan and any permit
required by the DEP or the borough shall be available at the project site at
all times.
(Ord. 2020-04, passed 1-11-2021; Ord. 2021-01, passed 8-9-2021)
§ 154.035 WATER OBSTRUCTIONS AND ENCROACHMENTS.
   (A)   No regulated development activities which require a Chapter 105 (water
obstructions and encroachment) permit from either the Commonwealth DEP or
Westmoreland Conservation District shall commence until all permits have
received Commonwealth DEP or WCD approval and borough approval.
   (B)   Evidence of any necessary Chapter 105 permit from the Commonwealth
DEP/WCD shall be provided to the borough.
   (C)   Proposed development shall avoid the long- and short-term adverse
impacts associated with the occupancy and modification of floodplains as
designated by FEMA, to the extent possible, wherever there is a practicable
alternative in order to reduce the risk of flood loss; minimize the impacts of
floods on human safety, health and welfare; and restore and preserve the
natural and beneficial values served by floodplains.
   (D)   Any proposed development found to be within the base floodplain of a
waterway shall include the identification of impacts, an evaluation of
practicable alternatives outside the floodplain and, when impacts cannot be
avoided, the development of measures to minimize the impacts and restore and
preserve the floodplain as appropriate. Findings shall be presented at a public
meeting and a determination made by the Council of the borough.
   (E)   Any proposed stormwater management plan should be consistent with the
provisions of the Floodplain Management Act, Act of Oct. 4, 1978, P.L. 851, No.
166, 32 P.S. §§ 679.101 et seq., and applicable borough floodplain ordinances.
(Ord. 2020-04, passed 1-11-2021; Ord. 2021-01, passed 8-9-2021)
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN REQUIREMENTS
§ 154.050 REQUIREMENTS GENERALLY.
   (A)   No development plan, subdivision plat or land development plan shall
be approved; no permit authorizing construction or development issued; nor any
earth disturbance activity subject to this chapter shall be initiated or
undertaken unless and until a stormwater management plan for such activity is
reviewed and approved in accord with the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   No regulated development activities within the borough shall commence
until approval by the borough of a stormwater management plan which
demonstrates compliance with state water quality requirements after
construction is complete. Refer to the Regulated Development Activity Table
located in §
154.026 of this chapter.
   (C)   The stormwater management plan must be designed, implemented and
maintained to meet state water quality requirements, and any other more
stringent requirements as determined by the borough.
   (D)   (1)   To control post-construction stormwater impacts from regulated
development activities, state water quality requirements can be met by BMPs,
including site design and green infrastructure, which provide for the
replication of pre-construction stormwater infiltration and runoff conditions,
so that post-construction stormwater discharges do not degrade the physical,
chemical or biological characteristics of the receiving waters.
      (2)   As described in the DEP Comprehensive Stormwater Management Policy
(#392-0300-002, September 28, 2002), this may be achieved by the following:
         (a)   Infiltration. Replication of pre-construction stormwater
infiltration conditions;
         (b)   Treatment. Use of water quality treatment BMPs to ensure
filtering out of the chemical and physical pollutants from the stormwater
runoff; and
         (c)   Streambank and streambed protection. Management of volume and
rate of post-construction stormwater discharges, using detention/retention and
other means, to prevent physical degradation of receiving waters (e.g., from
scouring).
   (E)   In the absence of an existing stormwater conveyance or easement,
whether natural or human-made, for the release of stormwater flow from a
development site, an easement must be provided. Information shall be presented
as to the ownership, responsible party and agreement for said easement.
   (F)   The stormwater management plan must meet DEP regulations that require
municipalities to ensure design, implementation and maintenance of best
management practices (BMPs) that control runoff from new development and
redevelopment after regulated development activities are complete. These
requirements include the need to implement post-construction stormwater
facilities and BMPs with assurance of long-term operations and maintenance of
those BMPs.
   (G)   Evidence of any necessary permit(s), such as Chapter 102, erosion and
sedimentation control, or Chapter 105, stream encroachment, for regulated
development activities from the WCD or the appropriate DEP regional office must
be provided to the borough. The issuance of an NPDES construction permit (or
permit coverage under the Statewide General Permit (PAG-2) may satisfy the
requirements of division (A) above after review and approval by the borough.
   (H)   Appropriate sections from the borough’s Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance (SALDO), and other applicable local ordinances, shall be
followed in preparing the SWM plans. In instances where the borough lacks
subdivision and land development regulations, SWM plans shall be reviewed and
approved pursuant to the county’s Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance
(SALDO). If the county’s SALDO does not have provisions for review and approval
of SWM plans, the SWM plans must be reviewed and approved pursuant to the
borough’s SWM ordinance.
   (I)   The borough shall not approve any SWM plan that is deficient in
meeting the requirements of this chapter. At its sole discretion and in
accordance with §§
154.050 to
154.054 of this chapter, when an SWM plan is found to be deficient, the borough
may either disapprove the submission and require a resubmission or, in the case
of minor deficiencies, the borough may accept the submission of modifications.
   (J)   The stormwater management plan (including all calculations) must be
prepared and sealed by a qualified professional with training and expertise in
hydrology and hydraulics. Documentation of qualifications may be required by
the borough.
(Ord. 2020-04, passed 1-11-2021; Ord. 2021-01, passed 8-9-2021)
§ 154.051 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN CONTENTS.
   The stormwater management plan shall include a narrative and a set of plan
drawings. Refer to the checklist in Appendix D of this chapter.
   (A)   Narrative. A narrative describing the overall stormwater management
concept for the project:
      (1)   Site conditions. A determination of site conditions in accordance
with the Commonwealth DEP Stormwater BMP Manual. A detailed site evaluation
shall be completed for projects proposed in environmentally sensitive areas,
such as brownfields;
      (2)   Runoff calculations. Stormwater runoff design calculations for
determining pre- and post-development discharge rates, for designing proposed
stormwater control facilities and to demonstrate that the maximum practicable
measures have been taken to meet the requirements of this chapter must be
submitted with the stormwater management plan. All calculations shall be
prepared using the methods and data prescribed by general requirements in §
154.026 of this chapter. Refer to the Acceptable Computation Methodologies for
Stormwater Management Plan Table in §
154.031 of this chapter.
         (a)   Volume and rate. Runoff volume and rate shall be calculated
according to generally accepted methods, such as those listed under §
154.031 of this chapter.
         (b)   Detention and retention. Detention/retention requirements,
including volume, routing and the like, for BMPs shall be calculated using
commonly acceptable standard method(s).
         (c)   Water quality. Water quality calculations shall be determined by
using the Commonwealth DEP Stormwater BMP Manual, 2006, or current edition,
Worksheets 12 and 13, or acceptable alternative method by the borough.
      (3)   Schedule. Expected project time schedule for the installation of
all temporary and permanent stormwater control measures and devices. If the
development is to be constructed in stages, the applicant must describe how
stormwater facilities and BMPs will be sequentially installed to manage
stormwater runoff safely during each stage of development;
      (4)   Effects. The effect of the project (in terms of runoff rate,
volumes and water quality) on surrounding properties and aquatic features and
on any existing stormwater conveyance system that may be affected by the
project;
      (5)   Justification. If appropriate, the narrative should provide
justification as to why any preferred stormwater management techniques, such as
LID and green infrastructure, as listed in this chapter, are not proposed for
use. Refer to the Commonwealth DEP Stormwater BMP Manual, 2006, or most recent
edition, for list of acceptable management techniques; and
      (6)   Operation and maintenance. Operation and maintenance program and
responsible party(s) for permanent stormwater facilities and BMPs. Refer to §§
154.085 to
154.088 of this chapter.
   (B)   Plan drawings. The stormwater management plan drawings shall be drawn
to a scale of not less than one inch equals 100 feet. All sheets shall contain
a title block with the name and address of the applicant and designer, scale,
north arrow, legend and date of preparation.
      (1)   Existing and proposed features. The plan shall show the following:
         (a)   Watershed location. Provide a key map (using USGS Topo maps)
showing the location of the development site within the watershed(s) and
watershed subarea(s). On all site drawings, show the boundaries of the
watershed(s) and subarea(s) as they are located on the development site and
identify watershed name(s) and subarea number(s);
         (b)   Floodplain boundaries. Identify 100-year floodplains on the
development site (as appropriate) based on the borough flood insurance study
maps;
         (c)   Natural features. Show all bodies of water (natural or
artificial), watercourses (permanent and intermittent), swales, wetlands and
other natural drainage courses on the development site, or which will be
affected by runoff from the development;
         (d)   Soils. Provide an overlay showing soil types and boundaries
within the development site (consult WCD, SCS and the United States Geological
Survey for information);
         (e)   Contours. Show existing and final contours at intervals of two
feet; in areas with slopes greater than 15%, five-foot contour intervals may be
used;
         (f)   Land cover. Show existing and final land cover classifications,
including existing and proposed improvements, as necessary to support and
illustrate the runoff calculations performed;
         (g)   Drainage area delineations. Show the boundaries of the drainage
areas and points of interest employed in the runoff calculations performed; and
         (h)   Utilities and easements. Show any existing utilities, stormwater
management or drainage controls and/or structures, such as sanitary sewers,
water, gas, electric, telecommunications, storm sewers, swales, culverts and
any easements which are located on the development site, or which are off-site
but may be affected by runoff from the development.
      (2)   Proposed stormwater facilities and BMPs. All proposed stormwater
runoff control measures must be shown on the plan, including methods for
collecting, conveying and storing stormwater runoff on-site, which are to be
used both during and after construction. Erosion and sedimentation controls
shall be shown in accordance with applicable borough and WCD requirements. The
plan shall provide information on the exact type, location, sizing, design and
construction of all proposed facilities and relationship to the existing
watershed drainage system:
         (a)   Construction in stages. If the development is to be constructed
in stages, the applicant must demonstrate that stormwater facilities will be
installed to manage stormwater runoff safely during each stage of development;
         (b)   Installation schedule. A schedule for the installation of all
temporary and permanent stormwater control measures and devices shall be
included in the narrative and shown on the site plan; and
         (c)   Operation and maintenance. The operation and maintenance program
and responsible party(s) for permanent stormwater BMPs. Refer to §§
154.085 to
154.088 of this chapter.
      (3)   Easements, rights-of-way and deed restrictions. BMPS and stormwater
management facilities that provide control for more than one lot shall be
located on a separate dedicated lot or in an easement. All existing and
proposed easements for any BMPs and stormwater management facilities and
controls for access, inspections, maintenance, repair, preservation and use
shall be shown on the plan and, if required, dedicated to the entity,
association or person required. The easement and the purpose for the same shall
be set forth on the plan and in the agreement required by this chapter.
(Ord. 2020-04, passed 1-11-2021; Ord. 2021-01, passed 8-9-2021)
§ 154.052 OTHER PERMITS, APPROVALS.
   A list of any approvals/permits relative to stormwater management that will
be required from other governmental agencies (e.g., Chapter 102, erosion and
sedimentation control, PennDOT HOP, Chapter 105, water obstruction and
encroachment permit, from PA DEP) and anticipated dates of submission/receipt
should be included with the stormwater plan submission. Copies of permit
applications may be requested by the borough where they may be helpful for the
plan review.
(Ord. 2020-04, passed 1-11-2021; Ord. 2021-01, passed 8-9-2021)
§ 154.053 OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE PROGRAM.
   The application shall contain a proposed operation and maintenance plan
(O&M) for all stormwater control facilities in accordance with the following
and as described in §§
154.085 to
154.088 of this chapter:
   (A)   Identify the responsible party and their responsibilities as described
in §
154.085 of this chapter (e.g., municipality, property owner, private
corporation, homeowner’s association or other entity);
   (B)   Include an operation and maintenance plan for all stormwater
facilities, outlining the routine maintenance actions and schedules necessary
to ensure proper operation of the stormwater control facilities as described in
§
154.086 of this chapter;
   (C)   Submit any legal agreements required to implement the maintenance
program and copies of the maintenance agreement as required by this chapter.
Refer to §
154.087 of this chapter; and
   (D)   Identify method of financing continuing operation and maintenance if
the facility is to be owned by other than the borough or governmental agency.
Refer to §
154.088 of this chapter.
(Ord. 2020-04, passed 1-11-2021; Ord. 2021-01, passed 8-9-2021)
§ 154.054 FINANCIAL GUARANTEES.
   Submit financial guarantees in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter. Refer to
Appendix E of this chapter.
(Ord. 2020-04, passed 1-11-2021; Ord. 2021-01, passed 8-9-2021)
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN SUBMISSION AND REVIEW PROCEDURES
§ 154.065 PREAPPLICATION PHASE.
   (A)   The Westmoreland County Integrated Water Resources Plan provides an
online decision-making tool to assist developers, designers and property owners
in addressing all water resources during development and redevelopment and
should be consulted. Refer to www.paiwrp.com for the decision-making tool, and
to www.westmorelandstormwater.org.
   (B)   Applicants should refer to the Westmoreland County Integrated Water
Resources Plan (IWRP), located at www.westmorelandstormwater.org, for the
mapping of impaired streams, riparian buffers and pollutant loading to
determine appropriate BMPs to address sources of impairments.
   (C)   Before submitting the stormwater management plan, and any other plan
required by a reviewing agency, applicants are urged to consult with the
borough, County Department of Planning and Development and Westmoreland
Conservation District, and PennDOT where applicable, on the requirements for
safely managing the development site in a manner consistent with the borough
ordinances, applicable watershed stormwater management plan and federal and
state requirements. These agencies may also be helpful in providing necessary
data for the stormwater management plan.
   (D)   Applicants are encouraged to submit a sketch plan with a narrative
description of the proposed stormwater management controls for general guidance
and discussion with the borough and other agencies.
   (E)   The pre-application phase is not mandatory; any review comments
provided by the borough or other agencies are advisory only and do not
constitute any legally binding action on the part of the borough or any county
agency.
(Ord. 2020-04, passed 1-11-2021; Ord. 2021-01, passed 8-9-2021)
§ 154.066 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN SUBMISSION AND REVIEW.
   (A)   Submission of plans.
      (1)   A stormwater management plan application shall be submitted with
the preliminary and final subdivision/land development applications, or if no
subdivision or land development is involved, then with the application for
development.
      (2)   Copies of the SWM site plan shall be submitted to the following
agencies as determined by the borough:
         (a)   Two copies to the borough;
         (b)   One copy to the Borough Engineer (when applicable);
         (c)   One copy to the Westmoreland Conservation District (when
applicable);
         (d)   One copy to the local sanitary authority (when applicable);
         (e)   One copy to the County Department of Planning and Development
(if applicable);
         (f)   One copy to the County Department of Public Safety/local
emergency management coordinator (when applicable); and
         (g)   One copy to the DEP (when applicable).
   (B)   Notification of affected municipalities. The borough shall notify
municipalities upstream and downstream of the development site which may be
affected by the stormwater runoff and proposed controls for the site. Copies of
the plans will be made available to the affected municipalities upon request.
Comments received from any affected municipalities will be considered by the
Borough Engineer and county agencies in their reviews.
   (C)   Review by the Borough Engineer and Westmoreland Conservation District
(WCD).
      (1)   Stormwater management plans shall be reviewed by the Borough
Engineer and the WCD. BMPs shall be shown on all stormwater management plans
and erosion and sedimentation control plans, as applicable. At its discretion,
the municipality and/or WCD may also engage other specialists in hydrology or
hydraulics to assist with the stormwater management plan review. The WCD will
review the plan for general compliance with the watershed plan standards and
criteria and watershed-wide impacts and, where appropriate, may consult with
adjacent municipalities and counties for their comments. If the WCD review
identifies the improper application of the watershed standards and criteria or
the possibility of harmful impacts downstream from the development site’s
proposed stormwater management system, the applicant and Municipal Engineer
will be notified so that the necessary modifications can be made to promote
safe stormwater management.
      (2)   The municipality and the WCD shall notify the applicant in writing
within 45 days whether the SWM site plan is approved or disapproved. If the SWM
site plan involves a subdivision and land development plan, the notification
shall occur within 90 days unless the applicant is notified that a longer
notification period is provided by other statute regulation or ordinance. If
modifications are required, the review period may be extended by the
municipality and the WCD in order for the applicant to address inadequacies.
   (D)   Resubmission. A disapproved stormwater management plan may be
resubmitted, with the revisions addressing the municipality’s and/or WCD’s
concerns, to the municipality and the WCD in accordance with this subchapter.
   (E)   Borough Engineer review. The Borough Engineer shall approve or
disapprove the stormwater management plan based on the requirements of borough
ordinances, the standards and criteria of the watershed plan, applicable state
and federal requirements and good engineering practice. The Borough Engineer
shall submit a written report, along with supporting documentation, stating the
reasons for approval or disapproval.
   (F)   Status of the Engineer’s determination. The approval/disapproval of
the site’s stormwater management plan by the Borough Engineer shall be
submitted to the Borough Council for final action. Final approval of the plan
rests with the borough.
   (G)   Permits required from other governmental agencies. Where the proposed
development requires a permit from the Commonwealth DEP, PennDOT or an erosion/
sedimentation permit, or Chapter 105 permit, from the Westmoreland Conservation
District, then final stormwater management plan approval shall be conditional
upon receipt of such permits. However, no building permit shall be issued, nor
construction or development started, until the permits are received and copies
filed with the borough.
   (H)   Fees. Reviews by the borough and the WCD may be subject to fees as
outlined in §
154.105 of this chapter.
(Ord. 2020-04, passed 1-11-2021; Ord. 2021-01, passed 8-9-2021)
§ 154.067 STATUS OF STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN AFTER APPROVAL.
   (A)   Upon final stormwater management plan approval and receipt of all
necessary permits, financial guarantees and agreements, the applicant may
commence to install or implement the approved stormwater management plan, BMPs
plan or erosion and sedimentation plan controls.
   (B)   If site development or building construction does not begin within two
years of the date of final approval of the stormwater management plan, then
before doing so, the applicant shall re-submit the stormwater management plan,
BMPs plan or erosion or sedimentation plan to verify that no condition has
changed on the property adjacent to the site or within the watershed that would
affect the feasibility or effectiveness of the previously approved stormwater
management controls. Further, if for any reason development activities are
suspended for two years or more, then the same requirement for resubmission of
the stormwater management plan shall apply.
(Ord. 2020-04, passed 1-11-2021; Ord. 2021-01, passed 8-9-2021)
§ 154.068 MODIFICATION OF STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN.
   If the request for a plan modification is initiated before construction
begins, the stormwater management plan must be resubmitted and reviewed
according to the procedures contained in this chapter.
   (A)   If the request for a plan modification is initiated after construction
is underway, the Borough Engineer and/or the WCD shall have the authority to
approve or disapprove the modification based on field conditions, provided:
      (1)   The requested changes in stormwater controls do not result in any
modifications to other approved borough land use/development requirements
(e.g., building setbacks, yards and the like); and
      (2)   The performance standards in this chapter are met. Notification of
the Engineer’s and/or WCD’s action shall be sent to the Borough Council, which
may issue a stay of the plan modification within five days and require the
permittee to resubmit the plan modification for full stormwater management plan
review in accordance with this chapter.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to, and no person shall, alter, replace, modify,
landscape or remove, or otherwise adversely affect, any permanent stormwater
management facilities, BMP controls or any area within a stormwater easement or
dedicated or designated area for stormwater facilities and BMPs required by an
approved stormwater management plan or BMP operations and maintenance plan, or
to allow the property to remain in a condition which does not conform to an
approved stormwater management plan or BMP operations and maintenance plan,
unless an exception is granted in writing by the borough and/or approval is
secured from all relevant agencies of the commonwealth.
(Ord. 2020-04, passed 1-11-2021; Ord. 2021-01, passed 8-9-2021)
§ 154.069 INSPECTION OF STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITIES AND BMPS.
   (A)   The Borough Engineer or a designated representative may inspect the
implementation, construction, condition, operation and maintenance of the
temporary and permanent stormwater management system and controls for the
development site. The borough or a designated representative shall have the
right to temporarily locate on any BMP in the borough such devices as are
necessary to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the discharge from such BMP.
   (B)   The permittee shall notify the Borough Engineer and the WCD 48 hours
in advance of the completion of the following key development phases:
      (1)   At the completion of preliminary site preparation, including the
stripping of vegetation, stockpiling of topsoil and construction of temporary
stormwater management control facilities;
      (2)   At the completion of rough grading but prior to placing topsoil,
permanent drainage or other site development improvements and ground covers;
      (3)   During construction of the permanent stormwater facilities and BMPs
at such times as specified by the Borough Engineer;
      (4)   Completion of permanent stormwater management facilities and BMPs,
including established ground covers and plantings; and
      (5)   Completion of final grading, vegetative control measures or other
site restoration work done in accordance with the approved plan and permit.
   (C)   The borough and/or WCD may conduct inspections during construction as
it deems appropriate.
   (D)   No work shall commence on any subsequent phase until the preceding one
has been inspected and approved. If there are deficiencies in any phase, the
Borough Engineer and/or WCD shall issue a written description of the required
corrections and stipulate the time by which they must be made.
   (E)   If, during construction, the contractor or permittee identifies any
site condition, such as subsurface soil conditions, alterations in surface or
subsurface drainage, which could affect the feasibility of the approved
stormwater facilities or erosion and sedimentation controls, he or she shall
notify the Borough Engineer and/or WCD within 24 hours of the discovery of such
condition and request a field inspection. The Borough Engineer and/or WCD shall
determine if the condition requires a modification of the stormwater management
plan, BMPs plan or erosion and sedimentation control plan.
   (F)   In cases where stormwater facilities or erosion and sedimentation
controls are to be installed in areas of landslide-prone soils, or other
special site conditions exist, the borough may require special precautions,
such as a geotechnical study, soil tests and core borings, full-time inspectors
and/or similar measures. All costs of any such measures shall be borne by the
permittee.
(Ord. 2020-04, passed 1-11-2021; Ord. 2021-01, passed 8-9-2021)
§ 154.070 RECORD DRAWINGS; COMPLETION CERTIFICATE; FINAL INSPECTION.
   (A)   The developer shall be responsible for providing record drawings of
all stormwater management facilities and BMPs as built and included in the
approved stormwater management plan. The record drawings and an explanation of
any discrepancies with the construction plans shall be submitted to the borough
and/or WCD.
   (B)   The record drawing submission shall include a certification of
completion signed by a qualified professional verifying that all permanent
stormwater management facilities and BMPs have been constructed according to
the approved plans and specifications. The latitude and longitude coordinates
for all permanent stormwater management facilities and BMPs must also be
submitted at the central location of the BMPs. If any licensed qualified
professionals contributed to the construction plans, then a licensed qualified
professional must sign the completion certificate.
   (C)   After receipt of the completion certification by the borough, the
borough and/or WCD may conduct a final inspection,
(Ord. 2020-04, passed 1-11-2021; Ord. 2021-01, passed 8-9-2021)
OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE OF STORMWATER FACILITIES AND BMPS
§ 154.085 OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE RESPONSIBILITIES.
   (A)   The stormwater management plan for the development site shall contain
an operation and maintenance plan prepared by the developer and approved by the
borough and/or WCD. The operation and maintenance plan shall outline the
responsible party(s) and required routine maintenance actions and schedules
necessary to ensure proper operation of the stormwater control facility(s).
   (B)   The stormwater management plan for the development site shall
establish responsibilities for the continuing operation and maintenance (O&M)
of all stormwater facilities and BMPs, consistent with the following.
      (1)   If a development consists of structures or lots which are to be
separately owned and in which streets, sewers and other public improvements are
to be dedicated to the borough, stormwater facilities and BMPs should also be
dedicated to and maintained by the borough, except for those individual on-lot
facilities and BMPs for privately owned structures.
      (2)   If a development site is to be held in single ownership or if
sewers and other public improvements are to be privately owned, operated and
maintained, then the operation and maintenance of stormwater facilities and
BMPs should be the responsibility of the owner or private management entity.
      (3)   Person(s) responsible for the operation and maintenance of
stormwater facilities and BMPs shall be named with contact information
provided.
   (C)   The borough, upon recommendation of the Borough Engineer, shall make
the final determination on the continuing maintenance responsibilities prior to
final approval of the stormwater management plan. The Borough Council reserves
the right to accept the ownership and operating responsibility for any or all
of the stormwater management facilities and BMPs.
   (D)   If the development site involves land located in more than one
municipality, then the plan shall be reviewed by the borough and/or WCD to
determine if all activities both within and without the municipality meet the
requirements of this chapter.
   (E)   Stormwater facilities and BMPs shall be inspected by the owner/
responsible party named in the O&M plan on a regular basis as determined by the
borough or as approved in the O&M plan. Inspections may include photographs,
written reports and measured drawings as necessary to document conditions of
the facility(s), and the report shall be provided to the borough as requested.
(Ord. 2020-04, passed 1-11-2021; Ord. 2021-01, passed 8-9-2021)
§ 154.086 STORMWATER FACILITY, BMP OPERATIONS AND MAINTENANCE PLAN
REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   No regulated development activities within the borough will be
considered complete until approval by the borough of a BMP operations and
maintenance plan which describes how the permanent (i.e., post-construction)
stormwater facilities and BMPs will be properly operated and maintained.
   (B)   The following items shall be included in the BMP operations and
maintenance plan:
      (1)   Map(s) of the project area, in a form that meets the requirements
for recording at the Office of the Recorder of Deeds of the county; refer to
www.wcdeeds.us/dts/. The contents of the maps(s) shall include, but not be
limited to:
         (a)   Ownership and operation and maintenance responsibilities of
stormwater facilities and BMPs;
         (b)   Clear identification of the location and nature of permanent
stormwater facilities and BMPs;
         (c)   The location of the project site relative to highways,
municipality boundaries or other identifiable landmarks;
         (d)   Existing and final contours at intervals of two feet are
required if the general slope of the site is less than 15%, and at vertical
intervals of five feet if the general slope is equal to or greater than 15%;
         (e)   Existing streams, lakes, ponds or other bodies of water within
the project site area;
         (f)   Other physical features, including flood hazard boundaries,
sinkholes, streams, existing drainage courses and areas of natural vegetation
to be preserved;
         (g)   The locations of all existing and proposed utilities, sanitary
sewers and water lines within 50 feet of property lines of the project site;
         (h)   Proposed final changes to the land surface and vegetative cover,
including the type and amount of impervious area that would be added;
         (i)   Proposed final structures, roads, paved areas and buildings; and
         (j)   A 15-foot wide access easement around all stormwater facilities
and BMPs that would provide ingress to and egress from a public right-of-way.
      (2)   A description of how each permanent stormwater facility and BMP
will be operated and maintained, and the identity of the person(s) responsible
for operations and maintenance;
      (3)   The name of the project site, the name and address of the owner of
the property and the name of the individual or firm preparing the plan; and
      (4)   A statement, signed by the landowner, acknowledging that the
stormwater facilities and BMPs are fixtures that can be altered or removed only
after approval by the borough.
   (C)   Each stormwater facility and BMP shall be recorded with the county as
permanent real estate appurtenances, and as deed restrictions or conservation
easements that run with the land. Prior to final approval of the stormwater
plan, the property owner shall sign and record an O&M agreement for those
facilities and BMPs. Refer to
Appendix B of this chapter.
   (D)   If the owner fails, refuses or neglects to maintain any stormwater
facility and/or BMP, the borough reserves the right to conduct maintenance work
and charge and assess the owner any and all costs, expenses incurred and fees
set by the borough. The borough reserves the right to take enforcement actions
for failure to perform required O&M. Refer to §§
154.100 to
154.105 of this chapter.
   (E)   A financial guarantee for timely installation and proper construction
of stormwater facilities and BMPs shall be as specified in §§
154.100 to
154.105 of this chapter.
(Ord. 2020-04, passed 1-11-2021; Ord. 2021-01, passed 8-9-2021)
§ 154.087 OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT FOR PRIVATELY OWNED STORMWATER
FACILITIES, BMPS.
   (A)   (1)   Prior to final approval of the site’s stormwater management
plan, the property owner shall sign and record a maintenance agreement covering
all stormwater facilities and BMPs which are to be privately owned.
      (2)   The agreement (refer to
Appendix B of this chapter) shall stipulate that:
         (a)   The owner, successors and assigns shall maintain all facilities
in accordance with the approved maintenance schedule and shall keep all
facilities in a safe and functional manner and consistent with the surrounding
natural area;
         (b)   The owner, successors and assigns shall convey to the borough
easements and/or rights-of-way to assure access for periodic inspections by the
borough and maintenance, if required;
         (c)   The owner, successors and assigns shall keep on file with the
borough the name, address and telephone number of the person or company
responsible for maintenance activities; and in the event of a change, new
information will be submitted to the borough within ten days of the change; and
         (d)   If the owner, successors and assigns fail to maintain the
stormwater facilities and BMPs following due notice by the borough to correct
the problem(s), the borough may perform the necessary maintenance work or
corrective work and the owner shall reimburse the borough for all costs.
   (B)   Other items may be included in the agreement where determined
necessary to guarantee the satisfactory inspection and maintenance of all
stormwater facilities and BMPs for a ten-year period. The maintenance agreement
shall be subject to the review and approval of the Borough Solicitor and the
Borough Council and shall be in a form such as may be recorded in the office of
the recorder of deeds in the county in which the facility is located.
   (C)   The property owner shall sign an operations and maintenance agreement
with the borough covering all stormwater facilities and BMPs that are to be
privately owned. The agreement shall be substantially the same as the agreement
in
Appendix B of this chapter.
(Ord. 2020-04, passed 1-11-2021; Ord. 2021-01, passed 8-9-2021)
§ 154.088 BOROUGH STORMWATER AND BMP OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE FUND.
   (A)   (1)   Persons installing stormwater facilities or BMPs shall be
required to pay a specified amount to the borough stormwater facilities and
BMPs fund to help defray the costs of periodic inspections and maintenance
expenses.
      (2)   The amount of the deposit shall be determined as follows.
         (a)   If the stormwater facilities and/or BMPs are to be privately
owned and maintained, the deposit shall cover the cost of periodic inspections
performed by the borough for a period of ten years, as estimated by the Borough
Engineer. After that period of time, inspections will be performed at the
expense of the borough.
         (b)   If the stormwater facilities and/or BMPs are to be accepted,
owned and maintained by the borough, the deposit shall cover the estimated
costs for maintenance and inspections for ten years. The Borough Engineer will
establish the estimated costs utilizing information submitted by the applicant.
         (c)   The amount of the deposit to the fund shall be converted to
present worth of the annual series values. The Borough Engineer shall determine
the present worth equivalents, which shall be subject to the approval of the
Borough Council.
   (B)   If stormwater facilities and BMPs are proposed that also serves as a
recreation facility (e.g., ball field, lake), the borough may reduce or waive
the amount of the maintenance fund deposit based upon the value of the land for
public recreation purposes, or the borough may accept the maintenance fund
deposit on behalf of the agency managing the recreation resource and make said
fees available to the agency’s maintenance department.
   (C)   If at some future time stormwater facilities and BMPs (whether
publicly or privately owned) are eliminated due to the installation of storm
sewers or other stormwater facilities and BMPs, the unused portion of the
maintenance fund deposit will be applied to the cost of abandoning the facility
and connecting to the storm sewer system or other facility. Any amount of the
deposit remaining after the costs of abandonment are paid will be returned to
the depositor.
(Ord. 2020-04, passed 1-11-2021; Ord. 2021-01, passed 8-9-2021)
FEES, FINANCIAL GUARANTEES AND DEDICATION OF PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS
§ 154.100 GUARANTEE OF COMPLETION.
   (A)   (1)   A completion guarantee or financial security in the form of a
bond, cash deposit, cashier’s check or other negotiable securities acceptable
to the borough shall provide for, and secure to the borough, the completion of
any improvements which may be required on or before the date fixed in the
formal action of approval or accompanying agreement for completion of the
improvements. The guarantee or security shall cover any and all stormwater
management facilities, BMPs, erosion and sedimentation controls and other
required improvements (collectively, “improvements”) and shall be equal to 110%
of the cost of completion estimated as of 90 days following the date scheduled
for completion by the developer.
      (2)   Annually, the borough may adjust the amount of financial security
by comparing the actual cost of the improvements which have been completed and
the estimated cost for the completion of the remaining improvements as of the
expiration of the ninetieth day after either the original date scheduled for
completion or a rescheduled date of completion. Subsequent to said adjustment,
the borough may require the developer to post additional security in order to
assure that the financial security equals said 110%. Any additional security
shall be posted by the developer in accordance with this subchapter.
   (B)   The amount of the guarantee or financial security required shall be
determined utilizing the provisions of § 509(g) of the Municipalities Planning
Code, Act of Jul, 31, 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, 53 P.S. § 10509.
(Ord. 2020-04, passed 1-11-2021; Ord. 2021-01, passed 8-9-2021)
§ 154.101 RELEASE OF COMPLETION GUARANTEE.
   (A)   The completion guarantee or financial security shall be returned or
released upon written certification by the Borough Engineer or a designated
agent that improvements and facilities have been installed and completed in
accordance with the approved plan and specifications.
   (B)   The procedures for requesting and obtaining a release of the
completion guarantee shall be in a manner prescribed by § 510 of the
Municipalities Planning Code, Act of Jul. 31, 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, 53 P.S.
§ 10510.
(Ord. 2020-04, passed 1-11-2021; Ord. 2021-01, passed 8-9-2021)
§ 154.102 DEFAULT OF COMPLETION GUARANTEE.
   If improvements are not installed in accordance with the approved final
plans, the Borough Council may enforce any corporate bond or any security by
appropriate legal and equitable remedies. If proceeds of such bond or other
security are insufficient to pay the cost of installing or making repairs or
corrections to all the improvements covered by said security, the Borough
Council may, at its option, install part of such improvements in all or part of
the development and may institute appropriate legal or equitable action to
recover the monies necessary to complete the remainder of the improvements. All
proceeds, whether resulting from the security or from any legal or equitable
action brought against the developer, or both, shall be used solely for the
installation of the improvements covered by such security and not for any other
borough purpose.
(Ord. 2020-04, passed 1-11-2021; Ord. 2021-01, passed 8-9-2021)
§ 154.103 DEDICATION OF PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   When streets, sanitary sewers, stormwater management facilities, BMPs,
erosion and sedimentation controls or other required improvements in the
development have been completed in accordance with the final plans, such
improvements shall be deemed private until such time as they have been offered
for dedication to the borough and accepted by separate ordinance or resolution
or until they have been condemned for use as a public facility. The borough
shall be under no obligation to accept such facilities or controls unless and
until the borough so determines that it is in the best interest of the borough
to do so.
   (B)   Prior to acceptance of any improvements or facilities, the Borough
Engineer shall inspect the same to ensure that the same are constructed in
accordance with the approved plans and are functioning properly.
   (C)   The owner shall submit as-built plans for all facilities proposed for
dedication.
(Ord. 2020-04, passed 1-11-2021; Ord. 2021-01, passed 8-9-2021)
§ 154.104 MAINTENANCE GUARANTEE.
   Prior to acceptance of any improvements or facilities, the applicant shall
provide financial security to secure the structural integrity and functioning
of the improvements. The security shall:
   (A)   Be in the form of a bond, cash, cashier’s check or other negotiable
securities acceptable to the borough;
   (B)   Be for a term of 18 months; and
   (C)   Be in an amount equal to 15% of the actual cost of the improvements
and facilities so dedicated.
(Ord. 2020-04, passed 1-11-2021; Ord. 2021-01, passed 8-9-2021)
§ 154.105 FEE SCHEDULE.
   The Borough Council may adopt by resolution, from time to time, a reasonable
schedule of fees to cover the cost of pre-submitted and pre-construction
meetings, plan reviews, inspections and other activities necessary to
administer, monitor and enforced the provisions of this chapter. All fees shall
be set in accordance with the applicable provisions of the Municipalities
Planning Code, §§ 101 et seq., of the Act of July 31, 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247,
art. I, as amended by the Act of Dec. 21, 1988 P.L. 1329, No. 170, 53 P.S. §§
10101 et seq., and any dispute over the fee amount shall be resolved in the
manner prescribed by the Municipalities Planning Code.
(Ord. 2020-04, passed 1-11-2021; Ord. 2021-01, passed 8-9-2021)
ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES AND REMEDIES
§ 154.120 RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   Upon the presentation of proper credentials, duly authorized representatives
of the borough may enter at reasonable times upon any property to inspect,
investigate or ascertain the condition of the subject property in regard to an
aspect related to stormwater management regulated by this chapter. Prohibitions
and unreasonable delays in allowing the borough access to a stormwater
management facility pursuant to this chapter is a violation of this chapter.
The failure of any person or entity to grant entry or to undertake any action
which impedes or prevents entry is prohibited and constitutes a violation of
this chapter. Unless in the event of an emergency, the borough shall notify the
property owner and/or developer within 24 hours prior to entry.
(Ord. 2020-04, passed 1-11-2021; Ord. 2021-01, passed 8-9-2021) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.121 ENFORCEMENT GENERALLY.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for a person to undertake any regulated activity,
except as provided in an approved SWM site plan, unless specifically exempted
in §
154.027 of this chapter.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to alter any BMPs, facilities or structures that
were installed under this chapter without written approval of the borough.
   (C)   (1)   In the event that the applicant, developer, owner or his or her
agent fails to comply with the requirements of this chapter or fails to conform
to the requirements of any permit, a written notice of violation shall be
issued. Such notification shall set forth the nature of the violation(s) and
establish a time limit for correction of the violation(s). Upon failure to
comply within the time specified, unless otherwise extended by the borough, the
applicant, developer, owner or his or her agent shall be subject to the
enforcement remedies of this chapter.
      (2)   Such notice may require, without limitation:
         (a)   Whenever the borough finds that a person has violated a
prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this chapter, the borough may
order compliance by written notice to the responsible person. Such notice may
require, without limitation, any or all of the following:
            1.   The performance of monitoring, analyses and reporting;
            2.   The elimination of prohibited connections or discharges;
            3.   Cessation of any violating discharges, practices or
operations;
            4.   The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property;
            5.   Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation
costs;
            6.   The implementation of stormwater management measures or
facilities;
            7.   Operation and maintenance of stormwater management measures
and/or facilities; and
            8.   Assessment and payment of any and all costs and expenses
relative to corrective measures taken or to be taken, and reasonable costs,
expenses and attorney fees incurred by the borough in and related to
enforcement and collection proceedings.
         (b)   Such notification shall set forth the nature of the violation(s)
and establish a time limit for correction of these violations(s). Said notice
may further advise that, if applicable, should the violator fail to take the
required action within the established deadline, the work will be done by the
borough or designee and the expense thereof shall be charged to the violator.
         (c)   Failure to comply within the time specified shall also subject
such person to the penalty provisions of this chapter. All such penalties shall
be deemed cumulative and shall not prevent the borough from pursuing any and
all other remedies available in law or equity.
(Ord. 2020-04, passed 1-11-2021; Ord. 2021-01, passed 8-9-2021) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.122 SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.
   (A)   Any approval or permit issued by the borough pursuant to this chapter
may be suspended or revoked for:
      (1)   Noncompliance with or failure to implement any provision of the
approved SWM site plan or O&M agreement;
      (2)   A violation of any provision of this chapter or any other
applicable law, ordinance, rule or regulation related to the regulated
activity; or
      (3)   The creation of any condition or the commission of any act during
the regulated activity which constitutes or creates a hazard, nuisance,
pollution or endangers the life or property of others.
   (B)   A suspended approval may be reinstated by the borough when:
      (1)   The borough has inspected and approved the corrections to the
violations that caused the suspension; and
      (2)   The borough is satisfied that the violation has been corrected.
   (C)   An approval that has been revoked by the borough cannot be reinstated.
The applicant may apply for a new approval under the provisions of this
chapter.
   (D)   (1)   If a violation causes no immediate danger to life, public health
or property, at its sole discretion, the borough may provide a limited time
period for the owner to correct the violation. In these cases, the borough may
provide the owner, or the owner’s designee, with a written notice of the
violation and the time period allowed for the owner to correct the violation.
      (2)   If the owner does not correct the violation within the allowed time
period, the borough may revoke or suspend any, or all, applicable approvals and
permits pertaining to any provision of this chapter.
(Ord. 2020-04, passed 1-11-2021; Ord. 2021-01, passed 8-9-2021) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.123 PREVENTATIVE REMEDIES.
   (A)   In addition to other remedies, the borough may institute and maintain
appropriate actions by law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate a
violation; to prevent unlawful construction; to recover damages; and to prevent
illegal occupancy of a building or premises.
   (B)   In accordance with the Municipalities Planning Code, §§ 101 et seq.,
of the Act of July 31, 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, art. I, as amended by the Act
of Dec. 21, 1988 P.L. 1329, No. 170, 53 P.S. §§ 10101 et seq., the borough may
refuse to issue any permit or grant approval to further improve or develop any
property which has been developed in violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 2020-04, passed 1-11-2021; Ord. 2021-01, passed 8-9-2021) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.124 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   No judgment shall commence or be imposed, levied or be payable until
the date of the determination of a violation by the magisterial district judge.
Each day that a violation of this chapter continues or each section of this
chapter which shall be found to have been violated shall constitute a separate
offense.
   (B)   If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the
borough may enforce the judgment pursuant to applicable rules of civil
procedure.
   (C)   Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate
violation unless the magisterial district judge further determines that there
was a good faith basis for the person violating this chapter to have believed
that there was no such violation. In such case, there shall be deemed to have
been only one such violation until the fifth day following the date of the
magisterial district judge’s determination of the violation; thereafter, each
day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
   (D)   All judgments, costs and reasonable attorney fees collected for the
violation of this chapter shall be paid over to the borough.
   (E)   The court of common pleas, upon petition, may grant an order of stay,
upon cause shown, tolling the per diem fine pending a final adjudication of the
violation and judgment.
   (F)   Nothing contained in this section or §
154.999 of this chapter shall be construed or interpreted to grant to any
person or entity other than the borough the right to commence any action for
enforcement pursuant to this chapter.
   (G)   Each day that a violation of any provision of this chapter shall
constitute a separate violation and be deemed a public nuisance.
(Ord. 2020-04, passed 1-11-2021; Ord. 2021-01, passed 8-9-2021) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.125 ADDITIONAL REMEDIES.
   In addition to the above remedies, the borough may also seek the remedies
and penalties under applicable state statutes or regulations adopted pursuant
thereto, including, but not limited to, the Stormwater Management Act, the Act
of Oct. 4, 1978, P.L. 851, 32 P.S. §§ 693.1 et seq., and the erosion and
sedimentation regulations, of 25 Pa. Code Chapter 102. Any activity conducted
in violation of this chapter or any state-approved watershed stormwater
management plan may be declared a public nuisance by the borough and abatable
as such.
(Ord. 2020-04, passed 1-11-2021; Ord. 2021-01, passed 8-9-2021) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.126 APPEALS.
   (A)   Appeals.
      (1)   Any person aggrieved by a decision of the borough or any of its
authorized persons or agencies may appeal in writing said decision to the
Council within 30 days of any decision. Any appeal must be filed with the
Council. If a decision appealed is from an authorized person or agency of the
borough, a copy of the written appeal must be filed with such person or agency
by such appellant within 30 days of such decision.
      (2)   The appellant shall pay to the borough, at the time of filing the
appeal, any and all fees and charges as set forth in a resolution of the
borough.
   (B)   Procedure. Any appeal filed pursuant to this section shall be governed
by the Local Agency Law of the commonwealth (2 Pa.C.S.A. § 105, specifically 2
Pa.C.S.A. §§ 551 to 555).
   (C)   Hearing. The Council shall schedule a hearing within 60 days of
receipt of said appeal. Written notice of the hearing shall be given to the
party filing the appeal, and any authorized person or agency of the borough
involved, not less than 15 days prior to said hearing.
   (D)   Hearing procedure.
      (1)   All testimony may be stenographically recorded and a full and
complete record be kept of the proceedings. In the event all testimony is not
stenographically recorded and a full and complete record of the proceedings is
not provided by the local agency, such testimony shall be stenographically
recorded and a full and complete record of the proceedings shall be kept at the
request of any party agreeing to pay the costs thereof.
      (2)   The Council shall not be bound by technical rules of the evidence
at the aforesaid hearing, and all relevant evidence of reasonably probative
value may be received. Reasonable examination and cross-examination shall be
permitted.
   (E)   Adjudication. The adjudication of the Council shall be in writing,
shall contain findings and the reasons for the adjudication and shall be served
upon all parties to the appeal, or their counsel, personally or by mail.
   (F)   Appeal from adverse adjudication. Pursuant to 2 Pa.C.S.A. §§ 751 et
seq., any person aggrieved by the adjudication of the Council who has a direct
interest in such adjudication shall have the right to appeal therefrom to the
court vested with jurisdiction of such appeals by or pursuant to Title 42 Pa.
C.S.A. (relating to judiciary and judicial procedure).
(Ord. 2020-04, passed 1-11-2021; Ord. 2021-01, passed 8-9-2021)
§ 154.999 PENALTY.
   Any person who has violated or knowingly permitted the violation of the
provisions of this chapter or has refused, neglected or failed to perform any
of the actions required pursuant to the notice set forth in §
154.121 of this chapter, upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a
magisterial district judge in the manner provided for the enforcement of
summary offenses under the Commonwealth Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be
guilty of a summary offense, and shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not less
than $100 nor more than $1,000 (subject to change via resolution) for each
violation, plus costs, together with reasonable attorney fees; and, in default
or failure of full and timely payment of such fine, costs and fees, to a term
of imprisonment not to exceed 90 days or to a term of imprisonment to the
extent permitted by law for the punishment of violations of summary offenses,
whichever is less. Each day that a violation of this chapter continues or each
section of this chapter which shall be found to have been violated shall
constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 2020-04, passed 1-11-2021; Ord. 2021-01, passed 8-9-2021)
APPENDIX A: NO-HARM PROJECT FORM
 
The following worksheet is to be used to estimate the change in the ten year
storm peak rate between developed and existing conditions to determine if a
regulated activity qualifies as “No-Harm”. The maximum new impervious area
qualifying for the No-Harm option is 3,000 square feet.
Methodology:
The worksheet is generated using NkCS Technical Release 55 (TR-55) Graphical
Peak Discharge method as described in Chapter 4 of TR-55. The calculations on
the following worksheet incorporate the following assumptions and methods:
•   Rainfall (P) for 10 year, 24 hour storm event in Oklahoma Borough = 4
in      (Fig B-5, TR-55)
•   NRCS Rainfall Distribution Type II                     (Fig B-2, TR-55)
•   Three Hydrologic Groups are considered for the simplified runoff
calculation within Oklahoma Borough; A, B, and Other. The Other category
includes C and D as well as all combination hydrologic groups (such as A/D). A
representative curve number was chosen for the Other category between the
values for groups C and D given in Table 2-2 of TR-55.
•   Curve Numbers                              (Tables 2-2 a-c, TR-55)
 
              Hydrologic Soil Group
              A  B  Other
Cover Type    CN CN CN
Meadow        30 58 75
Wooded        43 65 80
Paved/Rooftop 98 98 98
Gravel        76 85 90
•   Runoff values taken from Table 2-1, TR-55 using the above curve numbers and
a rainfall of 4 inches.
•   Initial abstraction (Ia) based on the above curve numbers.            
(Table 4-1, TR-55)
 
CN  Ia    CN Ia
30* 3.000 76 0.632
43  2.651 80 0.500
58  1.448 85 0.353
65  1.077 90 0.222
75  0.667 98 0.041
 
* When Curve number falls outside of chart, chart limits were used.
•   Assume 6 minute Time of concentration (Tc) for project areas under 3,000 sf
•   The unit peak discharges (qu) were interpolated using the Initial
abstraction – Rainfall ratios (Ia/P) and Time of concentration were
interpolated using exhibit 4-II, TR-55. The limiting values of 550 and 1,000
csm/in are assumed for Initial abstraction – Rainfall ratios outside the range
shown on the exhibit, per TR-55 Chapter 4 guidance.
Instructions:
1.   Enter Proposed New impervious area in Box 1.
Impervious area is defined as a surface that prevents the infiltration of water
into the ground. Impervious surface includes, but is not limited to, any roof,
parking or driveway areas, and any new streets and sidewalks. Any surface areas
designed to initially be gravel or crushed stone shall be assumed to be
impervious surfaces, unless demonstrated otherwise in an approved stormwater
management plan. Any surface, gravel or otherwise used for permanent or
temporary storage of vehicles, containers, solar arrays or other similar items
shall be considered impervious or at a minimum the impervious area shall be
measured as the total impervious surface of the combined footprint of the
vehicles, containers, solar arrays and other similar items based on a
reasonable assumption of capacity at that site.
2.   Determine the Hydrologic Soil Group (HSG).
3.   Write the existing cover type in Box 2. Find the Cover Type from the table
on the worksheet that most clearly matches the existing conditions of the
project area.
4.   Write the runoff value in Box 3. Find the Runoff from the table on the
worksheet that matches both the Hydrologic Soil Group and the existing cover
type entered in Box 2.
5.   Write the Unit Peak Discharge value in Box 4. Find the Unit Peak Discharge
from the table on the worksheet that matches both the Hydrologic Soil Group and
the existing cover type entered in Box 2.
6.   Multiply Boxes 1, 3, and 4 then divide the result by 27,878,400 and place
the value in Box 5, Peak Discharge. This value is the existing peak discharge.
7.   Write the proposed cover type in Box 6. Find the Cover Type from the table
on the worksheet that most closely matches the proposed conditions of the
project area.
8.   Write the runoff value in Box 7. Find the Runoff from the table on the
worksheet that matches both the Hydrologic Soil Group and the proposed cover
type entered in Box 6.
9.   Write the Unit Peak Discharge value in Box 8. Find the Unit Peak Discharge
from the table on the worksheet that matches both the Hydrologic Soil Group and
the proposed cover type entered in Box 2.
10.   Multiply Boxes 1,7 and 8 then divide the result by 27,878,400 and place
the value in Box 9, Peak Discharge. This value is the proposed peak discharge.
11.   Subtract the existing peak discharge from the proposed peak discharge
(Box 9 – Box 5) and place the result in Box 10.
12.   If the value in Box 10 is less than or equal to 0.5, the project meets
the rate increase criteria for the No-Harm option, § 154.028 of the Oklahoma
Borough Code of Ordinances.
Example:
The next sheet shows an example for a fictional project proposing to place a
2,500 square foot workshop/garage in an area within Hydrologic Soil Group A on
a currently wooded portion of their parcel. In the example, the rate increase
is less than 0.5 cfs, therefore the rate increase meets the criteria for the
No-Harm Option.
EXAMPLE
   NO-HARM PROJECT COMPUTATION FORM
   Simplified TR-55 Rate of Runoff Calculation for 10 year storm in Oklahoma
Borough
   See instructions in Appendix A. pages 1 and 2.
Project name:   EXAMPLE
Location:      WHITE CITY ROAD, WILPEN
Total project Disturbed Area (square feet):      4,000
Proposed New Impervious area (square feet):      2,500
(Rooftop, Pavement, Gravel, etc.)
Proposed New Impervious Area (square feet): 2,500        Box 1
   Hydrologic Soil Group (circle one)        A         B         Other
                                               Existi   Proposed
Proposed New Impervious Area  2,500                Box 1
(square feet):
   Hydrologic Soil Group (circle     A         B         Other
one)
                                 Existin   Proposed
Cover Type*                   WOODED Box 2 ROOFTOP Box 6
Runoff (in)*                  0.13   Box 3 3.77    Box 7
Unit Peak Discharge, qu*      550    Box 4 1,000   Box 8
Peak Discharge (cfs)          0.007  Box 5 0.338   Box 9
Box 5 (Box 1 X Box 3 X Box 4)        Box 9 (Box 1 X Box 7 X Box 8) 27,878,400
27,878,400
Change in Runoff (cfs) [Box 10 = Box 9 -  0.331   Box 10
Box 5]
If Box 10 is less than or equal to 0.5, the project meets the rate increase
criteria for the No-Harm option, §
154.028(B) of the Oklahoma Borough Code of Ordinances
 
* See Table below
Hydrologic Soil Group (see Cover Type Runoff (in) Unit Peak Discharge, qu (csm/
Map)                                              in)
Hydrologic Soil Group (see Cover Type    Runoff (in) Unit Peak Discharge, qu
Map)                                                 (csm/in)
A                          Meadow/Grass  0.06        550.0
A                          Wooded        0.13        550.0
A                          Paved/Rooftop 3.77        1,000.0
A                          Gravel        1.74        964.5
B                          Meadow/Grass  0.67        900.0
B                          Wooded        1.03        957.5
B                          Paved/Rooftop 3.77        1,000.0
B                          Gravel        2.46        1,000.0
Other                      Meadow/Grass  1.67        987.5
Other                      Wooded        2.04        997.5
Other                      Paved/Rooftop 3.77        1,000.0
Other                      Gravel        2.92        1,000.0
 
NO-HARM PROJECT COMPUTATION FORM
Simplified TR-55 Rate of Runoff Calculation for 10 year storm in Oklahoma
Borough
See instructions in Appendix A. pages 1 and 2.
Project name:
Location:
Total project Disturbed Area (square feet):
Proposed New Impervious area (square feet):
(Rooftop, Pavement, Gravel, etc.)
Proposed New Impervious Area (square feet):              Box 1
   Hydrologic Soil Group (circle one)        A         B      Other
                                               Existi   Proposed
Proposed New Impervious Area (square              Box 1
feet):
   Hydrologic Soil Group (circle on   A         B      Other
                                        Existi   Proposed
Cover Type*                           Box 2       Box 6
Runoff (in)*                          Box 3       Box7
Unit Peak Discharge, qu*              Box 4       Box 8
Peak Discharge (cfs)                  Box 5       Box 9
Box 5 (Box 1 X Box 3 X Box 4)         Box 9 (Box 1 X Box 7 X Box 8) 27,878,400
27,878,400
Change in Runoff (cfs) [Box 10 = Box 9 - Box 5]  Box 10
If Box 10 is less than or equal to 0.5, the project meets the rate increase
criteria for the No-Harm option, §
154.028(B) of the Oklahoma Borough Code of Ordinances
 
* See Table below
Hydrologic Soil Group (see Cover Type Runoff (in) Unit Peak Discharge, qu (csm/
Map)                                              in)
Hydrologic Soil Group (see Cover Type    Runoff (in) Unit Peak Discharge, qu
Map)                                                 (csm/in)
A                          Meadow/Grass  0.06        550.0
A                          Wooded        0.13        550.0
A                          Paved/Rooftop 3.77        1,000.0
A                          Gravel        1.74        964.5
B                          Meadow/Grass  0.67        900.0
B                          Wooded        1.03        957.5
B                          Paved/Rooftop 3.77        1,000.0
B                          Gravel        2.46        1,000.0
Other                      Meadow/Grass  1.67        987.5
Other                      Wooded        2.04        997.5
Other                      Paved/Rooftop 3.77        1,000.0
Other                      Gravel        2.92        1,000.0
 
(Ord. 2020-04, passed 1-11-2021; Ord. 2021-01, passed 8-9-2021)
APPENDIX B: LANDOWNER LETTER OF ACKNOWLEDGMENT;
OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT
 
Project Name:_______________________________________ Date:
______________________.
Location:
________________________________________________________________________.
    •   New impervious areas can potentially increase stormwater runoff from
this site and the use of proposed stormwater facilities and/or best management
practices (BMPs) can manage those impacts by mimicking natural processes to
provide groundwater recharge and stream base flow.
   •   Regulated development activities on this site shall not begin until
Oklahoma Borough has issued an approval for a Small Project Stormwater
Management Plan.
   •   If stormwater management facilities and/or BMPs included on the approved
Small Project Stormwater Site Plan require revisions or changes, the applicant
shall submit a revised plan to the Oklahoma Borough for approval. If a problem
arises, the applicant may need to seek the assistance of a qualified
professional.
   •   Installed stormwater facilities and/or BMPs shall not adversely affect
any property, septic systems, or drinking water wells on this or any other
property.
   •   The applicant acknowledges that the installed stormwater management
facilities and/or BMPs will be a permanent fixture of the property, shall be
inspected and maintained regularly to retain the original function, and cannot
be altered or removed without the approval of the Borough of Oklahoma.
I (we) ________________________________________________, hereby acknowledge the
above statements and agree to assume full responsibility for the
implementation, construction, operation, and maintenance of the proposed
stormwater management facilities and/or BMPs. Furthermore, I (we) acknowledge
that the steps, assumptions, and guidelines provided in the Oklahoma Borough
Small Project Stormwater Management Plan and Worksheet will be adhered to.
Signature:____________________________________________ Date:_________________
Signature:____________________________________________ Date:_________________
OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE (O&M) AGREEMENT
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (SWM BMPs)
THIS AGREEMENT, made and entered into this day ______________ of _____,
20______, by and between ____________________ (hereinafter the “Landowner”),
and _____________________, Westmoreland County, Pennsylvania (hereinafter
“Municipality”);
WITNESSETH
   WHEREAS, the Landowner is the owner of certain real property as recorded by
deed in the land records of Westmoreland County, Pennsylvania, Deed Book
____________ at page _____, (hereinafter “Property”).
   WHEREAS, the Landowner is proceeding to build and develop the Property; and
   WHEREAS, the SWM BMP Operation and Maintenance (O&M) Plan approved by the
Municipality (hereinafter referred to as the “O&M Plan”) for the property
identified herein, which is attached hereto as Appendix A and made part hereof,
as approved by the Municipality, provides for management of stormwater within
the confines of the Property through the use of BMPs; and
   WHEREAS, the Municipality, and the Landowner, his successors and assigns,
agree that the health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the Municipality
and the protection and maintenance of water quality require that on-site SWM
BMPs be constructed and maintained on the Property; and
   WHEREAS, the Municipality requires, through the implementation of the SWM
Site Plan, that SWM BMPs as required by said SWM Site Plan and the Municipal
Stormwater Management Ordinance be constructed and adequately operated and
maintained by the Landowner, successors, and assigns.
   NOW, THEREFORE, in consideration of the foregoing promises, the mutual
covenants contained herein, and the following terms and conditions, the parties
hereto agree as follows:
1.   The Landowner shall construct the BMPs in accordance with the plans and
specifications identified in the SWM Site Plan.
2.   The Landowner shall operate and maintain the BMPs as shown on the SWM Site
Plan in good working order in accordance with the specific operation and
maintenance requirements noted on the approved O&M Plan.
3.   The Landowner hereby grants permission to the Municipality, its authorized
agents and employees, to enter upon the property, at reasonable times and upon
presentation of proper credentials, to inspect the BMPs whenever necessary.
Whenever possible, the Municipality shall notify the Landowner prior to
entering the property.
4.   In the event the Landowner fails to operate and maintain the BMPs per
paragraph 2, the Municipality or its representatives may enter upon the
Property and take whatever action is deemed necessary to maintain said BMP(s).
It is expressly understood and agreed that the Municipality is under no
obligation to maintain or repair said facilities, and in no event shall this
Agreement be construed to impose any such obligation on the Municipality. A
timeline shall be set as mutually agreed upon..........
5.   In the event the Municipality, pursuant to this Agreement, performs work
of any nature, or expends any funds in performance of said work for labor, use
of equipment, supplies, materials, and the like, the Landowner shall reimburse
the Municipality for all expenses (direct and indirect) incurred within 10 days
of receipt of invoice from the Municipality.
6.   The intent and purpose of this Agreement is to ensure the proper
maintenance of the on-site BMPs by the Landowner; provided, however, that this
Agreement shall not be deemed to create any additional liability of any party
for damage alleged to result from or be caused by stormwater runoff.
7.   The Landowner, its executors, administrators, assigns, and other
successors in interests, shall release the Municipality from all damages,
accidents, casualties, occurrences, or claims which might arise or be asserted
against said employees and representatives from the construction, presence,
existence, or maintenance of the BMP(s) by the Landowner or Municipality.
8.   The Municipality intends to inspect the BMPs at a minimum of once every
three years to ensure their continued functioning.
   This Agreement shall be recorded at the Office of the Recorder of Deeds of
Westmoreland County, Pennsylvania, and shall constitute a covenant running with
the Property and/or equitable servitude, and shall be binding on the Landowner,
his administrators, executors, assigns, heirs, and any other successors in
interests, in perpetuity.
ATTEST:
WITNESS the following signatures and seals:
(SEAL)                                 For the Municipality:
                                    _____________________________________
                                    For the Landowner:
                                    _____________________________________
ATTEST:
__________________________________________ (City, Borough, Township)
County of Westmoreland, Pennsylvania
I, _____________________________________, a Notary Public in and for the county
and state aforesaid, whose commission expires on the day ____ of
__________________, 20____, do hereby certify that whose name(s) is/are signed
to the foregoing Agreement bearing date of the ____ day of ______________,
20____, has acknowledged the same before me in my said county and state.
 
GIVEN UNDER MY HAND THIS ____ day of ______________, 20____.
_________________________________________   __________________________________
NOTARY PUBLIC                        (SEAL)
(Ord. 2020-04, passed 1-11-2021; Ord. 2021-01, passed 8-9-2021)
APPENDIX C: SMALL PROJECT STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SITE PLAN AND WORKSHEET
 
Oklahoma Borough
SMALL PROJECT STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN
This small project stormwater management plan has been developed to assist
those proposing residential projects to meet the requirements of the Oklahoma
Borough Stormwater Management Ordinance (SWO) without having to draft a formal
stormwater management plan. This small project stormwater management plan is
only permitted for projects with new impervious area between 3,000 and 10,000
square feet, or total earth disturbance between 5,000 and 20,000 square feet,
(Section 302 Regulated Development Activity Table of the SWO) and by using the
recommendations in this Appendix for Volume Control. Additional information can
be found in Chapter 6 of the PA SW BMP Manual 2006 or most recent version.
A.   What is an applicant required to submit?
All requirements of Section 306 of the Oklahoma Borough Stormwater Management
Ordinance, including:
   •   A narrative including a brief description of the proposed stormwater
facilities and BMPs, types of materials to be used, total square footage of
proposed impervious areas, volume calculations;
   •   A sketch plan showing location of existing and proposed structures,
driveways, or other paved areas with approximate surface area in square feet;
location of any existing or proposed utilities, especially onsite septic system
and/or potable water wells showing proximity to infiltration facilities,
location and dimensions of all proposed stormwater facilities and BMPs;
   •   Small Project Stormwater Management Worksheet;
   •   Signed agreement page for installation, operation and maintenance of
stormwater facilities and BMPs (Refer to Appendix B); and
   •   Conservation District erosion and sediment control “Adequacy” letter as
required by Municipal, County or State regulations;
B.   Determination of Required Control Volume and Sizing Stormwater Facilities
and BMPs
By following the simple steps outlined below in the provided example and Small
Project Stormwater Management Worksheet, an applicant can determine the runoff
volume that is required to be controlled and how to choose the appropriate
stormwater facility or BMP to permanently remove the runoff volume from the
site. Impervious area calculations must include all areas on the lot proposed
to be covered by roof area or pavement which would prevent rain from naturally
percolating into the ground, including proposed impervious surfaces such as
sidewalks, driveways, parking areas, patios or swimming pools. NOTE: Sidewalks,
driveways or patios that are designed and constructed to allow for infiltration
(permeable paving systems) are not included in this calculation.
Small Project Sketch Plan:   Example
Project Name: _____________________________________ Date:
______________________.
Location:
______________________________________________________________________.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/9434653894a16ad54b7b591131774b31d8ffe75a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1250.png]
 
Step 1: Determine Total Impervious Surfaces and Required Control Volume:
TABLE I: Example
 
New        Dimensions Area
Impervious (width x   in   1” storm Multiplier  Required Control Volume 1” in
Surface    length)    SF   (0.083)                CF
           (FT)
Garage     20’ x 40�800  0.167                  133 CF
Roof                  SF
Driveway   20’ x 20�400  0.167                  67 CF
Court                 SF
Driveway   12’ x 50�600  0.167                  100 CF
                      SF
                    SF                         CF
                    SF                         CF
                    SF                         CF
 
Total Required Control Volume (enter in Table 2):
                                                           300 CF
In Table 1, as in the example above and as shown on the Figure 1 example sketch
plan, list each of the new improvements that create impervious area on the
property along with their dimensions and total area in square feet in the first
three columns. Then, depending on the design storm required by the
municipality, multiply the area in square feet by the design storm multiplier
to determine required control volume and list in the last column. Add each of
the required control volumes together to equal the Total Required Control
Volume and enter in Table 2.
Step 2: Sizing the Selected Volume Control BMP(s)
Several Best Management Practices (BMPs) are suitable for small stormwater
management projects. However, their application depends on the volume required
to be controlled, how much land is available, and the site constraints.
Proposed residential development activities can apply both nonstructural and
structural BMPs to control the volume of runoff from the site. A number of
these different volume control BMPs are described below. Note that Figure 1 is
an example of how these BMPs can be utilized on a property to control the total
required control volume.
Credit can be taken for non-structural best management practices (BMPs) on a
site to reduce the total volume required to be controlled. Credits must follow
the requirements listed in this Appendix. Fill out Table 2 with proposed non-
structural BMP credits and structural BMP control volumes entered in Tables 6
and 10 to meet the total required control volume.
TABLE 2: Example
 
Required Control Volume (Table 1)            300 CF
Non-structural BMP Credit (Table 6)          137 CF
Adjusted Required Control Volume             163 CF
(after credits) (Table 1 - Table 6)
Structural BMP Control Volume (Table 10)     202 CF
TOTAL Volume Controlled (Table 6 + Table 10) 338 CF
 
NOTE: Total Volume Controlled shall be greater than or equal to Required
Control Volume.
Step 3: Choosing and Measuring Non-Structural BMPs
   1.   Tree Planting and Preservation
Trees and forests reduce stormwater by capturing, storing and evapotranspiring
rainfall through their roots and leaves. Tree roots and leaf litter also create
soil conditions that promote infiltration of rainwater into the soil and that
breakdown excessive nutrients and pollutants. For more information refer to the
PA DEP BMP Manual 5.6.3.
   Considerations for credit:
    •   New tree plantings must be at least 6 feet in height and have at least
a 2 inch caliper trunk, and the quantity entered in Table 3
   •   New tree plantings must be native to Pennsylvania. Refer to http://
www.dcnr.pa.gov/Conservation/WildPlants/Pages/default.aspx
   •   Existing trees must have at least a 4” caliper trunk, and must be
located within 100 feet of impervious surfaces
   •   Measure existing tree canopy by determining the square foot area covered
within the drip line of the tree(s), and enter the area in Table 4
   •   Site runoff should be directed via sheet flow to the area(s) of trees
being used for volume control
TABLE 3: New Tree(s)
 
New Trees Volume Control Multiplier Tree Quantity Volume Controlled (CF)
Deciduous 6 CF                      2             12 CF
Evergreen 10 CF                     3             30 CF
                                                
 
Total Volume Control Credit (new trees) enter in Table 6:  42 CF
TABLE 4: Existing Tree Canopy
 
Existing Tree Canopy  Distance of           Volume Control Volume Controlled
(SF)                  Impervious to Canopy  Multiplier     (CF)
                      (FT)
SF                    0 FT to 20 FT         0.0833         CF
                                                         
 
Total Volume Control Credit (ex. trees) enter in Table 6:  83 CF
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/9434653894a16ad54b7b591131774b31d8ffe75a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1252.png]
 
2. Minimize Soil Compaction and Revegetate (lawn or meadow seeding)
When soil is overly compacted during construction it can cause a drastic
reduction in the permeability of the soil and rarely is the soil profile
completely restored. Runoff from overly compacted vegetated areas can resemble
increased runoff from impervious areas. Minimizing soil compaction during the
construction process, or restoring and amending compacted soils and
revegetating them after construction can greatly increase natural infiltration
on a site. For more information refer to the PA DEP BMP Manual 5.6.2 and 5.6.3.
   Considerations for credit:
    •   Area(s) shall not be stripped of topsoil and areas shall be protected
from construction vehicles and lay down space with construction fencing or
mats. Enter square foot area in Table 5.
   •   Soil ripping and soil amendments can be used to restore the soils
   •   Vegetation should be used, especially native plants and meadow mixes as
an alternative to lawn
TABLE 5: Minimize Soil Compaction Example
 
Type of stabilization Area of minimal Volume Control Volume Controlled (CF)
                      compaction (SF) Multiplier
Meadow                SF              0.0275         CF
Lawn                  600 SF          0.0208         12 CF
                                      
 
Total Volume Control Credit (min. compaction) enter in Table 6:
                                                          12 CF
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/9434653894a16ad54b7b591131774b31d8ffe75a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1254.png]
 
Step 4: Determining Non-Structural BMP Credit:
TABLE 6: Mon-Structural BMP Credit Summary: Example
 
Non-structural BMP        Storage Volume Credit (CF)
New Tree                  42 CF
Existing Tree Canopy      83 CF
Minimized Soil Compaction 12 CF
TOTAL (enter in Table 2)  137 CF
 
Step 5: Choosing and Sizing Structural BMPs
1.   Infiltration Trench
An infiltration trench is a linear stormwater management BMP consisting of a
continuously perforated pipe at a minimum slope in a stone-filled trench.
During small storm events, infiltration trenches can significantly reduce
volume and serve in the removal of fine sediments and pollutants. Runoff is
stored in the pipe and between the stones and infiltrates through the bottom of
the facility and into the surrounding soil matrix. Runoff should be pretreated
using vegetative buffer strips or swales to limit the amount of coarse sediment
entering the trench which can clog and render the trench ineffective. In all
cases, an infiltration trench should be designed with a positive overflow to a
stable outlet point. For more information refer to the PA DEP BMP Manual 6.4.4.
Design Considerations:
    •   Continuously perforated pipe (min 4” diameter) set at a minimum slope
(1%) in a stone filled, nearly level-bottomed trench on un-compacted soils.
   •   The trench width and depth can vary, but it is recommended that
infiltration trenches be no wider than four (4) feet, and a minimum of thirty
(30) inches and maximum six (6) feet in depth.
   •   Stone fill should be clean, angular stone, separated from soil layers by
four (4) inches of straw (top and bottom) or a nonwoven geotextile (top, sides,
and bottom).
   •   A minimum of 6” of topsoil can be placed over trench and vegetated.
   •   Cleanouts or inlets should be installed at both ends and at
intersections of the infiltration trench and at appropriate intervals to allow
access to the perforated pipe.
   •   The discharge or outlet from the infiltration trench should be safely
conveyed to a stable vegetated area, natural watercourse, the curb or gutter
line of roadway or existing storm collection/conveyance/control system as
applicable.
   •   Volume of facility = Depth x Width x Length x Void Space of the gravel
bed (assume 40%).
Maintenance:
   •   Cleanouts, catch basins and inlets should be inspected at least two
times a year and cleaned out as necessary to maintain function of the system.
   •   The vegetation along the surface of the infiltration trench should be
maintained in good condition and any bare spots should be re-vegetated as soon
as possible.
   •   Vehicles should not be parked or driven on the trench and care should be
taken to avoid soil compaction by lawn mowers.
TABLE 7 – Determining size of infiltration trench for volume control: Example
 
Required     Storage Trench
Control      Volume  Volume Trench Depth Trench Width  Trench Length Volume
Volume (CF)  Divider (CF)   (FT)         (FT)          (FT)          Controlled
From Table 2
                                                                
 
Total Volume Control Credit (Inf. trench) enter in Table 10:  165 CF
Infiltration Trench Construction:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/9434653894a16ad54b7b591131774b31d8ffe75a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1256.png]
 
2.   Rain Garden
A rain garden is a landscaped shallow depression that uses mulch, soil mix, and
deep rooted plants to capture, adsorb and infiltrate stormwater runoff from
roofs, and pavement. For more information refer to the PA DEP BMP Manual 6.4.5.
Design considerations:
    •   A rain garden should be located on nearly level to gently sloping
ground and no closer than 10 feet to a building foundation and 25 feet from
septic field or wellhead.
   •   A rain garden can vary in length, width and depth, but should have a
ponding depth of 6 to 12 inches, and a total surface depth of no greater than
18 inches.
   •   Side slopes within the garden should not exceed 3:1 horizontal to
vertical.
   •   The rain garden should be constructed in layers with a (min. 4”)
perforated underdrain in a clean angular stone envelope, separated from soil
layers by four (4) inches of straw (top and bottom) or a nonwoven geotextile
(top, sides, and bottom), covered with 12 inches to 36 inches of 50-30-20
topsoil-sand-compost mix or as approved by the municipality, and 3 inches of
shredded bark mulch or vegetated cover. Soil depth should be determined by
plant choices and control volume requirements.
   •   Vegetation should be deep rooted and tolerant of wet and dry conditions,
salts and environmental stress.
   •   An emergency overflow should be set in the rain garden such as a
vertical pipe or inlet box, with basket type grate set even with the ponding
depth, below the surrounding ground elevation and connected to the perforated
underdrain and an outlet pipe.
   •   The outlet from the rain garden should be safely conveyed to a stable
vegetated area, natural watercourse, the curb or gutter line of roadway or
existing storm collection/conveyance/control system as applicable.
Maintenance:
   •   Cleanouts, catch basins and inlets should be inspected at least two
times a year and cleaned out as necessary to maintain function of the system.
Detritus should be removed from the rain garden as necessary to prevent
clogging of the overflow outlet.
   •   The vegetation should be maintained in good condition and replaced as
necessary. Rain garden plants may need to be watered during dry spells.
   •   Rain garden should be weeded and shredded bark mulch should be amended
as necessary to prevent volunteer weeds.
TABLE 8 – Determining Size of Rain Garden for volume control: Example
(surface volume, soil storage volume should each be greater than or equal to
required control volume)
 
Required Ponding Rain                  Soil Mix              Soil
Control  Depth   Garden  Rain   Rain   Depth (1   Soil       Storage Volume
Volume   (0.5 FT Surface Garden Garden FT to 3    Storage    Volume  Controlled
(CF)     to 1.0  Area    Width  Length FT)        Volume     (<=     (soil)
from     FT)     (SF)    (FT)   (FT)   Multiplier Multiplier RCV)
Table 2  Divider
165 CF   0.5     330 SF  12 FT  28 FT  2 FT       0.3        202 CF  202 CF
                                                              
 
Total Volume Control Credit (rain garden) enter in Table 10:
                                                                                               202
CF
Rain Garden Construction:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/9434653894a16ad54b7b591131774b31d8ffe75a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1258.png]
 
3.   Dry Well/Seepage Pit
A dry well or seepage pit is a subsurface storage facility that temporarily
stores stormwater runoff from roofs and infiltrates it into the surrounding
soils. Roof downspouts connect directly to a dry well or seepage pit that is an
excavated pit filled with clean angular stone with an overflow pipe to ensure
the system will not be overwhelmed. Prefabricated chamber systems or perforated
pipe sections are commercially available for use as dry wells and should be
designed, constructed and maintained according to the manufacturer’s
recommendations. For more information on dry wells and seepage pits refer to
the PA DEP BMP Manual 6.4.6.
Design considerations:
    •   A dry well/seepage pit should be located on nearly level to gently
sloping ground and no closer than 10 feet to a building foundation and 25 feet
from septic field or wellhead.
   •   A dry well/seepage pit can vary in length, width and depth, but should
be a minimum depth of 3 feet.
   •   A downspout should direct water to the surface, a system of perforated
pipes should distribute the water throughout the system with an inspection/
cleanout pipe to the surface, and an overflow pipe should outlet excess water
during intense storms.
   •   The storage system can be clean angular stone, separated from soil
layers by four (4) inches of straw (top and bottom) or a nonwoven geotextile
(top, sides, and bottom).
   •   The outlet from the dry well/seepage pit should be safely conveyed to a
stable vegetated area, natural watercourse, the curb or gutter line of roadway
or existing storm collection/conveyance/control system as applicable.
Maintenance:
   •   Drywells and seepage pits should be inspected at least 4 times a year,
and after each storm event exceeding 1 inch.
   •   Remove sediment, debris, detritus and any other waste material from the
system as necessary.
   •   Regularly clean out gutters and downspouts to ensure proper connections
and to maintain effectiveness of the system.
   •   Replace any filter screen or clean out any sump box that may intercept
roof runoff as necessary.
Table 9: Determining Size of Dry Well (stone filled) for volume control:
Example
 
Required     Storage                                               Volume
Control      Volume  Dry Well    Dry Well   Dry Well   Dry Well    Controlled
Volume (CF)  Divider Volume (CF) Depth (FT) Width (FT) Length (FT) (CF)
from Table 2
                                                              
 
Total Volume Control Credit (dry well) enter in Table 10:  165 CF
NOTE: Applicants are required to utilize the manufacturer’s recommendations for
sizing proprietary stormwater infiltration systems, and to submit supporting
documentation for meeting the required control volume and maintenance
requirements.
Dry Well (stone filled) Construction:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/9434653894a16ad54b7b591131774b31d8ffe75a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1260.png]
 
4.   Alternative BMP Capture and Re-Use (rain barrel/cistern)
Rain barrels and cisterns are above or below ground containers used for
temporary storage of rainwater, to be used for landscape irrigation and other
similar uses after the rain has ended. A rain barrel or cistern cannot be used
as a volume control because infiltration is not guaranteed after a storm event,
but they are viable alternative method to capture and reuse stormwater.
Considerations:
       •   Rain barrels and cisterns should be directly connected to a
downspout with a mosquito screen
      •   There should be a means to release the water after a storm event to
provide storm volume for the next event
      •   An overflow, near the top of the container should direct water to a
vegetated area away from any structures
      •   Barrels can be connected in series to provide more volume collection
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/9434653894a16ad54b7b591131774b31d8ffe75a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1262.png]
Step 6: Determining BMP Volume Control
TABLE 10: Structural BMP Volume Control Summary:
 
Structural BMP           Storage Volume (CF)
Infiltration Trench      CF
Rain Garden              202 CF
Dry Well                 CF
TOTAL (enter in Table 2) 202 CF
 
Use Small Project Stormwater Management Worksheet
Step 7:   Post-Installation Operation and Maintenance Requirements
It is the property owner’s responsibility to properly maintain any stormwater
facilities and BMPs in accordance with the minimum maintenance requirements
listed in this Appendix. The property owner shall submit a signed agreement,
and declaration of easement to the Borough of Oklahoma for installation, and
maintenance of any proposed stormwater management facilities and BMPs. It is
also the property owner’s responsibility to inform any future owners of the
function, operation and maintenance needed for any BMPs on the properly prior
to the purchase of the property.
Refer to Appendix B
SMALL PROJECT STORMWATER MANAGEMENT WORKSHEET
For Oklahoma Borough
Project Name: ________________________________________________________ Date:
_______________________.
Location:
________________________________________________________________________________________.
TABLE 1: Determination of Control Volume Requirements:
 
New Impervious Area in SF 1” storm Multiplier Required Control Volume 1” in
Surface                   (0.083)               CF
              SF                              CF
              SF                              CF
              SF                              CF
              SF                              CF
              SF                              CF
              SF                              CF
 
Total Required Control Volume (enter in Table 2):  CF
TABLE 2: Determination of Volume Controlled:
 
Required Control Volume (Table 1)                CF
Non-structural BMP Credit (Table 6)              CF
Adjusted Required Control Volume (after credits) CF
(Table 1 – Table 6)
Structural BMP Control Volume (Table 10)         CF
TOTAL Volume Controlled                          CF
(Table 6 + Table 10)
 
NOTE: Total Volume Controlled shall be greater than or equal to Required
Control Volume.
Determining Non-Structural BMP Credit:
TABLE 3: New Tree(s)
 
New Trees Volume Control Multiplier Tree Quantity Volume Controlled (CF)
Deciduous 6 CF                                   CF
Evergreen 10 CF                                  CF
                                   
 
Total Volume Control Credit (new trees) enter in Table 6:  CF
TABLE 4: Existing Tree Canopy
 
Existing Tree Canopy  Distance of           Volume Control Volume Controlled
(SF)                  Impervious to Canopy  Multiplier     (CF)
                      (FT)
SF                    0 FT to 20 FT         0.0833         CF
SF                    20 FT to 100 FT       0.0416         CF
                                            
 
Total Volume Control Credit (ex. trees) enter in Table 6:  CF
TABLE 5: Minimize Soil Compaction
 
Type of stabilization Area of minimal Volume Control Volume Controlled (CF)
                      compaction (SF) Multiplier
Meadow                SF              0.0275         CF
Lawn                  SF              0.0208         CF
                                      
 
Total Volume Control Credit (min. compaction) enter in Table 6:  CF
TABLE 6: Non-Structural BMP Credit Summary:
 
Nonstructural BMP         Storage Volume Credit (CF)
New Tree                  CF
Existing Tree Canopy      CF
Minimized Soil Compaction CF
TOTAL (enter in Table 2)  CF
 
Sizing of Structural BMPs:
TABLE 7: Infiltration Trench (stone filled)
 
Required    Storage Trench      Trench     Trench Width Trench      Volume
Control     Volume  Volume (CF) Depth (FT) (FT)         Length (FT) Controlled
Volume (CF) Divider
CF          0.4     CF          FT         FT           FT          CF
             
 
Total Volume Control Credit (Inf. trench) enter in Table 10:  CF
TABLE 8: Rain Garden (surface & soil storage volume should be greater than or
equal to required control vol.)
 
         Ponding Rain                  Soil Mix              Soil
Required Depth   Garden  Rain   Rain   Depth (1   Soil       Storage Volume
Control  (0.5 FT Surface Garden Garden FT to 3    Storage    Volume  Controlled
Volume   to 1.0  Area    Width  Length FT)        Volume     (<=     (soil)
(CF)     FT)     (SF)    (FT)   (FT)   Multiplier Multiplier RCV)
         Divider
CF       FT      SF      FT     FT     FT         0.3        CF      CF
                                                   
 
Total Volume Control Credit (rain garden) enter in Table 10:   CF
TABLE 9: Dry Well (stone filled)
 
Required    Storage Dry Well    Dry Well   Dry Well   Dry Well    Volume
Control     Volume  Volume (CF) Depth (FT) Width (FT) Length (FT) Controlled
Volume (CF) Divider                                               (CF)
CF          0.4     CF          FT         FT         FT          CF
             
 
Total Volume Control Credit (dry well) enter in Table 10:  CF
TABLE 10: Structural BMP Volume Control Summary:
 
Structural BMP           Volume Controlled (CF)
Infiltration Trench      CF
Rain Garden              CF
Dry Well                 CF
TOTAL (enter in Table 2) CF
 
(Ord. 2020-04, passed 1-11-2021; Ord. 2021-01, passed 8-9-2021)
APPENDIX D: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN CHECKLIST
 
Oklahoma Borough
Stormwater Management Plan Checklist
See Oklahoma Borough Stormwater Ordinance for complete requirements
Project Name:__________________________________________________________ Date:
_____________________
Location:__________________________________________________ Performance
District:____________________.
Type of Plan:_____Residential, _____Commercial, _____Institutional,
_____Industrial, _____Recreational, _____Other
Owner:________________________________ Contact Information:
________________________________________.
Plan Preparer:__________________________ Contact Information:
_______________________________________.
Submission Requirements
   o   Checklist
   o   Application
   o   Fees and
   o   Location map (USGS)
   o   [x] sets completed plans, narrative
   o   E&S plan, as submitted for approval
   o   Operation and maintenance agreement
   o   Municipal notification(s)
   o   Financial guarantees, maintenance fund
General Requirements
Narrative:
   o   Project description, including Watershed Performance District, existing
and proposed features and improvements, soils and limitations, landform, land
cover, drainage areas, utilities, proposed SWM facilities and BMPs, easements
and other information required by the [Municipality] stormwater ordinance
   o   Stormwater calculations
   o   Project schedule
   o   Construction sequence, including phases if applicable
   o   Justification for SWM facilities and/or BMPs
   o   Operation and Maintenance requirements and responsible party(s)
Plan:
   o   Location map (USGS)
   o   Watershed Performance District
   o   Existing natural features
   o   Soils; and limitations
   o   Landform; existing and proposed contours at 2’ intervals, or 5’
intervals for slopes > 15%
   o   Land cover; existing and proposed improvements
   o   Drainage areas; existing and proposed
   o   Utilities; existing and proposed
   o   SWM facilities and BMPs; existing and proposed
   o   Easements, including offsite easements for drainage
   o   Stormwater construction details and sections (as applicable)
   o   Stormwater construction notes and sequence
   o   Operation and Maintenance requirements and responsible party(s)
(Ord. 2020-04, passed 1-11-2021; Ord. 2021-01, passed 8-9-2021)
APPENDIX E: FEES, FINANCIAL GUARANTEES
 
Oklahoma Borough
FEES, FINANCIAL GUARANTEES
(See Regulated Development Table §302)
Exemptions
(Sites with 0 Sq. Ft. of new impervious area and less than 1 Acre of disturbed
area)
1.   Application Fee: $25
2.   Review and Approval Fee: $100(1)
3.   Site Inspection Fee: $300 per inspection, if required(1)
No-Harm Evaluations
(Sites with less than 3,000 Sq. Ft. of new impervious area and less than 5,000
Sq. Ft. of disturbed area)
1.   Application Fee: $100
2.   Review and Approval Fee: $400(1)
3.   Site Inspection Fee: $300 per inspection, if required(1)
Waiver / Modification / Demonstrated Equivalency (Subject to Municipal
approval)
(Sites with less than 1 acre of new impervious area and less than 1 acre of
disturbed area)
1.   Application Fee: $100
2.   Review and Approval Fee: $600(1)
3.   Site Inspection Fee: $300 per inspection, if required(1)
Small Project Site Plan
(3,000 Sq. Ft. to 5,000 Sq. Ft. of new impervious area or less than 20,000 Sq.
Ft. of disturbed area)
1.   Application Fee: $ 100
2.   Review and Approval Fee: $600(1)
3.   Site and Construction Inspection Fee: $600(1)
4.   Post-Construction Inspection Deposit: $1,200 ($300/inspection for 4
inspections)(3)
5.   Post-Construction Maintenance Deposit: To be determined according to §
154.088(2)
Stormwater Management Site Plan
(More than 10,000 Sq. Ft. of new impervious area and more than 20,000 Sq. Ft.
of disturbed area)
1.   Application Fee: $100
2.   Review and Approval Fee: $600(1)
3.   Site and Construction Inspection Fee: $1,000(1)
4.   Post-Construction Inspections Deposit: $1,600 ($400/inspection for 4
inspections)(3)
5.   Post-Construction Maintenance Deposit: To be determined according to §
154.088(2)
Notes:
(1)   Per §
154.105, The Borough may invoice applicants for all associated costs over and
above the amount of fees listed above.
(2)   See §
154.088 regarding required deposits to the Borough Stormwater Facility and BMP
Operation and Maintenance Fund.
(3)   Upon completion of Construction in year 1 and every 3 years (years 4, 7
and 10) for a period of 10 years.
(Ord. 2020-04, passed 1-11-2021; Ord. 2021-01, passed 8-9-2021)
CHAPTER 155: SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT
Section
General Provisions
   
155.001   Short title
   
155.002   Purpose
   
155.003   Objectives; concepted goals
   
155.004   Legislative authority
   
155.005   Application
   
155.006   Definitions
Plan Submission Procedures
   
155.020   General procedures for submission of all plans
   
155.021   Fees and expenses
   
155.022   Official plan application
   
155.023   Recording of final plan
   
155.024   Subdivision and land developments exempted from standard review
procedures
Design Standards
   
155.035   Application
   
155.036   Conformance with other municipal entities, county, state and federal
agencies
   
155.037   Land, plan and zoning requirements
   
155.038   Environmental protection standards
   
155.039   Public dedication of land suitable for use, construction of
recreational facilities or payment of fees in lieu thereof
   
155.040   Storm drainage
   
155.041   Easements
   
155.042   Water supply and sewage facilities
   
155.043   Other utilities
   
155.044   Classification and ownership of streets
   
155.045   Design standards for streets
   
155.046   Street system layout
   
155.047   Street intersections
   
155.048   Uses fronting on major streets
   
155.049   Residential standards
   
155.050   Commercial and industrial subdivision design standards
Mobile Home Parks and Mobile Homes
   
155.065   Mobile home park design standards
   
155.066   Mobile home (not in park) design standards
Required Improvements
   
155.080   Application
   
155.081   Summary of required improvements
   
155.082   Required improvements details
Plan Requirements
   
155.095   Sketch plans
   
155.096   Preliminary plans
   
155.097   Final plans
Installation of Required Improvements
   
155.110   Improvements to be provided by subdivider
   
155.111   Method of providing improvements
   
155.112   Financial security for maintenance
   
155.113   Development agreement
   
155.114   Release from financial security for improvements
   
155.115   Release from financial security for maintenance
Administration and Enforcement
   
155.130   Administrative action
   
155.131   Modifications, variances, appeals and amendments
   
155.132   Conflict and legal responsibility
   
155.133   Enforcement
 
   
155.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 155.001 SHORT TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance of Oklahoma Borough.”
(Prior Code, § 22-105) (Ord. 12-8-2014, passed 12-8-2014)
§ 155.002 PURPOSE.
   This chapter has been adopted for the purpose of regulating subdivision and
land development within the borough in order to create conditions favorable to
the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the citizens of the borough;
and to provide regulations that will ensure the harmonious development or
redevelopment of the borough.
(Prior Code, § 22-104) (Ord. 12-8-2014, passed 12-8-2014)
§ 155.003 OBJECTIVES; CONCEPTED GOALS.
   (A)   This chapter regulates the subdivision and development of land within
the borough and requires that all proposed plans for the subdivision and land
development located within the borough shall be submitted to the Borough
Council for review and approval.
   (B)   Said chapter includes provisions for the following:
      (1)   Provisions for the submittal and processing of subdivision and land
development plans;
      (2)   Specifications for such plans;
      (3)   Provisions governing the layout of such plans relative to streets,
easements, rights-of-way and reservations for public grounds;
      (4)   Provisions for the subdivision and use of lands subject to
environmental or other hazards;
      (5)   Provisions establishing standards for the installation and
improvement of facilities;
      (6)   Provisions for land development not intended for immediate use; and
      (7)   Provisions for encouraging modern site planning and development.
(Prior Code, § 22-101) (Ord. 12-8-2014, passed 12-8-2014)
§ 155.004 LEGISLATIVE AUTHORITY.
   This chapter is enacted pursuant to the authority conferred by the
Municipalities Planning Code, Art. V, § 501 of the Act of July 31, 1968, P.L.
805, No. 247, amended by § 4 of the Act of June 1, 1972, P.L. 333, No. 93;
reenacted and amended by § 30 of the Act of Dec. 21, 1988, P.L. 1329, No. 170,
and amended by § 8 of the Act of June 23, 2000, P.L. 495, No. 68, 53 P.S. §§
10501 et seq.
(Prior Code, § 22-102) (Ord. 12-8-2014, passed 12-8-2014)
§ 155.005 APPLICATION.
   (A)   Jurisdiction. This chapter shall apply to all subdivisions and land
developments located within the borough or entire parcels where only part of
the parcel is within the borough. Subdivision and land development is defined
and applied to: see §
155.006 of this chapter for the definition of “land development” and
“subdivision.”
   (B)   Responsibility of the developer or person requesting review. The
developer or person requesting a subdivision or land improvement approval shall
submit a copy of a plat/survey drawing that has been certified as being true
and correct to the borough and the County Planning Office for its approval
within 30 days from the date the plat/survey has been presented to the borough.
Failure to provide the county planning recommendations to the borough shall
result in the deemed/implicit extension of time for every day over 30 days for
which the county has not provided a written review of the said submitted plans
(see § 154.020(B) of this chapter).
   (C)   Recording of approved plan.
      (1)   Within 90 days of the approval of the final plan for any
subdivision and land development, the subdivider shall record a copy of said
final plan in the Office of the Recorder of Deeds of the county, as required in
§
155.023 of this chapter. The County Recorder of Deeds shall not accept any such
plan for recording unless it is the final record plan, as defined herein, which
shall contain the official original endorsements/approval of the borough and
Council.
      (2)   Failure to record the final plan as required herein shall render
all approvals null and void.
   (D)   Status of recorded plans.
      (1)   Any subdivision or land development plan recorded prior to the
effective date of this chapter shall be subject to the provisions of this
chapter in the event that any change or resubdivision is made or legally
required to be made in the said plan.
      (2)   When a final plan has been approved and recorded subsequent to the
effective date of this chapter, and in conformance with the terms of this
chapter, then no subsequent change or amendment in the zoning, subdivision or
other governing ordinance or plan shall be applied to affect adversely the
right of the applicant to commence and to complete any aspect of the approved
development in accordance with the terms of such approval within five years
from such approval.
      (3)   Where final approval is preceded by preliminary approval, the five-
year period shall be counted from the date of the preliminary approval. In the
case of any doubts as to the terms of a preliminary approval, the terms shall
be constructed in light of the provisions of the governing ordinances or plans
as they stood at the time when the application of such approval was duly filed.
(Prior Code, § 22-103) (Ord. 12-8-2014, passed 12-8-2014)
§ 155.006 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter, words used in the present tense
include the future tense; the term SHALL is always mandatory; other terms or
words used herein shall be interpreted or defined as follows.
(Prior Code, § 22-801)
   (B)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      ACCESS. The means by which vehicles or pedestrians obtain entrance or
entry into a parcel, lot or building or into a subdivision or land development.
         (a)   EASEMENT OF ACCESS. An easement granted for use by the public
for the purpose of providing vehicular and/or pedestrian access to a parcel,
lot, building, subdivision or land development.
         (b)   RIGHT OF ACCESS. The right of the public to have vehicular and/
or pedestrian access over a specifically designated area, easement or property.
      ALLEY. A permanent serviceway providing a secondary means of access to
abutting lands.
      BLOCK. Property bounded on one side by a street and on the other three
sides by a street, railroad right-of-way, waterway, unsubdivied area or other
definite barrier.
      BONA FIDE BID. A bid secured by:
         (a)   The subdivider, from a contractor or contractors, for the
purpose of establishing the estimated cost to complete the required improvement
or maintenance which is the responsibility of the subdivider to provide under
the terms of this chapter. Said BONA FIDE BID shall include all costs and
activities, as determined by the borough, which will guarantee the completion
of all of the required improvements or maintenance, without any obligations to
be assumed by the borough in the case of a default by the subdivider or the
contractor. Said guaranties shall be included in the contract between the
subdivider and the contractor, which shall include the following provisions and
stipulations:
            1.   The contract shall include a clause which states that the
contract may be assigned to the borough in the event of a default on the part
of the subdivider. This clause should indicate that the borough will not incur
any obligations or liabilities of the contractor, other than to tender payment
for work satisfactorily completed in accordance with the specifications of this
chapter;
            2.   The contract should contain a not-to-exceed total contract
price;
            3.   An estimated rock excavation quantity should be included,
where applicable;
            4.   The bid price must also include the cost and provision of a
performance bond;
            5.   The contract should include a waiver of right to file
mechanics lien, which shall be duly filed with the appropriate courts;
            6.   The contractor must provide and maintain an acceptable level
of comprehensive liability insurance; and
            7.   All material and work submitted as part of the bona fide bid
must comply with the appropriate borough specifications.
         (b)   May be estimates provided by the Borough Council on the most
recent road or sewer construction projects wherein, within the last 12 months,
they have estimates for road work and improvements; or
         (c)   Estimates obtained from the Borough Engineer estimating costs
within 150% of actual fair market costs of said construction.
      BOROUGH COUNCIL. The Borough Council of the Borough of Oklahoma,
Pennsylvania.
      BOROUGH ENGINEER. The engineer designated by the borough to perform all
engineering duties required of a registered engineer by the provisions of this
chapter.
      BOROUGH SUBDIVISION OFFICER. The borough official who has been authorized
to implement the terms of this chapter.
      BUILDING SETBACK LINE. The minimum distance from the front lot line to
any building or structure to be erected on the lot.
      CARTWAY. Includes the portion of the entire right-of-way of a street
which contains an improved travelway for vehicles, including space for
shoulders and/or parking lanes.
      COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. The complete plan, or any part of its plan, for the
borough which contains goals and objectives for the future of the borough.
      COUNTY. Westmoreland County, Pennsylvania.
      COUNTY PLANNING COMMISSION. The Westmoreland County Planning Commission.
      CUL-DE-SAC. A local street having one end open to traffic and being
permanently terminated by a vehicular turnaround.
      DEVELOPER. Any landowner, or agent of such landowner or tenant with the
permission of such owner, who makes or causes to be made a subdivision of land
or a land development. The term DEVELOPER is intended to include the term
SUBDIVIDER as defined herein.
      DWELLING/EQUIVALENT DWELLING UNIT.
         (a)   DWELLING. Any building, vehicle or portion thereof designed or
used exclusively as the residence or sleeping place of one or more persons.
         (b)   EQUIVALENT DWELLING UNIT. Any dwelling unit as defined by the
Borough Sanitary Sewer Ordinance (Chapter 51 of this code).
      EASEMENT. A grant by the property owner of the use of a strip of land by
the public, a corporation or persons for specified purposes.
      FINANCIAL SECURITY. A deposit made out to the benefit of the borough in
an amount sufficient to guarantee and cover the entire costs of any required
improvement or maintenance which is the responsibility of the subdivider to
provide under the terms of this chapter by which will allow the borough to
complete said improvements or maintenance in their entirety, without any
additional cost to the borough, in the event of a default, negligence, cost
overrun or inflationary increase in price, or failure of any type of the
subdivider to provide or complete said required improvements or maintenance.
Said FINANCIAL SECURITY shall be approved by the borough and may include
irrevocable letters of credit and restrictive or escrow accounts in a federal
or commonwealth chartered lending institution, and such security shall be
posted with a bonding company or with a federal or commonwealth chartered
lending institution authorized to conduct business.
      FRONTAGE. The portion of a parcel or lot which abuts a street.
         (a)   DOUBLE FRONTAGE. A lot which has frontage on and access from two
streets which are approximately parallel to each other.
         (b)   REVERSE FRONTAGE LOT. A double frontage lot which extends
between and which has frontage on a major traffic street and a local or
collector street which has access only from the local or collector street and
which has its access prohibited from the major traffic street.
      LAND DEVELOPMENT.
         (a)   Includes the improvement of one lot, or two or more contiguous
lots, tracts or parcels of land, for any purpose, including, but not limited
to:
            1.   The development of a second or more building(s), whether for
inhabitation or the storage of business inventory, equipment or other
appurtenances, for the storage of motor vehicles or anything other than
nonhazardous/flammable residential materials;
            2.   Any improvements where construction upon or under covers more
than 20% of any lot area of any given lot or tract or parcel of ground;
            3.   Division or allocation of land or open spaces, streets, common
areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building groups between two or more existing
buildings or to-be-created parcels of land; and
            4.   The construction of a roof without side enclosures over an
existing or to-be-constructed patio area.
         (b)   The mere improvement of an existing driveway or parking area of
no greater enlargement than 12 square feet of surface area shall not be
considered LAND DEVELOPMENT by this chapter;
         (c)   Paving covering more than 20% of the land surface area is a land
development; and
         (d)   LAND DEVELOPMENT shall not include any improvements that only
result in a singular improvement of the following:
            1.   Construction of a fence, hedge, vegetation or patio without
roof or sides;
            2.   Any fence not higher than four and one-half feet and totally
within one’s boundaries;
            3.   The temporary placement of any sign, not being affixed to the
land, nor subject to another part of this chapter or the Zoning Ordinance
(Chapter 156 of this code); and
            4.   Improvement or refinishing or concreting of presently existing
sidewalks and wherein any new sidewalks shall not be greater than four feet in
width.
      LOT. A portion of a subdivision or other parcel of land intended as a
unit for transfer of ownership use or for development.
      LOW-DENSITY RESIDENTIAL. Includes developments having a net project
density of between one and five dwelling units per acre.
      MEDIUM-DENSITY RESIDENTIAL. Includes residential developments having a
net project density of more than five dwelling units per acre. This generally
defines the more urbanized or built-up area of the borough requiring higher
development standards and improvements than those which are located in the low-
density residential area.
      MOBILE HOME. A vehicle or movable dwelling structure containing not more
than one dwelling unit, so designed that it can be transported on a highway and
used for permanent living or sleeping quarters and standing on wheels or on
rigid supports or on a foundation, except for a travel trailer, as defined
herein, but excluding prefabricated homes or sections thereof which, when
assembled or combined, are more than 19 feet in width.
      MOBILE HOME PARK. Any lot, parcel or tract of land upon which three or
more mobile homes are located for occupancy and used by persons of different
families other than members of one household.
      MUNICIPALITY. The Borough of Oklahoma, Pennsylvania, in which the
proposed subdivision or land development is located.
      NET PROJECT DENSITY. The NET PROJECT DENSITY of a proposed residential
subdivision or land development measured in residential units per acre shall be
equal to the total number or residential dwelling units divided by the total
net residential land in acres. The TOTAL NET RESIDENTIAL LAND is equal to the
total project area minus the land in the project which is not used for
residential purposes or related residential yard area (such as street rights-
of-way, open space and other nonresidential uses).
      OFFICIAL MAP. Any map adopted by ordinance of the borough showing exact
locations of existing and proposed lines for public streets, watercourses and
public grounds, including widenings, narrowings, extensions, diminutions,
opening or closing of the same for the entire borough.
      PLAN. A map or chart, also known as a PLAT, indicating the subdivision or
resubdivision of land which, in its various stages of preparation, can include
the following:
         (a)   FINAL PLAN. A complete and exact plan, prepared for official
recording as required by this chapter, to define property rights and proposed
streets and other improvements as required by this chapter.
         (b)   PRELIMINARY PLAN. A tentative plan, in lesser detail than a
final plan, showing proposed streets and lot layout and such other information
as required by this chapter.
         (c)   RECORD PLAN. The copy of the final plan which contains the
original endorsements to approval as of the Borough Council and which is
intended to be recorded with the County Recorder of Deeds, as required by this
chapter.
         (d)   SKETCH PLAN. An informal plan indicating salient existing
features of a tract and its surroundings and the general layout of the proposed
subdivision to be used as a basis for consideration by the borough.
      PLANNING COMMISSION/BOROUGH COUNCIL COMMITTEE. The Planning Commission of
the Borough of Oklahoma or any other government body designated by the Borough
Council to perform all administrative, review, approval, supervisory and other
duties required by this chapter.
      PUBLIC NOTICE. Such notice shall state the time and place of the hearing
and the particular nature of the matter to be considered at the hearing. First
publication shall not be more than 30 days and the second publication shall not
be less than seven days from the date of the hearing.
      RECREATIONAL SUBDIVISION. Very low-density subdivisions designed
primarily for seasonal use, including mountain areas and areas for hunting,
camping and similar uses which will have an intensity of land use equivalent to
or less than one housing unit per net acre as determined by the Borough
Council.
      RIGHT-OF-WAY. Land reserved for use as a street, alley, interior walk or
for other public purposes.
      SETBACK OR BUILDING LINE. The line within a property defining the
required minimum distance between any enclosed structure and the adjacent
right-of-way.
      SIGHT DISTANCE. The maximum extent of unobstructed vision (in a
horizontal or vertical plane) along a street from a vehicle located at any
given point on the street.
      STREET. A strip of land designed for use by the public, including the
entire right-of-way intended for the use as a means of vehicular and pedestrian
circulation.
         (a)   PRIVATE STREETS. Streets not offered for dedication, or not
accepted by the borough, which remain in the private ownership of a group of
designated users or owners and which are maintained by said private owners.
         (b)   PUBLIC STREETS. Streets offered for dedication to the borough
and accepted by the borough to ensure permanent public ownership and
maintenance by the borough.
         (c)   Classes of streets according to use, function and width shall be
designated in the Comprehensive Plan or, if not so designated, shall conform
with the following:
            1.   COLLECTOR STREETS. Streets which intercept local streets,
provide access to abutting properties and serve individual neighborhoods or
areas, and their function is to collect and distribute traffic to the local
streets and to feed traffic into the major streets. They are anticipated to
serve moderate traffic volumes and shall have design speed of 36 mph to 45 mph;
            2.   LOCAL STREETS or MINOR STREETS. Streets used primarily to
provide access to abutting property and to feed into the collector streets.
They are anticipated to serve relatively low traffic volumes and shall have a
design speed of 35 mph;
            3.   MAJOR STREETS. Streets which serve internal borough movements
and provide connections between traffic generators serving or anticipated to
serve moderately heavy traffic volumes at design speed of 55 mph or more;
            4.   MARGINAL ACCESS STREETS. Local streets, parallel and adjacent
to major traffic streets, providing access to abutting properties and control
of intersections with major traffic streets; and
            5.   NONRESIDENTIAL STREETS. Streets designed to serve and give
access to commercial, industrial, public and other nonresidential uses.
      SUBDIVIDER. The owner or authorized agent of the owner, including, but
not limited to, an individual, partnership or corporation that undertakes a
subdivision or land development or any of the activities covered by this
chapter, particularly the preparation of a subdivision plan showing the layout
of the land and the public improvements involved therein. The term SUBDIVIDER
is intended to include the term DEVELOPER even though the personnel involved in
successive stages of the project may vary.
      SUBDIVISION. The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel of land
by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land,
including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether immediate or
future, of lease, transfer of ownership or building or lot development;
provided, however, that the division of land for agricultural purposes into
parcels of more than ten acres, not involving any new street or easement of
access, shall be exempted.
      SUBDIVISION OFFICER. The specific person designated by the Borough
Council to perform all of the administrative duties required by this chapter.
      TRAVEL TRAILER. A vehicle less than 36 feet in length standing on wheels
and containing not more than one dwelling unit which may be used for temporary
living or sleeping purposes.
      ULTIMATE RIGHT-OF-WAY. The maximum width to which an existing or proposed
right-of-way may be widened in accordance with the Comprehensive Plan, or plans
of the borough or the Commonwealth Department of Transportation or other
appropriate official agency.
      VERY-LOW-DENSITY RESIDENTIAL. Includes developments having a net project
density of less than one dwelling unit per acre.
(Prior Code, § 22-802)
(Ord. 12-8-2014, passed 12-8-2014)
PLAN SUBMISSION PROCEDURES
§ 155.020 GENERAL PROCEDURES FOR SUBMISSION OF ALL PLANS.
   (A)   Required plans. Preliminary and final plans and required fees and
supporting data for all proposed subdivisions and land developments of land
lying with the borough shall be submitted by the subdivider to the Borough
Secretary. In addition, the subdivider may prepare a sketch plan for informal
discussion with the Borough Council prior to submitting the official
preliminary plan for review.
   (B)   Borough and other agency reviews. It is the responsibility of the
developer and/or persons requesting acceptance of the plat/survey to ensure
that all other governmental agencies other than the borough divisions or
departments have received the plats/subdivisions if the same are required.
These agencies shall have 30 days to review and advise the borough in writing
of their findings and/or recommendations.
   (C)   Action and notification. The Borough Council shall consider all plans
submitted to determine compliance with this chapter and shall approve,
disapprove or approve with conditions all submitted plans. The decision of the
Council shall be made in writing and shall be communicated to the subdivider
and mailed to him or her at his or her last known address found on the
subdivision application not later than 15 days following the decision.
   (D)   Public hearing. Before acting on any preliminary or final plan
requiring a public hearing as per the terms of this chapter, the borough shall
hold a public hearing after providing public notice of the same.
   (E)   Sketch plan. Sketches, plot plans or surveys are required by this
chapter. Each must provide footage and dimensions.
   (F)   Preliminary plan. Any sketch plans, plats or surveys submitted shall
be considered the official plan for consideration. Each plan shall be reviewed
to determine compliance with the subdivision requirements set forth by the
chapter.
   (G)   Final plan. Any plan, including a preliminary plan, that has not been
modified or amended since its initial presentation for approval or plans that
have passed the preliminary stages of consideration are final plans. A final
plan shall be submitted by the Subdivision Officer of the borough to be
reviewed by the Borough Council. The Borough Council will then make the final
decision to approve, approve with conditions or disapprove the plan at this
stage.
   (H)   Recording of final plan. After the effective date of final plan
approval, the subdivider shall record such plan in the form of a record plan
within a period of 90 days in the County Office of the Recorder of Deeds.
(Prior Code, § 22-201) (Ord. 12-8-2014, passed 12-8-2014)
§ 155.021 FEES AND EXPENSES.
   (A)   (1)   The subdivider is responsible to pay any reviewing fees incurred
by the borough. These include reasonable and necessary charges by the borough’s
professional consultants or Borough Engineer for a review and report to the
borough. Such review fees shall be established by a schedule created by
ordinance or borough resolution.
      (2)   The review fees shall be reasonable in accordance with the ordinary
and customary charges by the Borough Engineer or consultant for similar
services charged within the community. These review services include, but are
not limited to, planning consultants, engineers, architects, specialists,
inspection services and/or legal services incurred by the borough.
   (B)   The borough shall enact or shall by resolution adopt permit fee
charges for types of or classifications of land development of subdivision, as
the case may be.
(Prior Code, § 22-202) (Ord. 12-8-2014, passed 12-8-2014)
§ 155.022 OFFICIAL PLAN APPLICATION.
   (A)   Preliminary plan.
      (1)   Preliminary plans and supporting data shall comply with the
provisions of this chapter.
      (2)   Four copies of the preliminary plan shall be submitted by the
subdivider to the Subdivision Officer. Any additional copies may be requested
if required for submission or reference to other appropriate agencies.
      (3)   The Subdivision Officer shall provide copies of the preliminary
plan to:
         (a)   The Borough Recreation Committee or Commission: one copy;
         (b)   The Borough Secretary on behalf of the borough: one copy;
         (c)   The Borough Solicitor: one copy;
         (d)   Other appropriate agencies as determined by the Borough
Secretary/Secretary; and
         (e)   The County Planning Commission Office, County Soil Conservation
District, the Commonwealth Department of Transportation, the Commonwealth
Department of Environmental Protection and also the Beaver Run Watershed
District Agency.
      (4)   The Borough Council shall then take official action on the
preliminary plan by way of a public hearing. The public hearing requirement is
only waived providing §
155.024 of this chapter is complied with.
      (5)   Approval of the preliminary plan subject to the conditions,
revisions and modifications as stipulated by the Borough Council shall
constitute conditional approval of the said division.
         (a)   If the subdivider fails to comply with the requirements set
forth by the Borough Council after the public hearing, and the subdivider fails
to file a final plan with said changes, the subdivider’s proposal shall be
deemed not approved and not considered a final plan.
         (b)   Modification of the subdivider’s plans with all the requirements
set forth by the Borough Council shall be designated as final plans.
      (6)   The Borough Council shall then take official action on the
preliminary plan. Before acting on any preliminary subdivision application, the
Borough Council may hold a hearing on said application after public notice. Its
action on the application shall be written and forwarded to the subdivider at
his or her last known address not later than 15 days following such action. In
case of a rejection or disapproval of the plan, the Borough Council shall
specify the defects of the land and the requirements of this chapter which have
not been complied with.
      (7)   Approval of the preliminary plan, subject to conditions, revisions
and modifications as stipulated by the Borough Council, shall constitute
conditional approval of the subdivision as to the character and intensity of
the development, the general layout and appropriate dimensions of streets, lots
and other proposed features. Said approval shall entitle the subdivider to
submit plans for final review as set forth below.
   (B)   Final plan.
      (1)   Failure to submit the final plan with supporting data within 90
days (unless an extension of time was granted by the Borough Council and is
made in writing by the subdivider) shall result in the deemed extension of
time. Otherwise, all other plans submitted after the 90-day period shall be
considered a new application as a preliminary plan for reconsideration.
      (2)   The final plan shall conform in all respects with the preliminary
plan as previously reviewed by the Borough Council, shall incorporate all
modifications and revisions specified by the Borough Council and shall
incorporate all modifications and revisions by the Borough Council in its
conditional approval of the preliminary plan. The Borough Council may accept a
final plan which has been modified to reflect changing conditions since the
time of preliminary plan review. Other modifications may be sufficient cause
for considering the plan to be a revised preliminary plan.
      (3)   The Borough Council may permit submission of the final plan in
sections or stages, providing the Borough Council specifically permits said
procedure in writing, not to exceed a period of one year after the approval of
the preliminary plan as provided in division (A) above. However, the Borough
Council may require the final plans being submitted in sections or stages to be
resubmitted, providing there has been a substantial change of circumstances
from the date of the preliminarily approved plans.
      (4)   All final plans and supporting data provided to the Borough Council
that appear to be insufficient on its face, and where the subdivision
applications have not been completed, the final plans and/or preliminary plans
under the appropriate circumstances shall be rejected in writing for cause
stated.
      (5)   Six copies of the final plan with supporting data shall be
submitted to the Borough Secretary, who shall transmit copies to:
         (a)   Borough Planning Agency: one copy;
         (b)   County Planning Commission: one copy;
         (c)   Borough Engineer: one copy;
         (d)   Borough Solicitor: one copy;
         (e)   Utility companies: one copy; and
         (f)   Additional copies of the plan shall be submitted if required by
the borough to properly review the plan.
      (6)   When the Borough Council has approved the final plan and when all
other approvals and agreements required herein have been satisfied, the
President of the Borough Council shall endorse three copies of the final plan
to that effect. One copy of the endorsed final plan shall be kept in the
borough files and the other two returned to the subdivider. Additional copies
may be endorsed to meet the needs of the subdivider and other agencies.
(Prior Code, § 22-203) (Ord. 12-8-2014, passed 12-8-2014)
§ 155.023 RECORDING OF FINAL PLAN.
   (A)   The subdivider shall record the final plan in the Office of the County
Recorder of Deeds within 90 days after the date of approval by the Borough
Council. The copy of the final plan filed for recording shall be known as the
“record plan.” It shall be a clear and legible document in a form and size as
required by the County Recorder of Deeds, bearing all required endorsements.
Failure to record the final plan as required herein shall render all approvals
null and void.
   (B)   The Borough Council may extend said 90-day limit if requested in
writing and if compliance with any condition for approval as set forth by the
Planning Commission shall require a greater time limit for recording.
(Prior Code, § 22-204) (Ord. 12-8-2014, passed 12-8-2014)
§ 155.024 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENTS EXEMPTED FROM STANDARD REVIEW
PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Certain land developments are excluded from enforcement under this
chapter. They are as follows: the addition or conversion of buildings or rides
within the confines of an enterprise which would be considered an amusement
park.
   (B)   For this section, an AMUSEMENT PARK is defined as a tract or area used
principally as a location for permanent amusement structures or rides.
   (C)   This section shall not apply to newly acquired acreage by an existing
amusement park until the initial plans for the expanded area have been approved
by the proper authorities.
(Prior Code, § 22-205) (Ord. 12-8-2014, passed 12-8-2014)
DESIGN STANDARDS
§ 155.035 APPLICATION.
   This chapter sets forth certain minimum design standards which shall apply
to all subdivisions and land developments and which shall govern the layout and
location of physical features included in any plan.
(Prior Code, § 22-301) (Ord. 12-8-2014, passed 12-8-2014)
§ 155.036 CONFORMANCE WITH OTHER MUNICIPAL ENTITIES, COUNTY, STATE AND FEDERAL
AGENCIES.
   (A)   All subdivision and land developments should comply with all other
municipal agencies, county, state or federal, pertaining to the applicable laws
and regulations. It is the responsibility of the subdividers to ensure that all
other regulations, statuses, codes or ordinances are complied with.
   (B)   Where other laws and regulations are more restrictive than those
contained herein, such other regulations shall be observed unless specifically
stated otherwise herein.
(Prior Code, § 22-302) (Ord. 12-8-2014, passed 12-8-2014)
§ 155.037 LAND, PLAN AND ZONING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Land shall be suited to the purpose for which it is to be subdivided.
Land which is unsafe or unsuited for development due to flooding, noise,
subsidence, unstable soils, quarries, underground fires, unconsolidated fill,
steep slopes or other hazardous conditions shall not be subdivided unless
proper safeguards are provided by the subdivider and approved by the Borough
Council;
   (B)   Consideration shall be given in the design of all land developments
and subdivisions to the future needs of the borough and its objectives
established in any Borough Comprehensive Plan for land use, streets and
thoroughfares, public utilities and facilities and to other governmental plans
affecting the subdivision and land development;
   (C)   All subdivision and land development plans shall conform with any
officially adopted Zoning Ordinance or official map (See
Chapter 156 of this code) covering the area;
   (D)   In reviewing subdivision and land development plans, the Borough
Council will consider the adequacy of existing or proposed community facilities
and borough infrastructure to serve the additional dwellings or uses proposed
by the subdivision;
   (E)   Areas may be required to be provided or reserved for such community
facilities, and these should be adequate to provide for building sites,
landscaping and off-street parking as appropriate to the use proposed;
   (F)   All plan proposals shall be coordinated with existing and proposed
development on adjoining or adjacent land;
   (G)   Unless specifically set forth herein, design standards for streets and
driveways shall be as set forth in the latest editions of the PennDOT
publication entitled Guidelines for Design of Local Roads and Streets,
Publication 70 and as set forth in the borough’s street ordinances, as amended
(see
Chapter 152 of this code);
   (H)   Solar orientation and energy conservation should be encouraged. All
developers are encouraged to use recognized solar design principles and
features. Such solar principles include the following:
      (1)   Layout of streets to provide a maximum number of sites with a
southern orientation to maximize solar heat gain;
      (2)   Minimum use of north-facing building exposures;
      (3)   Protection to solar access;
      (4)   Landscaping to complement solar use and to promote cooling in the
summer;
      (5)   Protection of trees; and
      (6)   Shading for summer solar exposures.
   (I)   Application of these principles will enhance passive solar heat gain
and enhance active solar heat and photovoltaic electric potentials, as well as
making the living environment brighter, airy and in tune with the environment;
   (J)   Provisions for ensuring that land which is subject to flooding,
subsidence, underground fires or other land or existing surface problems shall
be made safe for the purpose for which such land is proposed to be used, or
that such land shall be set aside for uses which shall not endanger life or
property or further aggravate or increase the existing menace;
   (K)   Reservations, if any, by the developer of any area designed for use as
public ground shall be suitable in size and location for his or her designated
uses. Provisions for adequate easements or rights-of-way for public use,
draining and/or utilities;
   (L)   Provisions for the erection of streetlights or connections for the
installation of streetlights at the borough’s discretion. The streetlights, if
erected, shall be the responsibility of adjoining landowners or the developer;
however, under no circumstance shall the borough be responsible for the
erection costs or the continuing lighting expenses, repairs or maintenance
unless specifically approved in writing by the Borough Council;
   (M)   The provision of fire hydrants, water and sewage facilities and/or
other community and/or environmental improvements;
   (N)   Shall permit when appropriate, and where the subdivider has let the
borough’s conditions to permit the phase development of certain premises,
providing sufficient financial security is made by the developer. The borough
shall be empowered to permit, encourage and promote flexibility, economy and
ingenuity in the layout and design of certain subdivisions and/or land
developments that may vary from the requirements specifically set forth in this
chapter. However, the developer shall meet the conditions required by the
Borough Council, as established by the borough, after:
      (1)   Full public hearing;
      (2)   Disclosure of the conditions placed upon the developer; and
      (3)   Providing that a short period for public comment occurs prior to
the enactment of the subdivision/developmental agreement.
   (O)   The borough may require that the subdivider solicit reviews and/or
reports from adjacent municipalities or other governmental agencies affected by
the plans;
   (P)   The provisions of this chapter may be waived or modified when:
      (1)   Good cause shown, and to be the satisfaction of the Borough Council
or planning agency, would be unreasonable;
      (2)   Results in an undue hardship, or hardship is not a result of the
subdivider’s own actions; or
      (3)   When an alternative standard can be demonstrated to provide equal
or better results.
   (Q)   Provisions for all new developments or subdivisions to incorporate
adequate provisions for reliable and safe and adequate water supplies to
support the intended uses within the capacity of available resources.
(Prior Code, § 22-303) (Ord. 12-8-2014, passed 12-8-2014)
§ 155.038 ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION STANDARDS.
   (A)   In the design of any subdivision and land development, the Borough
Council shall require that maximum consideration be given to the preservation
and protection of the natural environment so as to safeguard the public health,
safety and welfare of all residents of the borough and to minimize any adverse
effects resulting from the proposed development.
   (B)   Where the development many create an environmental problem which
affects the public health, safety or welfare, the Borough Council may require
and the subdivider shall present a plan indicating the specific manner in which
the problem will be minimized or eliminated, as further set forth in division
(C) below.
   (C)   Environmental factors for which the Borough Council may require a plan
include, but shall not be limited to, the following:
      (1)   Erosion and sediment control for which a plan is required as set
forth in §
155.039 of this chapter;
      (2)   Soil conservation and topsoil protection;
      (3)   Avoidance of drainage problems;
      (4)   Protection of floodplain areas and avoidance of future flooding
problems;
      (5)   Natural and historic feature preservation;
      (6)   Adequate provision of utilities in accordance with §§
155.042 and
155.043 of this chapter;
      (7)   Sewage system for which a plan may be required in accordance with §
154.042 of this chapter;
      (8)   Stream frontage preservation;
      (9)   Tree preservation, removal and planting;
      (10)   Topographic and geologic factors; and
      (11)   Excessive noise.
(Prior Code, § 22-304) (Ord. 12-8-2014, passed 12-8-2014)
§ 155.039 PUBLIC DEDICATION OF LAND SUITABLE FOR USE, CONSTRUCTION OF
RECREATIONAL FACILITIES OR PAYMENT OF FEES IN LIEU THEREOF.
   (A)   Purpose. All residential and commercial subdivisions or land
development plans submitted after the effective date of this chapter shall
provide for suitable and adequate recreation in order to:
      (1)   Ensure adequate recreational areas and facilities to serve the
future residents at the borough;
      (2)   Maintain compliance with recreational standards, as developed by
the National Recreation and Parks Association and the Borough Recreation
Commission;
      (3)   Reduce increasing resource usage pressure on existing recreational
areas and facilities;
      (4)   Comply with the Parks and Recreation Comprehensive Plan for the
borough with regard to size and distribution of recreation areas;
      (5)   Allow for the acquisition and development of additional recreation
areas as outlined by the borough’s park improvement plans;
      (6)   Ensure that all present and future borough residents have the
opportunity to engage in many and varied leisure pursuits;
      (7)   To reduce the possibility of the borough becoming overburdened with
the development and maintenance of many very small, randomly planned and widely
separated recreation areas; and
      (8)   To provide for a subdivider/developer to contribute to the
borough’s park/recreational resources to ensure planned improvement of
recreational resources with the borough’s growth and development.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      ACTIVE RECREATION. Any activity that required some physical exertion to
the part of the participant. See division (a) in the definition of “recreation”
below for general examples.
      ACTIVE RECREATION AREA. Any area developed in such a manner as to be
conducive to those activities that fall within the range of active recreation.
Examples: athletic fields and hard-surfaced courts, pools, large dams, bicycle
and walking trails, open turf areas and apparatus areas.
      LEISURE. Time not committed to making a living or involved with other
necessary support functions; discretionary or “free” time.
      PASSIVE RECREATION. Any activity that requires little or no physical
exertion on the part of the participant. See division (b) in the definition of
“recreation” below for examples.
      PASSIVE RECREATION AREA. Any area developed in such a manner as to be
conducive to those activities that fall within the range of passive recreation.
Examples: scenic vistas, natural areas, craft areas, meeting areas, sitting
areas, walkways, sunbathing, gardens, streams, impoundments, social events,
picnicking and spectating areas.
      RECREATION. Any activity, whether structured or not, in which individuals
voluntarily engage during their leisure. Examples would include:
         (a)   Active: sports (individual, dual, team, co-recreational and
combative) and athletics, both land and water-based;
         (b)   Passive: arts and crafts, spectating, picnicking, nature study
and board games; and
         (c)   Either, depending on specifics: dance, drama, music, games,
skills, social recreation, special events, hiking/walking, cycling, hobbies,
outdoor educational activities and cultural activities.
   (C)   Exemptions and requirements.
      (1)   The following are exempt from the provisions of this chapter:
         (a)   Any residential subdivision or land development plan, whether
single-family and/or multi-family, that contains fewer than ten dwelling units
shall pay a fee in lieu of land dedication; and
         (b)   Any commercial subdivision or land development plan shall pay a
fee in lieu of land dedication.
      (2)   The amount of land required to be provided for recreational
purposes for residential subdivisions or land development plans not exempted
from the provisions of this chapter shall be as follows:
         (a)   Single-family developments: in the case of a single-family
subdivision, the developer shall provide a minimum of 1,500 square feet per
lot; and
         (b)   Multiple: in multiple-family developments, a minimum contiguous
area of 20% of the total area of the land being developed, exclusive of
roadways, easements and usable lands, shall be provided for recreation.
      (3)   A maximum of 25% of the total land area required by this chapter to
be provided for recreation may consist of floodplain areas.
      (4)   Such land set aside shall be suitable to serve the purpose of
active and/or passive recreation by reason of its size, shape, location and
topography and shall be subject to the approval of the Planning Commission, the
Recreation Commission and the Borough Council, after having conferred with the
Development Review Committee composed of the Mayor, President of the Council,
Chairperson of the Park Commission and the Chairperson of the Planning
Commission.
      (5)   The developer shall satisfy the borough that there are adequate
provisions to assure retention, all future maintenance and upkeep of the
dedicated areas. The borough has the discretion to retain title or some
proprietary interest in the premises dedicated or to permit another designated
entity to hold the ownership, providing deed covenants are stated.
   (D)   Criteria for locating proposed recreation areas. The Planning
Commission and the Borough Council, in exercising these duties regarding the
approval of subdivision and land development plans, shall consider the
following criteria in determining whether to approve the proposed location of
recreation areas in the developer’s subdivision or land development plan:
      (1)   Site or sites should be easily and safely accessible from all areas
of the development to be served, handy to good ingress and egress, and have
access to a public road; however, no public road shall traverse the site or
sites;
      (2)   Site or sites should have suitable topography and soil conditions
for use and development as a recreation area;
      (3)   Size and shape for the site or sites should be suitable for
development as a particular type of park. Sites will be categorized by the
borough using the standards established by the National Recreation and Parks
Association (Publication No. 10005, latest edition);
      (4)   When designing and developing these recreation areas, it shall be
done according to the standards established by the National Recreation and
Parks Association, copies of which may be obtained from the Borough Office;
      (5)   Site or sites should, to the greatest extent practical, be easily
accessible to essential utilities, water, sewer and power;
      (6)   Site or sites should meet minimum size in respect to usable acreage
with respect to National Recreation and Parks Association standards, with 75%
of such area having a maximum slope of 7%; and
      (7)   Site or sites should be compatible with the objectives, guidelines
and recommendations as set forth in the Borough Comprehensive Plan.
   (E)   Dedication to borough.
      (1)   In a case where the developer does not wish to retain the required
recreation area, such area may be dedicated to the borough for public use.
      (2)   Such area dedicated to the borough for public use shall be suitable
for recreational purposes by reason of size, shape, location, topography and
access.
      (3)   The Planning Commission, after having conferred with the
Development Review Committee and the Recreation Commission, may find dedication
to be impractical because of the size, shape, location, access, topography,
drainage or other physical features of the land, and that such dedication would
adversely affect the subdivision of land development and its future residents
or occupants, or that there is no land area within the proposed subdivision
which is practical for dedication to the public because of size, access,
topography or other physical characteristics.
      (4)   If and when the Council deems it to be in the public interest to
accept dedicated land, such acceptance shall be by means of a signed resolution
to which the property description of the dedicated recreation area shall be
attached.
   (F)   Fee in lieu of dedication.
      (1)   Where the Borough Council agrees with the developer that, because
of the size, shape, location, access, topography or other physical features of
the land, it is impractical to dedicate land to the borough or set aside a
recreation area as required by this chapter, the Council shall require the
payment of a fee in lieu of dedication of such land, which shall be payable to
the borough prior to the approval of each final section of the overall plan by
the Council.
      (2)   The calculation of the recreation fee shall be as follows.
         (a)   Four hundred dollars shall be due per equivalent dwelling unit.
“Equivalent dwelling unit” shall utilize the same or similar definition used in
the Borough Sewage Ordinance (Chapter 51 of this code). Equivalent dwelling
unit applies to:
            1.   Residential equivalent dwelling units; and
            2.   Commercial or industrial equivalent dwelling units.
         (b)   Where there are no proposed dwelling units at the moment of the
subdivision approval, each subdivided parcel created shall be counted as one
unit, wherein $400 shall be required for each parcel. In the event dwelling
units are thereafter placed on said parcel, then $400 per equivalent dwelling
unit shall be due for each equivalent dwelling unit developed on each created
parcel, with credit for each parcel previously paid.
         (c)   All moneys must be used within three years from the date such
fee was paid. Any person who paid said fee under this section may receive a
refund of such fee plus interest accumulated thereon from the date of payment.
         (d)   All fees collected by the borough under this division (F) shall,
upon its receipt by the borough, be deposited in an interest-bearing account,
clearly identifying the specific recreational facilities for which the fee was
received. Interest earned on such accounts shall become funds of that account.
Funds from such an account shall be expended only in proper allocable portions
of the cost incurred to construct the specific recreational facilities for
which the funds were collected.
   (G)   Requirements for recreational plan approval. The plan for the
recreation areas must be shown on a drawing 24 inches by 36 inches, and a
reproducible tracing shall be furnished together with four prints. The plan
shall include the location and width of all proposed streets, alleys, rights-
of-way and easements, proposed lot lines with approximate dimensions, proposed
minimum setback lines for each street, locations of all proposed active and
passive recreation areas and development, to include types of equipment,
facilities and approximate dimensions of such facilities.
(Prior Code, § 22-305) (Ord. 12-8-2014, passed 12-8-2014)
§ 155.040 STORM DRAINAGE.
   (A)   All parcels shall be laid out and graded to provide positive drainage
away from buildings.
   (B)   Storm sewers, culverts and related installations shall be provided:
      (1)   To permit unimpeded flow of natural watercourses;
      (2)   To ensure adequate drainage of all low points along the lines of
streets; and
      (3)   To intercept stormwater runoff along streets at intervals
reasonably related to the extent and grade of the area drained.
   (C)   In the design of storm sewerage installations, special consideration
shall be given to the avoidance of problems that may arise from concentrations
of stormwater runoff over adjacent properties.
   (D)   Stormwater management shall conform with the requirements specifically
adopted and/or followed by the Westmoreland Conservation District, as may be
amended.
   (E)   All stormwater management plans and/or developments and/or systems
shall conform to the stormwater management plans for the specific stormwater
management districts existing within the borough. All land development
occurring within the Beaver Run Watershed Stormwater Management District within
the borough shall comply with the requirements as set forth in stormwater
management.
   (F)   The stormwater management districts are as follows:
      (1)   The Beaver Run Watershed Stormwater Management District; and
      (2)   The Beaver Run Watershed Stormwater Management District.
   (G)   All developments shall limit the rate of stormwater runoff so that no
greater rate of runoff is permitted than that of the site in its natural
condition.
   (H)   Storm drainage systems shall be designed separately from any sanitary
sewer systems, and such storm systems shall be installed in accordance with
sound and established borough storm sewer specifications. Such storm systems
shall be designed to accommodate any storm discharges from the property being
subdivided and additional runoff which may occur from higher elevations within
the same watershed when it is fully developed. Such storm systems shall not
overload existing storm drainage systems or create flooding hazards.
   (I)   Facilities such as bridges, culverts, damns and other drainage
facilities affecting the flow of water in a watershed shall meet the
requirements and be approved by any state agency having jurisdiction over such
facilities.
   (J)   Catch basins and pipes shall conform with any state agency having
jurisdiction over such facilities.
(Prior Code, § 22-306) (Ord. 12-8-2014, passed 12-8-2014)
§ 155.041 EASEMENTS.
   (A)   Easements with a minimum width of ten feet plus the width of any
physical improvement, or with the minimum width of any natural swale, shall be
provided as necessary for utilities and drainage facilities.
   (B)   Aboveground utilities shall be placed along the rear or side lot lines
unless they are existing along the street prior to the submission of the
preliminary plan to the Borough Secretary for the Borough Council’s
consideration.
   (C)   Easements for the installation of underground conduits for electric
power, telephone and television cable lines shall be provided so that each lot
or leased unit can be practically served.
   (D)   To the fullest extent possible, easements shall be centered on or
adjacent to rear or side lot lines.
   (E)   Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, there shall be
provided a drainage easement or right-of-way conforming substantially with the
line of such watercourse and of such width as will be adequate to preserve
natural drainage.
   (F)   When utility easements are established, the Council may give
consideration to the requirements and objectives of the appropriate utility
company.
(Prior Code, § 22-307) (Ord. 12-8-2014, passed 12-8-2014)
§ 155.042 WATER SUPPLY AND SEWAGE FACILITIES.
   (A)   All subdivisions and land developments located within the borough
shall be served with an adequate publicly owned water supply system and with an
adequate publicly owned sewage system.
   (B)   The sewer system shall meet the requirements of the official plan for
sewage systems adopted by the borough as required by the Sewage Facilities Act,
as amended, Act of January 24, (1966), P.L. 1535, 35 P.S. §§ 750.1 et seq., and
by the requirements of the Commonwealth Department of Environmental Protection.
Such facilities shall be designed in accordance with the requirements of the
Commonwealth Department of Environmental Protection, the borough and the
authority having jurisdiction over such facilities, subject to the review and
approval of the Borough Council.
   (C)   Any supplement or plan revision of the official plan for sewage
systems, as required by Commonwealth DEP requirements, shall be obtained by the
subdivider and made a condition for the final approval of any subdivision or
land development. It is recommended than an application for such required
supplements or plan revisions be initiated by the subdivider during the
preliminary plan phase and prior to submission of the final plan.
   (D)   All water supply systems and sanitary sewer systems located in any
designed floodplain district, whether public or private, shall be floodproofed
up to the regulatory flood elevation.
(Prior Code, § 22-308) (Ord. 12-8-2014, passed 12-8-2014)
§ 155.043 OTHER UTILITIES.
   (A)   A plan for providing all necessary utility services to the subdivision
and land development shall be prepared by the developer in cooperation with the
appropriate public utility companies and governmental agencies.
   (B)   Fire hydrants shall be required throughout the borough. The spacing of
hydrants shall be such that no residential structure shall be farther than 600
feet and no nonresidential structure shall be farther than 400 feet from a
hydrant and shall be reviewed by the Fire Chief of the borough. Additional
standards published by the Insurance Services Office of the commonwealth may
also be applied by the Commission.
   (C)   In accordance with a Commonwealth Public Utility Commission order of
July 8, 1970, all electric utility distribution lines shall be installed
underground in subdivision or land developments of five or more dwelling units.
Wherever practicable, telephone and cable television utilities shall also be
installed underground.
   (D)   Wherever practicable, in accordance with good engineering practice,
utility easements and trenches shall be occupied jointly by compatible
utilities.
   (E)   All public and/or private utilities and facilities, including gas and
electric, shall be elevated or floodproofed up to the regulatory flood
elevation.
   (F)   Maps of utility locations will be provided to the Borough Council
after utilities are placed.
(Prior Code, § 22-309) (Ord. 12-8-2014, passed 12-8-2014)
§ 155.044 CLASSIFICATION AND OWNERSHIP OF STREETS.
   All streets shall be classified as “major,” “collector,” “local” or
“nonresidential” streets as defined herein.
   (A)   All streets shall be public streets suitable for dedication to the
borough as per this chapter except for the following, which may be designated
as private streets:
      (1)   Industrial park, office park or shopping center nonresidential
streets specifically permitted as private streets by the Borough Council;
      (2)   Other streets previously constructed but not dedicated and accepted
by the borough; and
      (3)   Specifically designed and permitted as private streets (there is a
two-EDU limitation for private streets).
   (B)   In all cases where private streets are permitted, the responsibility
for improvement and continuing maintenance shall be the responsibility of the
subdivider and the owner of each abutting parcel, and the borough does not
imply any acceptance of responsibility for the improvement or maintenance of
private streets.
   (C)   In all cases where private streets are permitted, a note shall be
added to the plan indicating the following:
      (1)   Who owns the streets;
      (2)   Who is responsible for construction and for continued maintenance;
and
      (3)   The borough has no responsibility for ownership, construction or
continued maintenance of said streets.
(Prior Code, § 22-310) (Ord. 12-8-2014, passed 12-8-2014)
§ 155.045 DESIGN STANDARDS FOR STREETS.
   Street dimensions and design standards shall be in accordance with any state
or federal requirement.
(Prior Code, § 22-311) (Ord. 12-8-2014, passed 12-8-2014)
§ 155.046 STREET SYSTEM LAYOUT.
   (A)   Proposed streets shall be properly related to such street plans or
parts thereof as have been officially prepared and approved by the borough, and
they shall further conform to such state, road and highway plans as have been
prepared, adopted and/or filed as prescribed by law.
   (B)   The proposed street layout shall provide for the continuation or
projection of existing streets in the surrounding area unless the Borough
Council deems such extension undesirable for specific reason of topography or
design.
   (C)   Streets shall be logically related to the topography to produce usable
lots and reasonable grades.
   (D)   Minor streets shall be laid out to discourage through traffic, but
provision for street connections into and from adjacent areas will generally be
required.
   (E)   Proposed streets shall be extended to provide access to adjoining
property where necessary.
   (F)   Adequate street rights-of-way or street widths shall be provided as
necessary where lots in the proposal are large enough to permit resubdivision
or if a portion of the tract is not subdivided.
   (G)   New half or partial streets or new alleys will not be permitted,
except where essential to the reasonable subdivision of a tract in conformance
with the other requirements and standards contained herein, and where, in
addition, satisfactory assurance for dedication of the remaining part of the
street or alley can be secured.
   (H)   Wherever a tract to be subdivided borders an existing half or partial
street, the other part of the street shall be plotted within such tract.
   (I)   Dead-end streets shall be permitted only when they are designed as
stubs for temporary use to permit future street extension into adjoining tracts
or when they are designed as cul-de-sacs to serve residential areas.
   (J)   New reserve strips, including those controlling access to streets,
shall be prohibited.
(Prior Code, § 22-312) (Ord. 12-8-2014, passed 12-8-2014)
§ 155.047 STREET INTERSECTIONS.
   (A)   Streets shall be laid out to intersect as nearly as possible at right
angles. No street shall intersect another at an angle of less than 60 degrees.
   (B)   Multiple intersections involving the junction of more than two streets
shall be avoided. Where this proves impossible, such intersections shall be
designed with extreme care for both pedestrian and vehicular safety.
   (C)   Clear sight triangles shall be provided at all street intersections
within which no obstruction to vision shall be permitted between a height of
two feet to ten feet above the centerline grade of each street. Such clear
sight triangles shall be established from the point of intersection of the
centerlines of the intersecting streets for a distance of 75 feet where both
streets are local streets, 100 feet where one or both streets are collector
streets and 150 feet where one or both streets are major streets.
   (D)   To the fullest extent possible, intersections with major traffic
streets shall be located not less than 800 feet apart, measured from centerline
to centerline.
   (E)   Two streets intersecting a third street from opposite sides shall be
laid out directly opposite one another, or with a minimum centerline offset of
125 feet when all streets are local streets, or with a minimum centerline
offset of 300 feet when one or more of the streets is a collector street or a
major traffic street.
   (F)   Minimum curb radii at street intersections shall be 15 feet for
intersections involving only local streets, 35 feet for intersections involving
collector streets and 50 feet for intersections involving major traffic
streets.
(Prior Code, § 22-313) (Ord. 12-8-2014, passed 12-8-2014)
§ 155.048 USES FRONTING ON MAJOR STREETS.
   (A)   Service streets. Where a subdivision fronts or abuts a major street as
defined §
155.006 of this chapter, the Borough Council may require any of the following
measures:
      (1)   A service street approximately parallel to the major street at a
distance suitable for the appropriate use of the intervening land; and
      (2)   Marginal access streets, rear service alleys, reverse frontage lots
or such other treatment as will provide protection for abutting properties and
reduction in the number of intersections of local and through traffic.
   (B)   Controlled access. Driveway and parking lot entrances and exits to
nonresidential subdivisions from a major street shall be designed so as not to
interfere with through traffic. In general, such entrance and exit points shall
not be located closer to one another than 200 feet except when such entrance or
exit points are one-way in or out, in which case they may be located not closer
than 100 feet to one another. Such entrances or exits shall not exceed 24 feet
in width at any such point. Every effort will be made to maintain entrances and
exits on collection streets before constructing entrances and exits on major
streets.
   (C)   Building setback line. Unless otherwise regulated by appropriate
ordinances, nonresidential structures shall be set back not less than 20 feet
from the property line fronting on the major street. Rear setback lines shall
be such that no nonresidential structure shall be any closer to the rear
property line than 15 feet.
(Prior Code, § 22-314) (Ord. 12-8-2014, passed 12-8-2014)
§ 155.049 RESIDENTIAL STANDARDS.
   (A)   Application. All subdivision proposed for residential use, except
mobile home parks, shall conform with the provisions of this section.
   (B)   Residential lot sizes. Lot dimensions, areas, yards and building
setback lines shall be not less than specified by the provisions of the Zoning
Ordinance (
Chapter 156 of this code), except where the provisions of this chapter shall
apply.
   (C)   Design of residential lots.
      (1)   All lots shall front upon a public street, existing or proposed,
except that such frontage may be located on a private street where specifically
permitted herein.
      (2)   Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles or radial
permitted herein.
      (3)   If remnants of land exist after subdividing, they shall be
incorporated in existing or proposed lots or dedicated to public use, if
acceptable to the borough.
      (4)   Double frontage lots are to be discouraged.
      (5)   The depth and width of parcels laid out or reserved for
nonresidential use shall be sufficient to provide satisfactory space for off-
street parking and unloading.
   (D)   Residential blocks.
      (1)   The length, width and shape of blocks shall be determined with due
regard to the following:
         (a)   Provision of adequate sites for buildings of the type proposed;
         (b)   Zoning requirements;
         (c)   Topography;
         (d)   Requirements for safe and convenient vehicular and pedestrian
circulation; and
         (e)   Any other required requirement by state, county or borough
statutes, regulations or ordinances.
      (2)   Blocks shall normally have a minimum length of 600 feet or maximum
of 1,200 feet. In the design of blocks longer than 1,000 feet, special
consideration shall be given to the requirements of satisfactory fire
protection and pedestrian travel.
      (3)   Residential blocks shall be of sufficient depth to accommodate the
following:
         (a)   Two tiers of lots, except where reverse frontage lots bordering
a major traffic street are used; and
         (b)   Where special superblock, cluster design, planned unit or other
large-scale developments are proposed or where topographic or other conditions
prevent such a design.
      (4)   Pedestrian interior crosswalks may be required where necessary to
assist circulation or provide access to community facilities. Such crosswalks
shall have a right-of-way width of not less than ten feet and a paved walk of
not less than four feet.
   (E)   Cul-de-sac street.
      (1)   Cul-de-sac streets permanently designed should not normally exceed
800 feet in length unless specific consideration for emergency response and
other fire prevention, and problems are resolved to the satisfaction of the
borough.
      (2)   Any plan showing a street as a cul-de-sac shall state whether the
cul-de-sac is temporary or permanent.
      (3)   No cul-de-sac street shall be narrower than 26 feet on a “T” cul-
de-sac and not less than a 33-foot minimum radius on a paved circular cul-de-
sac.
(Prior Code, § 22-315) (Ord. 12-8-2014, passed 12-8-2014)
§ 155.050 COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS.
   (A)   Application and general requirements.
      (1)   All commercial and industrial subdivisions shall conform with the
provisions of this section.
      (2)   Wherever possible, commercial and industrial parcels should include
enough land to provide for a group of commercial establishments, planned,
developed and operated as a unit, and narrow, highway ribbon developments
fronting directly on a major street should be discouraged.
   (B)   Size. Approval of lot or parcel size will be determined by the Borough
Zoning Ordinance (
Chapter 156 of this code). The total area shall be sufficient to provide
adequate space for off-street parking and loading, landscaping and other
facilities, but in no case less than required by the Zoning Ordinance (
Chapter 156 of this code).
   (C)   Street system.
      (1)   Traffic movements in and out of commercial and industrial areas
should not interfere with external traffic, nor should it create hazards for
adjacent residential areas.
      (2)   The design of streets, service drives and pedestrian ways should
provide for safe and hazard-free internal circulation.
      (3)   Streets may be offered for dedication to the borough if said
streets meet the borough and state minimum standards. Otherwise, the commercial
or industrial park streets may remain in private ownership and care, if
approved by the Borough Council.
   (D)   Front yard. Building setback lines shall be as specified by the
Borough Zoning Ordinance (
Chapter 156 of this code).
   (E)   Utilities. Where possible, commercial and industrial subdivisions
should be located close to public utilities. In any case, subdivisions should
be provided with such utilities as are necessary to maintain adequate health
standards and to dispose of commercial and industrial wastes.
   (F)   Location.
      (1)   In general, commercial and industrial subdivisions should be
located adjacent or close to major highways and transportation facilities.
      (2)   Commercial and industrial subdivisions may not be located in
predominantly residential areas or areas that are better suited to residential
development, provided that a commercial parcel is designed in conformance with
the Borough Zoning Ordinance (
Chapter 156 of this code).
(Prior Code, § 22-316) (Ord. 12-8-2014, passed 12-8-2014)
MOBILE HOME PARKS AND MOBILE HOMES
§ 155.065 MOBILE HOME PARK DESIGN STANDARDS.
   (A)   All subdivisions and land developments designed as a mobile home park
shall comply with the requirements of the state for such mobile home parks.
   (B)   All individual mobile homes located in a mobile home park shall have a
minimum lot size, setback, area and side yard as required by the Borough Zoning
Ordinance (
Chapter 156 of this code).
   (C)   Except where affected by access roads or other functional design
reasons, all mobile home parks shall provide and maintain a landscaped buffer
area as provided by the Borough Zoning Ordinance (
Chapter 156 of this code).
   (D)   A mobile home park shall be located at least 40 feet from any abutting
land that is not part of the mobile home park.
   (E)   (1)   There shall be a minimum distance of 25 feet between an
individual mobile home and the adjoining mobile home.
      (2)   There shall be a 15-foot minimum setback distance between any part
of a mobile home and the adjoining pavement, any other mobile home, a parking
lot, a street or other common area.
   (F)   Off-street parking places shall be provided for each mobile home in
accordance with the parking requirements of the Zoning Ordinance (
Chapter 156 of this code).
   (G)   All mobile home parks shall be served with a system of common walks
providing convenient, adequately lighted and safe pedestrian access to all
parts of the mobile home park.
   (H)   All mobile home parks shall provide for the enclosure of the
foundation area on which the mobile home unit is situated. Enclosures shall be
installed within a maximum of 90 days after placement of a mobile home unit.
   (I)   All mobile home parks shall be served with adequate sewer and water
facilities and shall meet all the requirements of this chapter and the Borough
Zoning Ordinance (
Chapter 156 of this code).
   (J)   Each mobile home lot shall be provided with a sewage connection as
required by the borough’s sewage ordinances and regulations (Chapter 51 of this
code). Provisions shall be made for plugging the sewer riser pipe when a mobile
home does not occupy the lot. Surface drainage shall be diverted away from the
riser. The rim of the riser pipe shall be encased in a waterproof catch basin.
   (K)   Each mobile home lot shall have a water riser pipe which connects the
mobile home water system to the central water system. An outside hose bib shall
also be supplied for each mobile home.
   (L)   The Borough Council will give special consideration to any unique
design features required or provided by the mobile home park, including factors
such as:
      (1)   Lots laid out at an angle to streets to facilitate the movement of
mobile homes;
      (2)   One-way streets;
      (3)   Design to facilitate vehicular circulation and vehicular access to
each lot;
      (4)   Common vehicle parking areas; and
      (5)   Provision of adequate and secure storage space and buildings to
service the mobile home park.
(Prior Code, § 22-401) (Ord. 12-8-2014, passed 12-8-2014)
§ 155.066 MOBILE HOME (NOT IN PARK) DESIGN STANDARDS.
   All subdivision and land developments occurring where there may be a mobile
home improvement shall comply with the requirements set forth by the
commonwealth and/or the United States of America, in addition to the following
standards.
   (A)   All individual mobile homes shall be on one lot without any other
dwelling units on the same lot and shall have a minimum lot size, setback area
and side yard as is required by the Borough Zoning Ordinance (
Chapter 156 of this code) as specifically outlined in the single-family
residential section set forth in the Borough Zoning Ordinance (
Chapter 156 of this code).
   (B)   Off-street parking places shall be provided for each mobile home in
accordance with the parking requirement of the Zoning Ordinance (
Chapter 156 of this code).
   (C)   Mobile homes shall comply with the Borough Zoning Ordinance (
Chapter 156 of this code) and this chapter, in addition to the sewage
ordinances and regulations (
Chapter 51 of this code) and any other ordinances then and there applicable.
   (D)   No exterior pipes or tanks shall be visible from off the lot.
(Prior Code, § 22-402) (Ord. 12-8-2014, passed 12-8-2014)
REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
§ 155.080 APPLICATION.
   (A)   The minimum improvements required for all subdivisions and land
developments which shall be provided and installed by the subdivider as a
condition for final approval of any plan shall be as set forth in this
subchapter. Alternate improvement standards may be permitted if the Borough
Council deems them equal or superior in performance characteristics to any
specified improvements. All improvements are subject to the review, advice and
inspection of the Borough Council.
   (B)   Additional or higher-type improvements may be required in specific
cases where the Borough Council finds them to be necessary to create conditions
essential to the public health, safety and general welfare of the borough
citizens.
(Prior Code, § 22-501) (Ord. 12-8-2014, passed 12-8-2014)
§ 155.081 SUMMARY OF REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS.
   Minimum improvements to be required of the subdivider, where applicable,
shall include the following.
Type of Improvement Medium-Density Residential Low-Density     Very-Low-Density
Required            and Nonresidential Areas   Residential (b) Residential (c)
                    (a)
                       Medium-Density
Type of Improvement    Residential and       Low-Density     Very-Low-Density
Required               Nonresidential Areas  Residential (b) Residential (c)
                       (a)
Adequate drainage and/ X                     X               X
or storm sewers
Central water sewer    X                     X               X
Curbs                  X                     —             —
Electric and telephone X                     X               X
Fire hydrants          X                     X               X
Gutters                (e)                   (e)             (e)
Improved streets       X                     X               X
Monuments and markers  X                     X               X
Sidewalks              (d)                   (d)             (d)
Street name signs      X                     X               X
Streetlighting         X                     X               X
NOTES TO TABLE:
(a)   “Medium-density” includes developments having a net project density of
more than five units per acre.
(b)   “Low-density” includes developments having a net project density of
between one and five units per acre.
(c)   “Very-low-density” includes developments having a net project density
of less than one unit per acre or recreational developments considered to
have an equivalent very-low-density by the Borough Council.
(d)   Sidewalks will not normally be required except where needed to
facilitate traffic to school, shopping, park or other uses which generate
pedestrian traffic or to facilitate pedestrian safety, or in developments
having a net project density of 10 or more units per acre.
(e)   Sod, stone or concrete gutters shall be provided in accordance with
sound design and maintenance standards where required to adequately control
stormwater.
X   Indicates that the improvement is required.
 
(Prior Code, § 22-502) (Ord. 12-8-2014, passed 12-8-2014)
§ 155.082 REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS DETAILS.
   (A)   Street and shoulder construction standards.
      (1)   Streets (and alleys, where provided) shall be graded, surfaced and
improved to the grades and dimensions shown on the plans, profiles and cross-
sections submitted by the subdivider and approved by the Borough Council.
      (2)   (a)   The entire right-of-way width shall be graded to the approved
cross-section. All tree stumps and other material deemed unsuitable by the
Borough Council shall be removed to a depth of two feet below subgrade, and the
excavation shall be backfilled and suitably compacted.
         (b)   The finished road surface, both tangent and curve, shall be
crowned at one-fourth inch per foot away from the centerline. A proper super-
elevation shall be required on major traffic streets and collector streets when
the curb radii are less than 1,200 feet on major streets and less than 600 feet
on collector streets.
         (c)   Prior to placing the street surface, the subgrade shall be
graded parallel to the finished crown to permit the proper drainage of the
subbase. The subbase shall be properly outletted. Adequate subsurface drainage
for the streets and all subsurface utilities as acceptable to the Borough
Council shall be provided or installed by the subdivider. Minimum slopes of
banks measured perpendicular to the centerline of the street shall be two-to-
one (2:1) for fills and two-to-one and one-half (2:1.5) for cuts.
      (3)   (a)   The portion of cartway required to be paved shall be provided
by the subdivider with a suitable base and subbase material placed on a well-
compacted and prepared subgrade. A surface course will be provided on all
streets. The base, subbase and surface course shall conform with PennDOT
requirements contained in their publication entitled Guidelines for Design of
Local Roads and Streets, Publication 70, or shall have an equivalent paving
strength.
         (b)   Subbase material shall be native gravel or an equivalent
strength of shale, as per the specifications of the Commonwealth Department of
Transportation and approved by the Borough Council.
         (c)   If the material has adequate bearing capacity and is well
drained, the subbase may be omitted, if approved by the Borough Council.
      (4)   The portion of the cartway designated as a shoulder shall be
improved as follows:
         (a)   In high- and medium-density areas, shoulders may not be used;
and
         (b)   In very-low-density and low-density residential and in
nonresidential areas, all shoulders shall be constructed of native shale or
gravel or other equivalent material at least six inches thick, except that the
Borough Council may require shoulder areas to be fully paved if warranted by
street requirements, traffic or other functional requirements.
      (5)   The specifications required by this chapter and any other borough
ordinances shall be required in addition to any other applicable standard
requirements of the Commonwealth Department of State and Department of
Transportation applicable to the type of construction anticipated.
      (6)   Driveway entrances or aprons within the street right-of-way shall
be improved to their full width.
      (7)   Design standards shall comply with any and all state and federal
requirements.
      (8)   Curbs, where required, shall be valley gutters, vertical cement,
vertical stone or rolled curb and gutter cement as follows:
         (a)   Plain cement concrete curb: six inches at the top, eight inches
at the bottom and 18 inches in height from top to bottom, with the slope to the
street side; and
         (b)   Rolled cement concrete curb and/or valley-type cement concrete
gutter: 24 inches wide by 12 inches high from top to bottom. Gutters, where
required, shall be of vertical stone, rolled curb and gutter concrete in
accordance with sound design and maintenance criteria. All curbs and gutters
shall be in conformance with good engineering practice and subject to the
approval of the Borough Council.
   (B)   Sidewalks and crosswalks.
      (1)   Sidewalks, where required, shall be located with the street right-
of-way and shall not be closer than one foot from the right-of-way line, nor
closer than three feet from the right-of-way line, nor closer than three feet
from the curb or shoulder line.
      (2)   Sidewalks and crosswalks shall be a minimum of 42 inches wide and
shall be constructed of concrete four inches thick in residential areas and six
inches thick in commercial and industrial areas, placed on a suitable subbase.
Sidewalks at driveway crossings shall be at least six inches thick.
      (3)   All sidewalks shall be designed in accordance with established
engineering practice and subject to the approval of the Borough Council.
   (C)   Streetlights.
      (1)   Streetlights, where required, shall be installed with underground
lines wherever possible, and the subdivider shall provide or make arrangements
for a complete energy efficient street lighting system within the subdivision.
      (2)   Such systems shall provide a safe level of illumination and shall
be reviewed by the appropriate utility company.
      (3)   The appropriate places for the construction or placement of
streetlights shall be built into the subdivision. The developer shall be
responsible for the actual placement of any streetlighting systems, and either
the developer or the adjacent property owner(s) to the light shall be
responsible for the monthly rental and/or utility fees related thereto.
   (D)   Water and sewer facilities. Water and sewer facilities shall also
conform with the following:
      (1)   Public water lines and sanitary sewer lines shall be required in
all cases;
      (2)   Sanitary sewers shall have a minimum inside diameter of eight
inches and a minimum grade of 0.4%. The sanitary sewer shall be designed in
accordance with accepted specifications approved by the Borough Council;
      (3)   Where a subdivision is provided with a complete water main supply
system, fire hydrants shall also be installed in accordance with the
requirements of the Insurance Service Office of the commonwealth, subject to
approval by the Borough Council; and
      (4)   Shall comply with any other borough sewer and/or water ordinances
then and there in force.
   (E)   Storm drainage and other utility facilities. These shall be provided
as per §§
155.040,
155.042 and
155.043 of this chapter, shall be provided in accordance with sound engineering
practices, shall comply with the Stormwater Management Act, the Act of Oct. 4,
1978, P.L. 851, 32 P.S. §§ 680.1 et seq., and related statutes and be subject
to the approval of the Borough Council and any other borough ordinances then
and there applicable. The said plan under this division (E) shall be approved
by the Westmoreland Conservation District, and compliance will be made with any
recommendations made from this organization.
   (F)   Monuments and markers.
      (1)   Monuments shall be of concrete or stone, with a minimum size of six
inches by six inches by 36 inches, and shall be marked on top with a one-half
inch round brass pin or a drilled hole. Markers shall consist of iron pipes or
iron steel bars at least 24 inches long and not less than 3.4 inches in
diameter.
      (2)   Monuments and markers shall be placed so that the scored or marked
point shall coincide exactly with the intersection of lines to be marked and
shall be set so that the top of the monument or marker is level with the
surface of the surrounding ground and the elevation permanently recorded on at
least one monument.
      (3)   Monuments shall be set in readily accessible locations at all
corners and angle points of the boundary of the original tract being subdivided
and at a minimum of two points of intersection of the right-of-way lines at all
street intersections so as to permanently locate of provide reference for all
property lines.
      (4)   Markers shall be set:
         (a)   At the beginning and ending of all curves along the street
property lines;
         (b)   At all points where lot lines intersect curves, either front or
rear;
         (c)   At all angles in property lines of lots; and
         (d)   At all other corners.
      (5)   Any monuments or markers that are removed shall be replaced by a
competent engineer at the expense of the person removing them.
   (G)   Other improvements.
      (1)   Other required improvements shall be provided in accordance with
borough standards, where available, at the developer’s expense, and shall
include at least the following.
         (a)   Street name signs conforming with the type of street signs used
in the borough shall be installed at all street intersections.
         (b)   Streetlighting shall be provided to adequately illuminate all
streets for the purpose of eliminating unsafe darkened areas.
         (c)   Fire hydrants, where required, shall be provided to facilitate
adequate fire protection service. The borough will determine where to place the
hydrants.
      (2)   Where borough standard are not available, the above improvements
are to be installed in accordance with the requirements of the Borough Council.
The signs, lighting and fire hydrants will then become the responsibility of
the borough to maintain, replace, restore and the like.
   (H)   Concrete, paving or stone chip improvements. The construction of new
concrete, new construction or aggregate materials or new paved areas:
      (1)   Exceeding 100 square feet shall require a permit; and
      (2)   Exceeding 200 square feet shall be reviewed by a public hearing and
comply with all of the terms of this chapter and the Zoning Ordinance
requirements (
Chapter 156 of this code).
(Prior Code, § 22-503) (Ord. 12-8-2014, passed 12-8-2014)
PLAN REQUIREMENTS
§ 155.095 SKETCH PLANS.
   Sketch plans shall be legibly drawn at a scale of one inch to 100 feet or
200 feet and shall contain sufficient information to indicate the nature, scope
and concept of the proposed subdivision and land development, the major
problems to be resolved, the location of the subdivision tract, preliminary or
United Stated Geological Survey topography, if available, the name of the
landowner and other data considered essential by the subdivider in presenting
his or her proposal.
(Prior Code, § 22-601) (Ord. 12-8-2014, passed 12-8-2014)
§ 155.096 PRELIMINARY PLANS.
   (A)   Scale. The preliminary plan shall be at a scale of not more than 100
feet to the inch.
   (B)   Plan information.
      (1)   The preliminary plan shall show or be accompanied by the following
information:
         (a)   Proposed subdivision name or identifying title;
         (b)   North point, scale and date;
         (c)   Name of the owner of the property and of the subdivider if
different from the owner;
         (d)   Name of the registered engineer, surveyor, architect or planner
responsible for the plan;
         (e)   Tract boundaries with bearings and distances and total number of
acres being subdivided;
         (f)   Where new street construction or other facilities are proposed,
contours at vertical intervals of from two feet to five feet, or at such lesser
intervals as may be necessary for satisfactory study and planning of the tract;
         (g)   Where reasonably practicable, data shall refer to known,
established elevations;
         (h)   If on-lot sewage is proposed, soils information as mapped by the
United States Soil Conservation Service or by another competent qualified soils
scientist;
         (i)   All existing watercourses, tree masses and other significant
natural and environmental features;
         (j)   All existing buildings, sewers, water mains, culverts, petroleum
or petroleum product lines, fire hydrants and other significant human-made
features;
         (k)   All existing streets on or adjacent to the tract, including
name, right-of-way width and pavement width;
         (l)   A location map, for the purpose of locating the site to be
subdivided, at a scale not more than 800 feet to the inch showing the relation
of the tract to adjoining property and all streets, roads and municipal
boundaries existing within 1,000 feet of any part of the property proposed to
be subdivided. Also, when applicable, a map showing the location of the
proposed subdivision and/or land development, with respect to any involved
floodplain district, proposed lots and sites, fills and flood or erosion
protective facilities;
         (m)   All existing property lines, easements and rights-of-way and the
purpose for which the easements or rights-of-way have been established;
         (n)   Location and width of all proposed streets, alleys, rights-of-
way and easements; proposed lot lines with approximate dimensions; playgrounds,
public buildings, public areas and parcels of land proposed to be dedicated or
reserved for public use; proposed public utilities and drainage facilities.
Preliminary street profiles may be required by the Borough Council showing the
proposed finished grade along the centerline and each right-of-way line;
         (o)   Wherever practicable, the preliminary plan shall show the names
of owners of all abutting unplotted land and the names of all abutting
subdivisions;
         (p)   Where the preliminary plan covers only a part of the
subdivider’s entire holdings, a sketch shall be submitted of the new
prospective street layout for the remainder; and
         (q)   Copies of proposed deed restrictions, if any, shall be attached
to the preliminary plan.
      (2)   The preliminary plan shall include therein or be accompanied by:
         (a)   All required permits and related documentations from the
Department of Environmental Protection and any other commonwealth agency or
borough where any alteration or relocation of a stream or watercourse is
proposed.
         (b)   Documentation indicating that all affected adjacent
municipalities, the Department of Community and Economic Development and the
Federal Insurance Administrator have been notified whenever any alteration or
relocation of a stream or watercourse is proposed.
(Prior Code, § 22-602) (Ord. 12-8-2014, passed 12-8-2014)
§ 155.097 FINAL PLANS.
   (A)   Plan size and legibility.
      (1)   The subdivision plan submitted for final approval shall be a clear,
legible, white print of an ink drawing or suitable equivalent.
      (2)   Final plans shall be on sheets not larger than 36 inches by 48
inches overall. It is recommended that as far as practicable, final plan sheets
be held to the sizes required by the Westmoreland County Recorder’s Office.
Where necessary to avoid sheets larger than the maximum size prescribed above,
final plans shall be drawn in two or more sections accompanied by a key diagram
showing relative location of the sections.
   (B)   Plan scale and required information.
      (1)   The final plan shall be legible and at a scale of not more than 100
feet to the inch and shall include the following information:
         (a)   Subdivision name or identifying title;
         (b)   North point, scale and date;
         (c)   Name of the record owner and subdivider;
         (d)   Name and seal of the registered professional engineer and/or
other qualified professional responsible for the plan;
         (e)   Boundaries of the tract;
         (f)   Street lines, lot lines, rights-of-way, easements and areas
dedicated or proposed to be dedicated to public use;
         (g)   Sufficient data to determine readily the location, bearing and
length of every street, lot and boundary line and to reproduce such lines on
the ground, including notations of lot square footage figures;
         (h)   The length of all straight lines, radii, lengths of curves,
tangent bearings and deflection angles for each street;
         (i)   All dimensions and angles or bearings of the lines of each lot
and of each area proposed to be dedicated to public use;
         (j)   The proposed building setback line for each street or the
proposed placement of each building;
         (k)   Location, size and invert elevation of all sanitary and storm
sewers and location of all manholes, inlets and culverts and reference
locations for all underground utilizes;
         (l)   All dimensions shall be shown in feet and in hundredths of a
foot;
         (m)   Lot numbers;
         (n)   Names of streets within and adjacent to the subdivision;
         (o)   Location of permanent reference monuments shall be shown;
         (p)   Wherever practicable, names of any adjoining subdivisions shall
be shown;
         (q)   Wherever practicable, names of the owners of any unplotted land
shall be shown;
         (r)   A letter of intent from the borough indicating willingness or
conditions for acceptance of the dedication of streets and other public
property; and
         (s)   Certificate of approval and signature of the President of the
Borough Council and attesting the Borough Secretary with seal; with space for
acknowledgment of receipt of the plan by the county planning agencies and the
County Recorder of Deeds when it is presented for recording.
      (2)   The final plan shall include thereon or be accompanied by:
         (a)   An affidavit that the applicant is the owner or equitable owner
of the land proposed to be subdivided;
         (b)   A statement duly acknowledged before an officer authorized to
take acknowledgment of deeds, and signed by the owner or owners of the
property, to the effect that the subdivision as shown on the final plan is made
with his, her or their free consent and that it is desired to record the same;
         (c)   Certification by the Commonwealth Department of Environmental
Protection when individual sewage disposal or water systems are to be installed
as required by §§
155.035 to
155.050 of this chapter;
         (d)   Certification by the Borough Engineer that the subdivider has
met the requirements of §§
155.035 to
155.050,
155.080 to
155.082 and
155.110 to
155.115 of this chapter. However, if it is subsequently discovered that
violation of these sections has occurred, the developer shall be liable for any
necessary actions for compliance;
         (e)   Construction plans for all required improvements, including
topical cross-sections, street profiles and drainage details for all streets.
Such profiles shall show at least the following: existing (natural) grade along
the proposed street centerline; existing (natural) grade along each side of the
proposed street right-of-way; proposed finished grade at the top of curbs;
sanitary sewer mains and manholes; and storm sewer mains, inlets, manholes and
culverts. All such plans shall include a public improvements list and shall be
in a form suitable to serve as a basis for documenting all improvements to be
installed;
         (f)   A contour grading plan, including ground and basement floor
elevations of all buildings, may be required if deemed necessary by the Borough
Engineer to properly establish grading and drainage patterns;
         (g)   Protective covenants, if any, in form for recording;
         (h)   Any other special plans required by the Borough Council in
accordance with §§
155.038,
155.039,
155.042 and
155.043 of this chapter; and
         (i)   A development agreement and financial security as required
herein.
(Prior Code, § 22-603) (Ord. 12-8-2014, passed 12-8-2014)
INSTALLATION OF REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
§ 155.110 IMPROVEMENTS TO BE PROVIDED BY SUBDIVIDER.
   In all cases, the subdivider shall be responsible to pay for the cost of
installation of all required improvements under supervision of the Borough
Council, and in the manner specified below and in accordance with §§ 509 and
510 of the Act of July 31, 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, amended by § 4 of the Act
of June 1, 1972, P.L. 333, No. 93; reenacted and amended by § 30 of the Act of
Dec. 21, 1988, P.L. 1329, No. 170, and amended by § 8 of the Act of June 23,
2000, P.L. 495, No. 68, 53 P.S. §§ 10509 and 10510.
(Prior Code, § 22-701) (Ord. 12-8-2014, passed 12-8-2014)
§ 155.111 METHOD OF PROVIDING IMPROVEMENTS.
   No plan shall be approved by the Borough Council until provision has been
made by the subdivider for the proper installation of required improvements in
either of the following ways.
   (A)   Construction of improvements.
      (1)   The subdivider may elect to physically install, prior to final plan
approval, all of the required improvements in accordance with the standards and
specifications contained in this chapter and with the final plan submitted to
the Borough Council, provided that such final plan has been conditionally
approved by the Borough Council subject to the construction of improvements as
required herein and subject to the execution of the development agreement set
forth in §
155.113 of this chapter.
      (2)   Upon completion of all improvements, the Borough Engineer and the
Borough Subdivision Officer shall be authorized by the Borough Council to
inspect said improvements and shall certify if all improvements have been
installed in accordance with this chapter or any other applicable ordinances.
Upon receipt of such a certification, the Borough Council may then proceed to
final approval of the final plan.
   (B)   Financial security. In addition to division (A) above, the subdivider
shall deposit with the borough sufficient financial security to secure to the
public the completion of all of the required improvements within one year of
the proposed completion date which is set forth in the subdivision plan and in
the development agreement referred to below.
      (1)   Said financial security shall be provided by posting a bond with a
bonding company or another type of financial guarantee with a federal- or
commonwealth-chartered lending institution. The amount of said financial
security shall be equal to 110% of the cost of the required improvements. Said
costs shall be established by an estimate prepared by the Borough Council
Engineer or by submission to the Borough Council of a bona fide bid or bids.
      (2)   Said amount of security may be increased by 10% for each yearly
period beyond the first anniversary date for the initial posting of the
financial security.
      (3)   Notwithstanding the submission of said financial security as
required herein, no occupied structure within the proposed subdivision and land
development shall be without suitable street access improved with at least the
required base, curbs, gutters and utilities for a period of time longer than
six months.
(Prior Code, § 22-702) (Ord. 12-8-2014, passed 12-8-2014)
§ 155.112 FINANCIAL SECURITY FOR MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   Where the borough in which the final plan is located accepts
dedication of any required improvement, the Borough Council may require the
positing of financial security to secure the structural integrity and
functioning of said improvements in accordance with the design and
specifications approved in the final plan for a term not to exceed 18 months
from the date of acceptance and dedication.
   (B)   Financial security for maintenance shall be posted as required by §
155.111(B) of this chapter, and the amount shall not exceed 15% of the actual
cost of the installation of said improvements.
   (C)   Financial security for the maintenance of improvements installed under
the jurisdiction and rules of a public utility or a municipal authority shall
be posted in accordance with the requirements of said public utility or
municipal authority or other appropriate agency and shall not be included in
the financial security posted with the borough.
(Prior Code, § 22-703) (Ord. 12-8-2014, passed 12-8-2014)
§ 155.113 DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT.
   (A)   All subdividers proposing any subdivision or land development
requiring the installation of improvements as required herein shall be required
to enter into a legally binding development agreement with the borough
guaranteeing the installation of said improvements in accordance with this
chapter.
   (B)   The development agreement shall be in a form suitable for execution by
the Borough Council and it shall consist of the following, where applicable:
      (1)   The construction authorized by the approved final plan or, in the
case where §
155.111(A) of this chapter applies, in accordance with a conditionally approved
final plan;
      (2)   Construction of streets with any other required improvements;
      (3)   Installation of utility lines;
      (4)   Installation of underground streetlighting cable and streetlighting
poles;
      (5)   Dedication of streets, transfer of storm drainage systems and sewer
lines and easements to the borough;
      (6)   Prevention of erosion and water damage to adjacent properties;
      (7)   Developer’s responsibilities for damage to other property;
      (8)   The responsibility for providing necessary inspections to ensure
compliance with this chapter shall be clearly identified;
      (9)   A work schedule, beginning and ending date for improvements
contained herein;
      (10)   All planning, engineering, inspection and legal service costs
incurred by the borough, including the cost of preparing this development
agreement, shall be identified and that amount agreed upon for payment by the
subdivider on a regular basis;
      (11)   Posting of the required financial security to ensure completion of
all of the required improvements in accordance with §
155.111(B) of this chapter, if applicable;
      (12)   Where the borough accepts the dedication of any required
improvement, posting of the required financial security may be required by the
borough to secure the structural integrity and the functioning of said
improvement in accordance with §
155.112 of this chapter;
      (13)   The developer shall provide the borough with two sets of
reproducible as-built plans, including all improvements which are properly
referenced to identify specific locations;
      (14)   Provisions for violation of the development agreement;
      (15)   The subdivider shall secure or maintain public liability insurance
and provide the borough with evidence of said insurance;
      (16)   A save harmless clause;
      (17)   Liability of developer during warranty period;
      (18)   No improvements shall be commenced or work begun prior to the
execution of this agreement and the delivery of the required financial security
in compliance with §
155.111(B) of this chapter, if applicable; and
      (19)   Other requirements to assure compliance with this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 22-704) (Ord. 12-8-2014, passed 12-8-2014)
§ 155.114 RELEASE FROM FINANCIAL SECURITY FOR IMPROVEMENTS.
   The financial security provided by the subdivider shall be released as
follows.
   (A)   When the subdivider has completed all of the necessary and approved
improvements, he or she shall so notify the borough in writing by certified or
registered mail and send a copy to the Borough Engineer.
   (B)   Within ten days of receipt of such notice, the borough shall direct
and authorize the Borough Engineer to inspect all of the improvements.
   (C)   The Borough Engineer shall then file a written report with the Borough
Council and shall mail a copy to the subdivider by certified or registered mail
within 30 days after his or her receipt of authorization to inspect all
improvements from the borough. Said reports shall be detailed and shall
indicate approval or rejection of said improvements, either in whole or in
part, with a statement of reasons for any non-approval or rejection.
   (D)   The borough shall notify the subdivider in writing by certified or
registered mail of its action in relation to the improvements provided.
   (E)   If the Borough Council or the Borough Engineer fails to comply with
the above time limits, all improvements will be deemed to have been approved
and the subdivider shall be released from all liability pursuant to its
financial security.
   (F)   Any improvements not approved or rejected by the borough shall be
expeditiously completed by the subdivider and, upon completion, the same
notification procedure as above shall be followed.
   (G)   If any required improvement has not been installed, as required by
this chapter, by the approved final plan or by the executed development
agreement, then the borough shall enforce the financial security posted by
appropriate legal and equitable remedies. If the proceeds of such financial
security are insufficient to pay the cost of installing or making repairs or
corrections to the required improvements, the borough may, as its option,
install part of such improvements and may institute appropriate legal or
equitable action to recover the money necessary to complete the remainder.
   (H)   The borough, upon the recommendation of the selected engineer on
behalf of the borough, may refuse to accept the certification of completion
from the subdivider/developer. The estimate shall then be recalculated and
recertified by another professional engineer licensed as such in the
commonwealth and chosen mutually by the borough and the applicant developer/
subdivider. The financial security bond may be adjusted accordingly based upon
the mutually selected engineer’s recommendation.
   (I)   In the event acceptance of the development is made in part or in
whole, the borough may require financial security for maintenance for said
premises to be in place as per §
155.115 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 22-705) (Ord. 12-8-2014, passed 12-8-2014)
§ 155.115 RELEASE FROM FINANCIAL SECURITY FOR MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   The financial security for maintenance shall remain in effect for a
period of 18 months after acceptance of dedication by the borough or other
appropriate agency. Said release shall be effected utilizing the same
notification procedures set forth in §
155.114 of this chapter.
   (B)   The borough may prescribe that the applicant developer/subdivider
shall reimburse the borough for reasonable and necessary expenses incurred for
the inspection of improvements. Such expense shall be reasonable and in
accordance with the ordinary and customary fees charged by the Borough Engineer
or consultant for work performed for similar services within the community.
   (C)   If any portion of said improvements shall not be approved or shall be
rejected by the Borough Council, the developer shall proceed to complete the
same and, upon completion, the same procedure of notification as outlined here
in this section and the previous section shall be followed.
(Prior Code, § 22-706) (Ord. 12-8-2014, passed 12-8-2014)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 155.130 ADMINISTRATIVE ACTION.
   (A)   Subdivision Officer. The Subdivision Officer, as designated by the
Borough Council, shall:
      (1)   Act as administrative officer of the borough for the clarification
and/or enforcement and administration of this chapter;
      (2)   Receive and examine copies of all such plans and applications to
the appropriate borough agencies or officials;
      (3)   Refer copies of all such plans and applications to the appropriate
borough agencies or officials;
      (4)   Oversee the Borough Secretary’s maintenance and preservation of
borough records, applications and plans, review the Borough Council’s written
responses and timeliness of responses;
      (5)   Assist the borough in providing the appropriate notices required
under the circumstances and by ordinance; and
      (6)   Provide notice to any developers, subdividers or violators of any
violations of the ordinances known or discovered.
   (B)   Borough Council.
      (1)   The Borough Council, with the assistance of the Subdivision Officer
and Borough Engineer, shall review all plans to determine conformity with this
chapter and shall hold necessary public hearings and shall approve, approve
with conditions or disapprove all plans submitted and shall grant any necessary
modifications, variances or waivers and shall perform all other duties required
under this chapter; and
      (2)   After approval of any final plan, the Subdivision Officer, Borough
Solicitor and Borough Engineer shall be directed to take necessary action
relative to the acceptance of dedication of any public right-of-way or area
shown on the plan by the borough and also relative to the execution of the
development agreement with the subdivider.
   (C)   Endorsement of record plan. Upon approval of any final plan by the
Borough Council, the President and Secretary of the Borough Council shall
endorse the required number of copies of the record plan.
   (D)   Subdivision records. The Subdivision Officer shall keep a record of
the findings, decisions and recommendations relative to all subdivision plans
and applications filed for approval. Such records shall be open to the public
for review.
(Prior Code, § 22-901) (Ord. 12-8-2014, passed 12-8-2014)
§ 155.131 MODIFICATIONS, VARIANCES, APPEALS AND AMENDMENTS.
   (A)   Variances and modifications. The Borough Council, after public notice
and public hearing, may grant the following modifications and variances subject
to such conditions which will, in its judgment, secure substantially the
objectives of the standards or requirements so varied or modified:
      (1)   The Borough Council may grant a variance to the provisions
contained herein for reason for the size or exceptional shape of a specific
piece of property or of exceptional topographic conditions, where the strict
application of this chapter would result in extreme practical difficulties and
undue hardship upon the owner of such property; provided, however, that such
relief may only be granted without detriment to the public good and without
substantially impairing the intent and purposes of this chapter;
      (2)   The Borough Council may, subject to appropriate conditions, waive
the provisions of any or all of the required improvements specified in §§
155.080 to
155.082 of this chapter to ensure the proper completion of the subdivision in
accordance with the intent and objectives of this chapter and which are not
required in the interest of the public health, safety and general welfare or
which are inappropriate because of the inadequacy of connecting facilities; and
      (3)   Modification to permit large-scale or planned unit developments
(see Borough Zoning Ordinance, §§
156.085 to
156.089 of this code).
   (B)   Reconsideration and appeals to Borough Council. Any subdivider
aggrieved by a finding, decision or recommendation of any official may request
and receive the opportunity to appear before the Borough Council, present
additional relevant information and request reconsideration and/or appeal of
the original finding, decision or recommendation.
   (C)   Procedure for applying. Applications for modification, variance and
appeal to the Borough Council shall be submitted in writing. The application
shall state fully the grounds and all the facts relied upon by the applicant.
The Borough Council shall act upon such applications within a period of 45
days.
   (D)   Appeals to court. The decisions of the Borough Council with respect to
the approval or disapproval of plans may be appealed directly to court as
provided for in the Municipalities Planning Code, §§ 101 et seq., of the Act of
July 31, 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, art. I, as amended by the Act of Dec. 21,
1988 P.L. 1329, No. 170, 53 P.S. §§ 10101 et seq. as amended.
   (E)   Revision and amendment. The Borough Council may, from time to time,
amend this chapter by appropriate action taken after a public hearing on said
proposed revisions. Public notice shall give together with a brief summary
setting forth the principal provisions for such amendments, indicating the
place and time where copies of the proposed amendments may be examined. In the
case of an amendment other than that prepared by the Planning Commission, the
Borough Council shall submit each such amendment to the Commission for
recommendations at least 30 days prior to the date fixed for the public hearing
on such amendment.
(Prior Code, § 22-902) (Ord. 12-8-2014, passed 12-8-2014)
§ 155.132 CONFLICT AND LEGAL RESPONSIBILITY.
   (A)   Conflict with other ordinances. Wherever there is a difference between
minimum standards or dimensions specified herein and those contained in any
Zoning Ordinance (
Chapter 156 of this code) or other official regulation, the stricter standard
shall apply against the developer or person making the subdivision.
   (B)   Legal responsibility. Any approval granted the Borough Council under
this chapter does not relieve the subdivider of the legal responsibility for
meeting all other legal requirements under local, commonwealth and federal law,
and said subdivider shall be responsible for providing a safe, environmentally
sound and properly constructed subdivision which does not adversely affect the
public health, safety or welfare. All aggrieved persons, firms or corporations
may take appropriate legal remedies against the subdivider in the event of any
failure on the part of the subdivider, and the subdivider shall hold the
Borough Council harmless in any action by any such person, firm or corporation.
(Prior Code, § 22-904) (Ord. 12-8-2014, passed 12-8-2014) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.133 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Other preventive remedies permitted at law. In addition to §
155.999 of this chapter, any other remedy permitted by law, including, but not
limited to, the following:
      (1)   The borough may institute and maintain appropriate actions by law
or in equity to restrain, correct or abate violations of this chapter,
including, but not limited to, unlawful construction, recovery of damages and
the prevention of illegal occupancy of any buildings, structures or premises
contrary to the terms of this chapter.
      (2)   (a)   The borough may refuse to issue any permit or approval
necessary for further improvement or development of any real property which has
resulted from a subdivision of real property in violation of this chapter.
         (b)   The authority to make such denials shall apply to any of the
following categories of persons who may be deemed in violation of this chapter:
            1.   The owner of record at the time of the violation;
            2.   Lendee or lessee of the owner of record at the time of said
violation, without regard to whether such lendee or lessee had actual
constructive knowledge of the violation;
            3.   Current owner who acquired the property subsequent to the time
of violation, without regard as to whether such current owner had actual or
constructive knowledge of a violation; and
            4.   Lendee of lessee of the current owner of record who acquired
the property subsequent to the time of violation, without regard to whether
such lendee or lessee had actual constructive knowledge of the violation.
      (3)   Any other remedies permitted at law, equity or contract applicable
to the circumstances. See 53 P.S. §§ 10515.1 and 10515.3.
   (B)   Enforcement agents. The terms of this chapter shall be enforceable by
the action of any borough official, the Borough Solicitor, borough police
officers, the Subdivision Enforcement Officer or the Borough Zoning Officer
acting as authorized agents on behalf of the borough when said person is
authorized by resolution of the Borough Council.
(Prior Code, § 22-903) (Ord. 12-8-2014, passed 12-8-2014) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.999 PENALTY.
   Any person, entity or group of persons who violates the terms of this
chapter or fails to comply with its terms, conditions and regulations adopted
hereunder shall be responsible for such violation, and each day that the
violation continues to occur may be found liable via a civil enforcement to pay
a judgment of not more than $500 (subject to change via resolution), plus all
court costs, including reasonable attorney fees incurred by the borough as a
result thereof. The magisterial district judge shall have jurisdiction pursuant
to the Rules of Civil Procedure. Each day that a violation shall be deemed by
statute after the fifth day following the date of determination of violation by
the magisterial district judge, and each day that a violation continues, shall
constitute a separate violation.
(Prior Code, § 22-903) (Ord. 12-8-2014, passed 12-8-2014; Ord. 2015-04, passed
12-14-2015)
CHAPTER 156: ZONING
Section
General Provisions
   
156.001   Short title
   
156.002   Purpose
   
156.003   Community development objective
   
156.004   Interpretation
   
156.005   Conflict
   
156.006   Municipal liability
   
156.007   Continuity
   
156.008   Definitions
Zoning District Map
   
156.020   Establishment of districts
   
156.021   Official zoning map
   
156.022   Interpretation of district boundaries
Regulations Within Each Zone District
   
156.035   Application of district regulations
   
156.036   Conservation Zone District (CON)
   
156.037   Residential R-1 Zone District (R-1)
   
156.038   Residential R-2 Zone District (R-2)
   
156.039   Residential R-3 Zone District (R-3)
Supplementary Regulations
   
156.050   Minimum lot size and frontage
   
156.051   Regulations in required yards
   
156.052   Maximum building height
   
156.053   Individual mobile homes on their own lot
   
156.054   Apartments and attached dwellings
   
156.055   Off-street parking
   
156.056   Signs
   
156.057   Site development
   
156.058   Slaughterhouses
   
156.059   Fences and walls in residential districts
Conditional Uses
   
156.070   Review and general criteria
   
156.071   Conditional residential uses
   
156.072   Business uses in residential or conservation districts
   
156.073   Other conditional uses
Nonconforming Uses, Structures and Lots
   
156.085   Applicability
   
156.086   Nonconforming uses
   
156.087   Nonconforming structures
   
156.088   Nonconforming lots
   
156.089   Registration of nonconformity
Zoning Hearing Board
   
156.100   Operation of the Board
   
156.101   Functions of the Board
   
156.102   Parties appellant before the Board
   
156.103   Hearings, preliminary activities
   
156.104   Hearings, conduct
   
156.105   Zoning appeals
Administration
   
156.120   Duties of Zoning Officer
   
156.121   Zoning permits
   
156.122   Permission to occupy
   
156.123   Enforcement
   
156.124   Amendment of chapter
   
156.125   Schedule of fees
 
   
156.999   Penalty
   
Appendix A:   Permitted Uses—Zones in Which Permitted
   
Appendix B:   Conditional Uses—Section Reference and Zones Where They May be
Proposed
   
Appendix C:   Minimum Dimensional Requirements
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 156.001 SHORT TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Oklahoma Borough Zoning
Ordinance.”
(Prior Code, § 27-101) (Ord. 196, passed 4-14-1986)
§ 156.002 PURPOSE.
   This chapter is deemed necessary by the Borough Council to promote the
public health, safety and general welfare; to conserve and stabilize property
values; to facilitate the economic provisions of streets, utilities and other
public services; to prevent the overcrowding or incompatible use or development
of land; and to preserve floodplains, steep hillsides and areas of poor
subsurface conditions from intense development.
(Prior Code, § 27-102) (Ord. 196, passed 4-14-1986)
§ 156.003 COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT OBJECTIVE.
   The arrangement of land use areas, the intensity of residential development
and the capacity and function of streets and public utilities were determined
in a master plan study of the borough that preceded the preparation of this
chapter. That plan is the basis for the description of the zoning districts of
this chapter and the regulations that apply in each district.
(Prior Code, § 27-103) (Ord. 196, passed 4-14-1986)
§ 156.004 INTERPRETATION.
   The provisions of this chapter shall be held to be the minimum requirements
for promotion of the public health, safety and welfare.
(Prior Code, § 27-104) (Ord. 196, passed 4-14-1986)
§ 156.005 CONFLICT.
   (A)   Where conflicts exist between this chapter and other regulations of
the borough or of a higher level of government, or with legal restrictive
covenants applied by landowners to the development of their property, the
ordinance, regulation or covenant establishing the higher standard shall
prevail.
   (B)   All ordinances or parts thereof in conflict with this chapter or
inconsistent with its provisions or less restrictive are hereby repealed to the
extent necessary to give this chapter full force and effect.
(Prior Code, § 27-105) (Ord. 196, passed 4-14-1986)
§ 156.006 MUNICIPAL LIABILITY.
   The grant of a zoning permit in any zone district shall not constitute a
representation, guarantee or warranty of any kind by the borough, or by any
official or employee, of the practicality or safety of the use, building or
structure covered by the permit and shall create no liability upon the borough,
its officials or employees.
(Prior Code, § 27-106) (Ord. 196, passed 4-14-1986)
§ 156.007 CONTINUITY.
   The provisions of this chapter, so far as they are common to those of zoning
regulations in force immediately prior to the enactment of this chapter, are
intended as a continuation of such prior regulations and not as new enactments.
Such parts of the prior regulations that are omitted from this chapter shall be
deemed as abrogated, and only the new or changed provisions included in this
chapter shall be deemed to be the law from the effective date of this chapter.
The adoption of this chapter does not make legitimate development activity in
the borough illegal under provisions of the prior regulations, nor does it
annul any litigation currently being pursued or that may be pursued in the
future against such illegal activity.
(Prior Code, § 27-107) (Ord. 196, passed 4-14-1986)
§ 156.008 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   Words used in the present tense include the future tense; the
particular controls the general; the singular includes the plural and the
plural the singular; the words PERSON or DEVELOPER include a firm, association,
partnership, trust, company or corporation as well as an individual; the
masculine includes the feminine; the word SHALL is mandatory and the word MAY
permissive; the words USED or OCCUPIED include the words INTENDED, ARRANGED,
MAINTAINED OR DESIGNED TO BE USED OR OCCUPIED; and words used in this chapter
and not otherwise defined in this section shall have the same meaning as in a
standard dictionary.
(Prior Code, § 27-201)
   (B)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      ACCESS LANE. The vehicular passage between a street and parking spaces,
lined on one or both sides by parking spaces for all or a part of the lane’s
length.
      ACCESSORY USE. An activity that is incidental to the principal use of a
lot and not permitted unless developed at the same time as, or later than, the
principal use. An ACCESSORY STRUCTURE contains an ACCESSORY USE, but no
dwelling units.
      AMENDMENT. Any addition, deletion or revision of the chapter text or the
zoning map officially adopted by the Council after public hearing.
      APARTMENT. A suite of rooms in a building containing at least one other
dwelling unit, each unit with its own cooking, food storage, bathing and toilet
facilities, and with access directly or by a common hallway to the outside.
      APARTMENT BUILDING, GARDEN. A building containing more than two
apartments, with access from apartments via stairways and common halls to the
outside at grade level.
      BOARDING OR LODGING ACCOMMODATION. A room within a dwelling available to
an individual on a rental basis but not necessarily including a private
bathroom or meals, which if provided constitute a boarding arrangement.
      BOROUGH COUNCIL. The duly elected governing body of the Borough of
Oklahoma.
      BUILDING. Any structure having a permanent roof and covering an area on
the ground.
      BUILDING, ENCLOSED. A building with a permanent roof and solid walls
extending from the roof to the ground, the walls pierced by doors and/or
windows.
      BUILDING, PERMANENT. A building supported upon foundations extending into
the ground and constructed thereon.
      CENTERLINE. A line running parallel to the curbs or edges of a street and
equidistant from the curbs or edges on each side.
      CLUB, NONPROFIT COMMUNITY. An organization of members which operates a
facility for the benefit of the members and not as a commercial venture.
      COMMERCIAL RECREATION. Indoor leisure activity including, but not limited
to, bowling, pool halls, dance halls, movie or live entertainment theaters, but
not including activities that apply principally to lewd interests.
      COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT OBJECTIVES. A statement required by the
Municipalities Planning Code, §§ 101 et seq., of the Act of July 31, 1968, P.L.
805, No. 247, art. I, as amended by the Act of Dec. 21, 1988 P.L. 1329, No.
170, 53 P.S. §§ 10101 et seq., to appear in a zoning ordinance, demonstrating
that the ordinance is based upon a municipal master plan relative to land use,
population density and the location of streets and utilities.
      CONDITIONAL USE. The use of a property that may be permitted by the
Borough Council after study of the use, and the property proposed to receive it
indicates that such use will not downgrade the neighborhood where it is
proposed or be hazardous to the public. Such uses are specified for each zone
district by this chapter. The Council may attach conditions to approval of a
CONDITIONAL USE.
      CONVERSION APARTMENT. A dwelling unit established from a portion of an
already existing single-family dwelling when each dwelling after conversion is
provided with all the facilities normally found in a dwelling unit, including
adequate heat, light, ventilation, sanitary and washing facilities, cooking and
food storage and separate means of egress.
      CURATIVE AMENDMENT. An AMENDMENT of this chapter requested by a property
owner requiring the Borough Council to schedule a public hearing within 60
days, followed by formal action thereon, or an AMENDMENT by the Council after
declaring a part of this chapter defective, placing a moratorium on property
owner curative amendments and requiring the Council’s action to reaffirm or
amend the chapter or part thereof after hearing within 180 days.
      DAY CARE CENTER. A facility designed to accommodate preschool age or
elderly dependent persons while parents or guardians are at work, but not
including overnight accommodations.
      DEVELOPER. Any landowner, agent of such landowner or tenant, with the
permission of such landowner, who undertakes, or causes to be undertaken, the
subdivision or redivision of land, or erects, expands or alters a building or
structure, or changes the surface of the land, or any or all of these.
      DEVELOPMENT. The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots
for the erection, expansion or alteration of one or more buildings or
structures, the changing of the land surface in anticipation of its receiving a
building or structure, the subdivision or redivision of land or the offering of
land for such purpose.
      DRAINAGEWAY. A sloping depression on the earth’s surface, either natural
or human-made, to carry stormwater runoff from higher to lower elevations.
      DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED. A dwelling unit along a common party
wall or party walls to one similar dwelling, each with its own at-grade access
to the outside and each with at least one room, not a corridor or stairhall, on
the first floor level; also a TOWNHOUSE.
      DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED. A dwelling unit designed and intended
to be occupied by one family only, and surrounded by open space on the same
lot.
      DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY. A detached building containing only two dwelling
units, each entirely separate from the other and each with its own access
directly to the outside.
      DWELLING UNIT OR DWELLING. A group of connected rooms in a building for
the exclusive use of one family, containing its own private bathing, toilet,
cooking and food storage facilities.
      EARTH MOVEMENT. The rearrangement of the earth surface by excavation and
filling to accommodate development; also known as GRADING.
      EASEMENT. A right-of-way across private property granted by the owner for
the passage of public utilities or the disposal of stormwater.
      FAMILY. An individual, or group of persons related by blood, marriage or
adoption, or a group of not more than three unrelated individuals, living
together in the same dwelling unit.
      FILL. Material excavated elsewhere and deposited upon the earth surface
in the process of grading for land development.
      FLOOD-PRONE AREA. Land surface abutting a stream or drainageway that will
be inundated during the course of a flood likely to occur once every 100 years,
or with a 1% change of occurring in any one year.
      FLOODPROOFED. The preparation of an enclosed space, all or part of which
lies below a foot and a half above the 100-year flood level, so that such space
will remain dry during flood conditions.
      FOSTER CARE OR HALF-WAY HOUSE. A dwelling used to house individuals who
are under the custody and care of a social agency or public body or are
recovering from treatment in an institution and are preparing to return to
society.
      GARAGE. An accessory building on a residential lot attached to or
detached from the dwelling, or a room within the dwelling, intended for the
storage of vehicles operated by the residents of the dwelling and not intended
to house an automobile repair business.
      GRADING. The reconstruction of the surface of a property to accommodate
development.
      HOME OCCUPATION. A business carried on entirely within a single-family
dwelling by the residents thereof, involving no exterior changes to the
appearance of the dwelling and not creating nuisance or congestion conditions
in the neighborhood where it is located.
      LAND USE. The activity or activities for which a lot or property and the
structures (if any) on it are devoted.
      LOT. An area of land surface abutting a street, such area recorded as to
ownership and legal description with the County Recorder of Deeds; also a
property.
      LOT AREA. The area of a lot, but not including any portions of a street
right-of-way encroaching on or crossing the lot.
      LOT FRONTAGE. The length of the edge of a lot that abuts the street to
which the principal structure on the lot is or will be oriented.
      LOT OF RECORD. A lot duly recorded in the Office of the County Recorder
of Deeds.
      LOT WIDTH. The distance across a lot measured along the front setback
line.
      MOBILE HOME. A transportable, structurally integral single-family
dwelling intended for permanent occupancy which arrives on its site or lot
ready for use, except for the joining of the matched pair of units if a double-
wide home, and other minor assembly; and which is capable of later being
disassembled and towed to a second site or lot.
      MOBILE HOME PARK. A property which has been designed for the placement of
at least two mobile homes.
      MUNICIPAL FACILITIES AND SERVICES. Any service or utility provided by the
borough or by a body created and/or funded by the borough.
      NEIGHBORHOOD BUSINESS. A retail outlet providing goods and/or services
required by households on a daily basis located in a building similar in size
to the surrounding dwellings.
      OCCUPANCY PERMIT. Authorization issued by the Zoning Officer attesting
that the proposed use or reuse of premises is in accordance with this chapter
or with a previously issued zoning permit and may legally be occupied.
      OFF-STREET PARKING. Area set aside on a lot for the parking of cars
entirely outside a public street.
      PARKING SPACE. An area in a lot designed to store one vehicle.
      PATIO. A paved outdoor area that is level with surrounding land surfaces
and without a permanent roof.
      PENNSYLVANIA MUNICIPALITIES PLANNING CODE or MUNICIPALITIES PLANNING
CODE. The enabling legislation of the commonwealth, originally adopted in 1968,
regulating the right of municipalities to adopt zoning ordinances and
specifying generally the regulations and limitations thereof, being Act of Jul.
31, 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, 53 P.S. §§ 10901 et seq.
      PERSONAL SERVICES. Activities provided at retail to individuals but
involving no added product, except incidentally.
      POSTING. The placement of a notice upon a signboard on a property calling
public attention to proposed changes in the zoning status of the property, or
to a request for a variance, and indicating the date, time and place of the
hearing at which such matter will be heard.
      PREMISES. All or part of a lot or property devoted to a particular use.
      PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USE. A use that is expressly allowed by this chapter
to occur on a lot because of the lot’s location in a certain zoning district,
and to which all other activity on the lot is subordinate.
      PRINCIPAL STRUCTURE. The main building on a lot, housing the principal
use of the lot.
      PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER. An individual duly registered to practice civil
engineering in the commonwealth.
      PROPERTY LINE. The edge of a lot or property described by bearings and
distances and noted on the property deed; also a LOT LINE.
      PUBLIC HEARING. A meeting called by the Borough Council or the Zoning
Hearing Board, properly noticed in advance, for the purpose of taking testimony
on the matter being heard as a basis for the Council or the Board to make a
later decision.
      PUBLIC NOTICE. An announcement of a public hearing published in the legal
section of the principal newspaper serving borough residents at least twice,
once in each of two consecutive weeks, the first notice not more than 30 days
before the hearing and the second not less than seven days before, indicating
the date, time and place of the hearing and a description of the matter to be
heard, as well as the location where, and times at which, the material to be
covered in the hearing may be examined.
      PUBLIC UTILITY STRUCTURE, RIGHT-OF-WAY AND FACILITIES. Any element in the
systems to convey water, sewerage, gas, electricity or telephone or television
communications, as well as devices to treat, store, transform or regulate
within such systems, whether on public or privately owned land.
      RIGHT-OF-WAY. A strip of land dedicated to and improved for public use
providing access to properties or lots that abut it and connecting to other
public ways, or an easement across private property for the passage of public
utilities or the disposal of stormwater.
      SCREEN. A planted buffer intended to protect residential properties from
abutting commercial or other downgrading activities that might deteriorate the
residential property values.
      SETBACK. The minimum distance a structure must be removed from the
nearest property line; thus, the FRONT SETBACK LINE describes the limit of
construction on a lot behind the property line abutting the street.
      SEWAGE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. An individual certified by the commonwealth
and retained by the borough to evaluate the ability of a lot proposed for
development to absorb sewerage effluent and to decide on the appropriate type
of disposal system, if any, under the circumstances to serve the property.
      SIGN. A panel or construction projecting a message by words, symbols and/
or pictures designed to be viewed by the public, but not including the support
thereof.
      SITE DEVELOPMENT. The improvement of a property in accordance with an
approved site plan, including the placement of structures and/or manipulation
of the land surface.
      SITE PLAN. A layout of a property showing all improvements proposed to be
placed on or under the lot in the course of development, as well as existing
conditions on the lot to remain.
      SMALL BUSINESS VENTURE. A business conducted on a property by those
residing there and screened and isolated in such a way that neighboring
dwellings are not affected by it.
      STENOGRAPHIC RECORD. A transcription of the testimony taken at a public
hearing, recorded by a professional stenographer at the hearing.
      STORM RETENTION VESSEL. A depression in the land surface or a paved
surface, rooftop or holding tank designed and built to hold excess stormwater
drainage for release at a controlled rate.
      STORY. The vertical dimension between a floor and the floor of the level
next above or next below when the dimension between floors is at least six
feet, or if no floor is above, then the ceiling above.
      STREET. An improved vehicular surface within a right-of-way which affords
the primary means of access to abutting properties. A PUBLIC STREET is one
which has been accepted for maintenance by the borough or state.
      STRUCTURE. Any permanent human-made construction in, on or over the
ground surface and attached to the ground, but not including paving or surfaces
treated for vehicular or pedestrian passage.
      SUBDIVISION. The dividing of a property into two or more lots, each with
access to a street, for the immediate or future sale or lease to a second
party, or the changing of existing lot lines even when no new lots are created,
such divisions requiring the approval of the County Department of Development
and recording with the County Recorder of Deeds before lots may be sold.
      UNDISTURBED EARTH. Land surface that has not been altered for at least
the two previous years.
      USE ALLOWED BY RIGHT. A principal permitted use.
      VARIANCE. A grant of the Zoning Hearing Board permitting an owner to use
a property not wholly in accordance with this chapter because the Board finds
that strict conformance would be a hardship, not created by the owner,
depriving him or her of reasonable use of the property, and a specific minor
variation or variations in the regulations determined by the Board to
accommodate the owner will not detrimentally affect abutting properties or the
public.
      VOLUME MEASUREMENT. The dimension created by multiplying the length of an
interior space by its width and then multiplying the quotient by the floor-to-
ceiling dimension.
      YARD. The front, side or rear area of a lot or property between property
line and setback line, the depth of which is specified for each zoning district
by this chapter and within which buildings with permanent roofs, or portions
thereof, cannot be built.
      YARD, FRONT. The area of a lot between the front property line abutting
the street to which the property has access and the front setback line and
extending between the side lot lines.
      YARD, REAR. The area of a lot between the rear property line and rear
setback line and extending between the side lot lines.
      YARD, SIDE. The area of a lot between the side property line and side
setback line on each side of a property and extending between the front and
rear yards.
      ZONING BOUNDARY. The edge of a zoning district where it abuts another
district or the borough boundary.
      ZONING CLASSIFICATION. The group of uses that are permitted by right or
conditionally and the constraints on development that apply uniformly
throughout a zoning district.
      ZONING DISTRICT. A contiguous area of land on all parts of which the same
uniform opportunities for development apply.
      ZONING HEARING BOARD. A board appointed by the Borough Council to examine
and decide appeals for relief from strict conformance to this chapter, and to
hear testimony regarding the validity of this chapter or regarding challenges
to the decisions of the Zoning Officer.
      ZONING MAP. The official plan of zoning districts in the borough, a part
of this chapter, showing precisely the boundaries and title of each zoning
district.
      ZONING OFFICER. A person retained by the borough to enforce the
regulations of this chapter, with power to issue building and occupancy
permits, to halt illegal construction and to interpret the meaning of the
various sections of this chapter subject to appeal before the Zoning Hearing
Board.
      ZONING PERMIT. A document issued by the borough attesting that all
requirements of this chapter have been met and allowing the approved work to
commence in conformance with the permit.
(Prior Code, § 27-202)
(Ord. 196, passed 4-14-1986; Ord. 206B, passed 8-13-1990; Ord. 2015-04, passed
12-14-2015)
ZONING DISTRICT MAP
§ 156.020 ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS.
   The borough is hereby divided into four classes of zoning districts as shown
on the official zoning map. The regulations that apply in each zone district
are contained in §§
156.035 to
156.039 of this chapter. The four classifications are Conservation, Residential
R-1, Residential R-2 and Residential R-3.
(Prior Code, § 27-301) (Ord. 196, passed 4-14-1986)
§ 156.021 OFFICIAL ZONING MAP.
   (A)   A reproduction of the official zoning map is bound into the rear of
the ordinance codified in this chapter and is an integral part of the chapter.
   (B)   The official copy of the zoning map shall be located in the Borough
Office and shall be kept current as zone district boundaries are amended. It
shall be the final authority as to the current location of zone district
boundaries.
   (C)   No changes of any kind shall be made to the map except after
amendments have been adopted by the Council (see §
156.124 of this chapter). Any unauthorized change by any person shall be
considered a violation of this chapter, subject to penalties under §§
156.123 and
156.999 of this chapter.
   (D)   The official zoning map shall be identified by the signatures of the
President and Secretary of the Borough Council, together with the date of
adoption under the following words: “This is to certify that this is the
Official Zoning Map referred to in Article III of Ord. 196, of 1986 of the
Borough of Oklahoma, Westmoreland County, Pennsylvania.”
   (E)   Each amendment to the zoning district boundaries shall be noted on the
zoning map by the ordinance number and date together with the initials of the
President of the Council.
(Prior Code, § 27-302) (Ord. 196, passed 4-14-1986) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.022 INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.
   (A)   Zoning district boundaries in most cases follow property lines or the
centerlines of streets, railroad lines or streams.
   (B)   Boundaries indicated as parallel to a street, property line or
railroad shall be construed as parallel thereto and at such a distance
therefrom as indicated on the map.
   (C)   Boundaries whose location are not otherwise indicated specifically
follow the toe or top (edge) of steep slopes and are indicated approximately on
the map.
   (D)   When there is disagreement over the location of district boundaries, a
decision on the correct location shall be rendered by the Zoning Officer, with
appeal from his or her decision made to the Zoning Hearing Board.
   (E)   In the event that the borough annexes additional land, such land shall
be placed initially in the R-1 Zone District until the Council, within 90 days
of annexation, determines the appropriate zone classification for the land
after receiving recommendations from the Planning Commission and holding a
public hearing.
(Prior Code, § 27-303) (Ord. 196, passed 4-14-1986)
REGULATIONS WITHIN EACH ZONE DISTRICT
§ 156.035 APPLICATION OF DISTRICT REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Uniformity. The regulations within each zone district shall apply
uniformly to every proposed development therein, whether new construction,
expansion or renovation of a property.
   (B)   Conformity. No building, structure or land area shall be erected, used
or altered except to conform with the regulations of the zone district
containing the property to be developed, unless:
      (1)   The Borough Council approves an application for a conditional use;
or
      (2)   The Zoning Hearing Board grants a variance, allowing specific
modification of the regulations.
   (C)   Yard size and use. No yard or lot area or off-street parking space
used by one building, structure or land use shall be credited to another
building, structure or use, and no yard or lot or off-street parking area shall
be reduced in size or number so as to be less than the minimums prescribed for
the zone district.
   (D)   Uses allowed by right.
      (1)   Within each zoning district, lands, buildings and structures shall
be used, and buildings and structures shall be erected, altered or enlarged,
only for any of the uses permitted by right in the zone district, or after
Council approval for a conditional use. The principal permitted uses (allowed
by right), accessory uses and conditional uses for each zone district are
listed below in this subchapter.
      (2)   No use listed in one zone district is allowed in a second district
unless listed as a permitted, accessory or conditional use in that second
district.
   (E)   Accessory uses. Any accessory use may only be constructed or occupied
concurrent with or later than the principal use it serves.
(Prior Code, § 27-401) (Ord. 196, passed 4-14-1986) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.036 CONSERVATION ZONE DISTRICT (CON).
   (A)   Principal permitted uses.
      (1)   Single-family detached dwellings, but not including a mobile home;
      (2)   Growing of orchard, nursery, vegetable or field crops, or the
grazing of livestock, including barns and/or storage buildings;
      (3)   Municipal facilities and services; and
      (4)   Public utility structures, rights-of-way and facilities, but not
including office buildings, garages or materials stockpiles.
   (B)   Accessory uses.
      (1)   Private garages and off-street parking areas for the use of
residents of the property and their guests;
      (2)   Private recreation facilities for the use of residents of the
property and their guests; and
      (3)   Buildings for property maintenance equipment, housing of pets or
farm animals owned by the property residents, greenhouses and the like.
   (C)   Conditional uses.
      (1)   Recreation areas, including, but not limited to, playgrounds,
fishing or boating preserves, swimming clubs, horse riding stables and trails,
picnic groves and the like (see §
156.073(A) of this chapter);
      (2)   Commercial nurseries, greenhouses or orchards, including roadside
sales stands for crops grown on the same property (see §
156.072(A) of this chapter);
      (3)   Cemeteries (see §
156.073(B) of this chapter);
      (4)   Veterinary clinics and/or commercial kennels (see §
156.072(B) of this chapter);
      (5)   Home occupations (see §
156.072(C) of this chapter); and
      (6)   Small business ventures (see §
156.072(D) of this chapter).
   (D)   Minimum dimensional requirements.
      (1)   Lot area: 40,000 square feet;
      (2)   Lot width: 120 feet;
      (3)   Lot frontage: 50 feet;
      (4)   Front yard depth: 25 feet;
      (5)   Side yard depth, interior yard: 15 feet;
      (6)   Side yard depth, yard abuts street: 25 feet;
      (7)   Rear yard depth, principal building: 30 feet; and
      (8)   Rear yard depth, accessory building: 15 feet.
(Prior Code, § 27-402) (Ord. 196, passed 4-14-1986)
§ 156.037 RESIDENTIAL R-1 ZONE DISTRICT (R-1).
   (A)   Principal permitted uses.
      (1)   Single-family detached dwellings, but not including a mobile home;
      (2)   Two-family dwellings;
      (3)   Conversion of a single-family dwelling to a two-family dwelling
(see §
156.054(A) of this chapter);
      (4)   Outdoor growing of orchards, nurseries or vegetable crops;
      (5)   Municipal facilities and services;
      (6)   Public utility structures, rights-of-way and facilities, but not
including office buildings, garages or materials stockpiles; and
      (7)   Operations for the exploration for and development of oil and gas,
provided that the laws and regulations of the commonwealth and the Department
of Environmental Protection are met.
   (B)   Accessory uses.
      (1)   Private garages and off-street parking areas for the use of
residents of the property and their guests;
      (2)   Private recreation facilities for the use of residents of the
property and their guests;
      (3)   Buildings for property maintenance equipment, housing for pets
owned by the property residents, greenhouses and the like; and
      (4)   Boarding or lodging of not more than two individuals in a single-
family detached dwelling occupied by a family.
   (C)   Conditional uses.
      (1)   Attached single-family dwellings (townhouses) (see §
156.071(A) of this chapter);
      (2)   Garden apartment buildings (see §
156.071(B) of this chapter);
      (3)   Places of worship, including educational, social and administrative
functions (see §
156.073(C) of this chapter);
      (4)   Home occupations (see §
156.072(C) of this chapter);
      (5)   Nonprofit community clubs (see §
156.073(D) of this chapter);
      (6)   Nursing, convalescent or retirement homes (see §
156.071(C) of this chapter);
      (7)   Day care centers (see §
156.073(E) of this chapter);
      (8)   Boarding or lodging homes for not more than five residents (see §
156.071(D) of this chapter);
      (9)   Parking lots for permitted or conditional use in an adjacent zone
district (see §
156.072(E) of this chapter); and
      (10)   Commercial greenhouses (see §
156.072(A) of this chapter).
   (D)   Minimum dimensional requirements.
      (1)   Lot area:
         (a)   Single-family detached dwellings, municipal facilities, public
utilities, home occupations or boarding homes: 7,500 square feet;
         (b)   Two-family dwellings, dwelling conversions, places of worship,
day care centers or parking lots: 10,000 square feet; and
         (c)   Attached dwellings or garden apartments, nursing homes,
community clubs, commercial greenhouses or crop raising: 20,000 square feet.
      (2)   Lot width: 60 feet;
      (3)   Lot width, corner lot: 75 feet;
      (4)   Lot frontage: 50 feet;
      (5)   Front yard depth: 25 feet;
      (6)   Side yard depth, interior yard: eight feet;
      (7)   Side yard depth, yard abuts street: 25 feet;
      (8)   Rear yard depth, principal building: 25 feet;
      (9)   Rear yard depth, accessory building: eight feet; and
      (10)   Lot area per attached dwelling or apartment unit: 3,000 square
feet.
(Prior Code, § 27-403) (Ord. 196, passed 4-14-1986; Ord. 2005-1, passed 4-11-
2005)
§ 156.038 RESIDENTIAL R-2 ZONE DISTRICT (R-2).
   (A)   Principal permitted uses.
      (1)   Single-family detached dwellings, including a mobile home (see §
156.053 of this chapter);
      (2)   Two-family dwellings;
      (3)   Conversions of a single-family dwelling (see §
156.054(A) of this chapter);
      (4)   Outdoor growing of orchards, nurseries or vegetable crops;
      (5)   Municipal facilities and services;
      (6)   Public utility structures, rights-of-way and facilities, but not
including office buildings, garages or materials stockpiles; and
      (7)   Operations for the exploration for and development of oil and gas,
provided that the laws and regulations of the commonwealth and the Department
of Environmental Protection are met.
   (B)   Accessory uses.
      (1)   Private garages and off-street parking areas for the use of
residents of the property and their guests;
      (2)   Private recreation facilities for the use of residents of the
property and their guests;
      (3)   Buildings for property maintenance equipment, housing for pets
owned by the property residents, greenhouses and the like; and
      (4)   Boarding or lodging of not more than two individuals in a single-
family detached dwelling occupied by a family.
   (C)   Conditional uses.
      (1)   Attached single-family dwellings (townhouses) (see §
156.071(A) of this chapter);
      (2)   Garden apartment buildings (see §
156.071(B) of this chapter);
      (3)   Places of worship, including educational, social and administrative
functions (see §
156.073(C) of this chapter);
      (4)   Home occupations (see §
156.072(C) of this chapter);
      (5)   Nonprofit community clubs (see §
156.073(D) of this chapter);
      (6)   Nursing, convalescent or retirement homes (see §
156.071(C) of this chapter);
      (7)   Day care centers (see §
156.073(E) of this chapter);
      (8)   Boarding or lodging homes for not more than five residents (see §
156.071(D) of this chapter);
      (9)   Parking lots for permitted or conditional uses in an adjacent zone
district (see §
156.072(E) of this chapter);
      (10)   Mobile home parks (see §
156.071(E) of this chapter); and
      (11)   Commercial greenhouses (see §
156.072(A) of this chapter).
   (D)   Minimum dimensional requirements.
      (1)   Lot area:
         (a)   Single-family detached dwellings, municipal facilities, public
utilities, home occupations or boarding homes: 7,500 square feet;
         (b)   Two-family dwellings, dwelling conversions, places of worship,
day care centers or parking lots: 10,000 square feet;
         (c)   Attached dwellings or garden apartments, nursing homes,
community clubs, commercial greenhouses or crop raising: 20,000 square feet;
and
         (d)   Mobile home parks: 85,000 square feet.
      (2)   Lot width: 60 feet;
      (3)   Lot width, corner lot: 75 feet;
      (4)   Lot frontage: 50 feet;
      (5)   Front yard depth: 25 feet;
      (6)   Side yard depth, interior yard: eight feet;
      (7)   Side yard depth, yard abuts street: 25 feet;
      (8)   Rear yard depth, principal building: 25 feet;
      (9)   Rear yard depth, accessory building: eight feet; and
      (10)   Lot area per attached dwelling or apartment unit: 3,000 square
feet.
(Prior Code, § 27-404) (Ord. 196, passed 4-14-1986; Ord. 2005-1, passed 4-11-
2005)
§ 156.039 RESIDENTIAL R-3 ZONE DISTRICT (R-3).
   (A)   Principal permitted uses.
      (1)   Single-family detached dwellings, but not including a mobile home;
      (2)   Two-family dwellings;
      (3)   Conversions of a single-family dwelling to two or more dwelling
units;
      (4)   Attached single-family dwellings (townhouses) (see §
156.071(A) of this chapter);
      (5)   Garden apartment buildings (see §
156.071(B) of this chapter);
      (6)   Municipal facilities and services;
      (7)   Public utility structures, rights-of-way and facilities;
      (8)   Places of worship, including educational, social and administrative
functions and/or the dwelling of the minister, priest or rabbi;
      (9)   Home occupations;
      (10)   Boarding or lodging homes for not more than five residents;
      (11)   Parking lots; and
      (12)   Operations for the exploration for and development of oil and gas,
provided that the laws and regulations of the commonwealth and the Department
of Environmental Protection are met.
   (B)   Accessory uses.
      (1)   Private garages and off-street parking areas for the use of
residents of the property and their guests;
      (2)   Private recreation facilities for the use of residents of the
property and their guests;
      (3)   Buildings for property maintenance equipment, housing for pets
owned by the property residents, greenhouses and the like; and
      (4)   Boarding or lodging of not more than two individuals in any
dwelling occupied by a family.
   (C)   Conditional uses.
      (1)   Medical or dental clinics (see §
156.072(F) of this chapter);
      (2)   Business or professional offices (see §
156.072(G) of this chapter);
      (3)   Nonprofit community clubs (see §
156.073(D) of this chapter);
      (4)   Nursing, convalescent or retirement homes (see §
156.071(C) of this chapter);
      (5)   Day care centers (see § 156.073(E) of this chapter);
      (6)   Funeral homes (see §
156.072(H) of this chapter);
      (7)   Commercial recreation establishments (see §
156.072(I) of this chapter);
      (8)   Gasoline service stations (see §
156.072(J) of this chapter);
      (9)   Restaurants or taverns (see §
156.072(K) of this chapter);
      (10)   Motels (see §
156.072(L) of this chapter); and
      (11)   Neighborhood retail businesses, including, but not limited to,
grocery stores, bake shops, delicatessens, pharmacies, laundromats, dry
cleaning pickup and branch banks (see §
156.072(M) of this chapter).
   (D)   Minimum dimensional requirements.
      (1)   Lot area:
         (a)   Single-family detached dwellings, municipal facilities or public
utilities: 4,000 square feet;
         (b)   Two-family dwellings, home occupations, boarding houses and
dwelling conversions: 6,000 square feet; and
         (c)   All other permitted or conditional uses in the R-3 District:
10,000 square feet.
      (2)   Lot width and frontage: 40 feet;
      (3)   Lot width, corner lot: 50 feet;
      (4)   Front yard depth: 25 feet;
      (5)   Side yard depth, interior yard: five feet;
      (6)   Side yard depth, yard abuts street: 15 feet;
      (7)   Rear yard depth, principal building: 20 feet;
      (8)   Rear yard depth, accessory building: five feet; and
      (9)   Lot area per attached dwelling or apartment unit: 2,000 square
feet.
(Prior Code, § 27-405) (Ord. 196, passed 4-14-1986; Ord. 2005-1, passed 4-11-
2005)
SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS
§ 156.050 MINIMUM LOT SIZE AND FRONTAGE.
   (A)   Lots of record lacking minimum area or frontage. A lot legally
recorded before the adoption of this chapter containing less lot area and/or
lot frontage on a public street than required may be developed for any use
permitted in the zone district where the lot is located without application for
a variance, provided:
      (1)   No reduction of front, side or rear yards is required to
accommodate the proposed development;
      (2)   The lot does not abut along a common side lot line property in the
same ownership; and
      (3)   If public sewer and water are not available, the Borough Sewage
Enforcement Officer certifies the lot as being acceptable for on-lot sewage
disposal and specifies the location and type of sewage disposal method that
will be required.
   (B)   Ownership of multiple vacant lots. If two or more vacant lots in the
same ownership exist side-by-side and one or more contain less area or frontage
than the minimum required, the lots shall be combined or resubdivided to create
lots meeting at least the minimum area and/or frontage requirements.
   (C)   Determination of lot area if lot extends to street centerline. In such
case, the street right-of-way shall be assumed to be 40 feet wide and a strip
20 feet wide across the front of the property shall be excluded from the lot in
determining area.
   (D)   Number of principal permitted uses on a lot. Only one principal
permitted use shall be allowed on an undivided property, and only one dwelling
building shall be permitted on a lot, except in the case of a mobile home park,
a townhouse or apartment development, or a second use on a lot situated so that
if the property is later subdivided, both uses will occupy lots meeting all
area, setback and frontage requirements that apply in the zone district and
each will have separate access to a public street.
   (E)   Newly subdivided lots. All lots created by subdivision after the
effective date of this chapter shall be processed and approved by the County
Planning Department.
   (F)   Water supply. Any lot proposed for development with a structure
requiring a water supply shall be either connected to the public sewage
disposal system or to a disposal system on the lot approved by the Borough
Sewage Enforcement Officer.
(Prior Code, § 27-501) (Ord. 196, passed 4-14-1986)
§ 156.051 REGULATIONS IN REQUIRED YARDS.
   (A)   Structures on vacant lots.
      (1)   When a vacant lot exists between developed lots, a structure may be
erected on the vacant lot so that it is set back from the street not less than
the average setback of structures on the developed lots on either side, or 25
feet, whichever is less.
      (2)   If a vacant lot exists next to a developed lot on one side, a
structure may be erected on the vacant lot so that it is set back from the
street not less than the setback of the structure on the developed lot and 25
feet, or set back 25 feet, whichever is less.
   (B)   Permitted projections into yards. Roof overhangs, chimneys, open
balconies, bay windows, fire escapes and covered porches may extend up to five
feet into a required front, side or rear yard, but not closer than three feet
to a property line.
   (C)   Uses permitted in required yard areas. Driveways, patios and parking
areas may be extended to within one foot of any property line, and fences and
hedges to any property line, but paved areas may not drain onto neighboring
properties or adjacent streets. Neighbors may agree to extend paved areas to
their mutual property line.
   (D)   Hedges and fences as obstructions. Fences or hedges along property
lines shall not exceed seven feet in height. At street corners, fences and
hedges shall be held back to assure adequate vision for drivers approaching the
intersection on each street.
(Prior Code, § 27-502) (Ord. 196, passed 4-14-1986; Ord. 2003-?, passed - -
2003)
§ 156.052 MAXIMUM BUILDING HEIGHT.
   (A)   Maximum height. No building containing a principal permitted or
conditional use shall exceed three stories or 35 feet in height, whichever is
less, and accessory buildings shall not exceed 15 feet in height.
   (B)   Measurement of height. Height shall be measured as the vertical
distance between ground level and the top of the wall or the top of the roof,
using the wall with the lowest ground level. On a sloped-roof building, the top
of the wall shall be considered as halfway between the roof’s eave line and
ridge line.
   (C)   Exceptions. Chimneys, church steeples, flagpoles, water tanks, silos,
mechanical equipment mounted on a roof and communications equipment erected to
meet the standards of the Federal Communications Commission shall be exempt
from the maximum height regulations.
(Prior Code, § 27-503) (Ord. 196, passed 4-14-1986)
§ 156.053 INDIVIDUAL MOBILE HOMES ON THEIR OWN LOT.
   (A)   Such mobile homes shall meet all requirements of this chapter for
single-family homes, including the securing of a building permit.
   (B)   They shall be supported directly on a peripheral masonry foundation
carried at least three feet below grade. The area below the floor shall be
ventilated but completely enclosed by a masonry wall.
   (C)   Mobile homes shall be placed on their foundations not later than 30
days after arrival on the lot.
   (D)   No mobile home shall be occupied until the Zoning Officer verifies
that connection has been made to approved sewer and water services.
   (E)   Mobile homes shall be securely tied down to their foundations by
exterior over-the-top or built-in steel straps at each corner and at one
intermediate point on each side.
   (F)   No mobile home lacking toilet and washing facilities or cooking and
food storage facilities shall be permitted for permanent occupancy.
   (G)   No mobile home shall be removed from the borough until the owner has
secured certification that all borough, school district and county taxes past
and current have been paid in full.
   (H)   Any mobile home brought into the borough on or after the effective
date of this chapter shall comply with the National Manufactured Housing
Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, 42 U.S.C. §§ 5401 et seq., as
amended.
(Prior Code, § 27-504) (Ord. 196, passed 4-14-1986) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.054 APARTMENTS AND ATTACHED DWELLINGS.
   (A)   Any single-family dwelling in a residential zone district may be
converted to a two-family dwelling provided that after conversion, each
dwelling will have at least 360 square feet of floor area, its own toilet,
lavatory and shower or tub in a separate room, as well as a stove, refrigerator
and food preparation area, and each dwelling has two means of egress directly
to the outside and not through the other dwelling.
   (B)   Apartments constructed in a new building shall contain at least 360
square feet in an efficiency apartment, at least 480 square feet for a one-
bedroom apartment and at least 550 square feet for a two-bedroom unit. Each
apartment shall also contain a toilet, lavatory and shower or tub in a separate
room, as well as a stove, refrigerator and food preparation area. There shall
not be less than 2,000 square feet of lot area per apartment if in the R-3 Zone
District, and the minimum lot size shall be not less than 10,000 square feet.
   (C)   Attached single-family dwellings (townhouses) shall contain at least
450 square feet of floor area at the ground level, and there shall be not more
than eight dwellings attached in one group. The average distance within a group
between the centerlines of adjacent walls separating dwellings shall be not
less than 18 feet, and no two adjacent wall centerlines shall be closer
together than 16 feet. Walls controlled by this section shall include exterior
walls parallel to walls separating dwellings. Each dwelling shall have front
and rear entrances at grade as remote as possible from each other. No lot for
sale or lease containing a townhouse shall be less than 2,000 square feet in
area if in the R-3 Zone District, and the minimum lot size to receive a
townhouse group shall be not less than 10,000 square feet.
   (D)   Where several apartment building or townhouse groups occupy the same
or adjacent lots, such buildings shall be separated by at least 40 feet when
the long walls of adjacent buildings face each other, at least 20 feet when a
long wall faces an end wall and at least ten feet when end walls face each
other, regardless of the location of property lines.
(Prior Code, § 27-505) (Ord. 196, passed 4-14-1986)
§ 156.055 OFF-STREET PARKING.
   (A)   Off-street parking required. Any development constructed or expanded
after the effective date of this chapter shall provide off-street parking in
accordance with this section. Where several uses share the same lot, the
parking requirements of each shall be added together to determine the total
parking to be provided.
   (B)   Spacing.
      (1)   Each parking space in a lot shall contain at least 180 square feet
and be at least nine feet in width, exclusive of access lanes. Access lanes
shall be at least 22 feet in width. The near edge of a parking lot shall be not
farther away from the entrance of the use it serves than 200 feet and may be on
a second property in the same ownership as the use served, or leased for the
life of the use.
      (2)   For a single-family detached or two-family dwelling, the garage and
driveway on the property may be used to meet the off-street parking
requirements.
   (C)   Parking lot surfaces.
      (1)   Where parking is provided for eight or fewer vehicles on a lot, the
surfacing may be not less than four and one-half inches of well-choked and
compacted crushed limestone or slag base course.
      (2)   Where parking is provided for more than eight vehicles on a lot,
the base course described in division (C)(1) above shall be surfaced with a
one- or two-layer bituminous course not less than two inches in depth, provided
and placed in accordance with PennDOT specifications, or equivalent concrete
surfacing.
   (D)   Slopes and drainage.
      (1)   Parking lots shall be sloped not less than 0.5% nor more than 6% to
a storm drain if the lot is paved.
      (2)   When the slope extends downhill from the edge of a parking lot, the
edge shall be protected by a curb or stop bars.
      (3)   Stormwater on a paved lot shall be collected in the lot and
directed to a storm inlet or a recognized drainageway or stream.
   (E)   Screening and setback of parking.
      (1)   Parking lot paved edges shall be set back from property lines at
least two feet.
      (2)   Where a parking lot designed for more than eight vehicles abuts
other properties developed with housing, the parking lot shall be screened
along the common property line by a hedge maintained at a height of not less
than four feet, or a fence or wall of the same height.
      (3)   The Council may approve a natural change of grade along property
lines or existing natural vegetation as a screen in lieu of a hedge, fence or
wall upon application of the developer.
   (F)   Schedule of parking requirements.
      (1)   Single-family detached dwellings or two-family dwellings: two
spaces per dwelling unit;
      (2)   Townhouses, garden apartments, conversion apartments or apartments
over a store: one and one-half spaces per dwelling unit;
      (3)   Home occupations, small business ventures, medical or dental
clinics, business or professional offices, veterinarian clinics or neighborhood
retail businesses: one space for each 250 square feet of floor area devoted to
the business;
      (4)   Nonprofit clubs or other assembly space without permanent seating:
one space for each 100 square feet of floor space in the main hall or meeting
room;
      (5)   Churches: one space for each four persons who can be seated
simultaneously in the sanctuary;
      (6)   Restaurants or taverns: one space for each three persons who can be
seated simultaneously at tables and at the bar;
      (7)   Gasoline service stations: two parking spaces outside the
circulation area surrounding the pump islands and garage entrance;
      (8)   Funeral homes: six spaces for each reposing room;
      (9)   Motels: one space for each sleeping room;
      (10)   Boarding or lodging homes: one space for each boarder or lodger;
      (11)   Foster care homes or day care centers: three spaces;
      (12)   Roadside stands, commercial nurseries or greenhouses: six spaces
or one space for each 500 square feet of enclosed floor space, whichever is
greater; and
      (13)   Nursing or convalescent homes: one space for each two beds.
(Prior Code, § 27-506) (Ord. 196, passed 4-14-1986)
§ 156.056 SIGNS.
   (A)   Signs erected or placed in any zone district after the adoption of
this chapter shall be subject to regulation by this section.
   (B)   No sign illuminated by a flashing, pulsating or intermittent source;
no sign with moving parts; no strings of bare bulbs; and no signs lighted in
such a manner as to cause glare conditions on adjacent streets or properties
shall be permitted. No sign shall obstruct sight distances for, or confuse,
motorists. No sign shall extend into a public right-of-way, except signs placed
by a governmental body.
   (C)   Only the following types of signs shall be permitted: identification
of the occupant of a property and his or her address; a real estate sales sign;
identification of the contractor while employed on the same property;
identification of any business permitted by this chapter on the same property;
a sign or bulletin board of a church or other public or nonprofit organization;
and a sign authorized and erected by any level of government.
   (D)   Signs may be free-standing on their own support or attached to the
principal building or to a fence on the property. Signs advertising a business
may be lighted from a hidden or internal source during business hours.
   (E)   No sign shall be placed so that its topmost point is greater than 25
feet above the ground level below.
   (F)   No sign shall exceed four square feet in area (each side if more than
one) except business signs or signs identifying a church or other nonprofit
organization, which shall not exceed 32 square feet in area each side. Signs
identifying a home occupation shall not exceed four square feet in area each
side.
   (G)   If more than one sign occurs on a property, the total area of the
several signs shall not exceed the maximums specified in division (F) above.
   (H)   When a business moves or closes, signs advertising it shall be removed
within 30 days of termination.
   (I)   In a particular instance, the Borough Council may approve signs not in
accordance with these regulations for specific community events.
(Prior Code, § 27-507) (Ord. 196, passed 4-14-1986) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.057 SITE DEVELOPMENT.
   (A)   Review of plans for attached single-family, garden apartment and
commercial developments.
      (1)   Before a zoning permit may be issued for such a building or
grouping of buildings, or to expand such a grouping, the developer shall
present a plan of his or her proposal to the Planning Commission.
      (2)   The plan shall clearly show on a scaled drawing the location and
height of all buildings proposed and existing to remain relative to property
and street lines, number of dwelling or commercial units in each building,
access drives from adjacent streets, layout of parking areas showing the number
of spaces, location of public sanitary sewer and water lines and proposed
grading, including degree of slope and methods to control and dispose of storm
water.
      (3)   The Planning Commission shall review the plan at its next monthly
meeting after receipt, and shall render a decision to approve the plan as
submitted, approve it with specific modifications or conditions or reject it
not later than the second regular meeting after first reviewing the proposal.
Any conditions attached to approval shall be included on the zoning permit. If
the developer withdraws and then resubmits the plan, the review time period
shall begin again with the resubmission. If the plan is approved as submitted
or the developer accepts the modifications or conditions attached to approval,
the Commission shall authorize the issuance of a zoning permit. Otherwise, the
plan shall be considered as rejected. A developer whose plan has been rejected
or who objects to conditions attached to the plan by the Commission may appeal
to the Borough Council to approve the plan or remove or relax specific
conditions.
      (4)   The Council or the Planning Commission may, at its option, call and
hold a public hearing on the plan prior to rendering a decision.
   (B)   Grading.
      (1)   Earth movement shall result in finished grades that do not exceed
two horizontal to one vertical unless a report prepared by a professional
engineer indicates that specific steeper slopes in a particular location will
not compromise the stability of the completed slope or areas above or below it.
      (2)   Topsoil shall be removed and stockpiled before the start of
grading. Graded slopes shall be planted with a fast-catching grass cover as
soon as grading is completed.
      (3)   Where fill is used, it shall be placed in layers not exceeding 12
inches in depth, thoroughly compacted and keyed in to undisturbed earth at the
edges of the fill. Fill shall be considered any material that has been brought
to or moved on the site.
   (C)   Drainage.
      (1)   Stormwater shall not be permitted, as a result of development
undertaken after the adoption of this chapter, to collect upon any property; or
to pass from one property onto another in a concentrated flow without the
benefit of an easement; or to cross a public street on the surface.
      (2)   In any townhouse, garden apartment or commercial development, the
application to the Borough Council shall be accompanied by a plan to indicate
how stormwater will be collected and removed from the property.
      (3)   The Council may require, where no subsurface storm drainage system
is available and/or where large areas are to be covered with structures and
paved surfaces, that developers provide storm retention vessels on their
properties of sufficient capacity to hold the flow from the 50-year storm of
record (4.7 inches in 24 hours) for release at the ten-year rate (3.8 inches in
24 hours). The Council may ask the Westmoreland County Conservation District
for assistance in determining the need for, and adequacy of, stormwater
management facilities.
   (D)   Flood-prone areas.
      (1)   Areas identified as within the 100-year floodplain by the Federal
Insurance Administration’s flood insurance study for the borough shall not be
developed with structures whose lowest floor elevation is less than one and
one-half feet above the 100-year flood elevation at the proposed building site.
If the structure is for strictly commercial purposes, the lowest floor
elevation may be below that level as long as the building is floodproofed to
one and one-half feet above the 100-year flood elevation.
      (2)   Until definitive studies by the United States Army Corps of
Engineers have established specific flood levels, the preliminary report by the
Department of Housing and Urban Development and the highest known water level
at a particular location shall be used to establish the 100-year flood level.
      (3)   No new construction may encroach on any existing stream or
drainageway or constrict its natural flow characteristics.
      (4)   No flammable or toxic substances or buoyant containers shall be
stored within the floodplain.
(Prior Code, § 27-508) (Ord. 196, passed 4-14-1986) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.058 SLAUGHTERHOUSES.
   (A)   Definition and interpretation.
      (1)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
         PERSON. Any natural person, partnership, association, firm or
corporation.
      (2)   The singular shall include the plural and the masculine shall
include the feminine and the neuter.
   (B)   Distance of slaughterhouse from dwellings. No person shall establish
any slaughterhouse within the limits of the borough within 300 feet of any
dwelling house.
(Prior Code, § 27-509) (Ord. 196, passed 4-14-1986; Ord. 2015-04, passed 12-14-
2015) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.059 FENCES AND WALLS IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.
   (A)   For the purposes of this chapter, shrubs and hedges shall be regulated
as fences and walls when located within a residential district and shall be
regulated as stated in this section.
   (B)   All fences and walls require zoning permits regardless of the proposed
height.
   (C)   Fence or wall height shall be measured from grade and shall not exceed
six and one-half feet in height at any point.
   (D)   No portion of an opaque fence or wall erected within a clear vision
triangle may exceed two and one-half feet in height.
   (E)   Fences and walls may be constructed of stone, brick, wood, vinyl,
chain link or wire, wrought iron, aluminum and ornamental concrete block,
provided all other requirements herein are met. The finished side of the fence
or wall shall face outward.
   (F)   Fences or walls erected in front of any front setback shall not exceed
four feet in height.
   (G)   Fences and walls may be located up to but not on a property line. In
no case shall a fence or wall be located closer than one foot from a sidewalk
or other public right-of-way.
   (H)   Pen enclosures for animals shall be regulated as accessory structures.
(Prior Code, § 27-510) (Ord. 196, passed 4-14-1986; Ord. 2015-04, passed 12-14-
2015) Penalty, see §
156.999
CONDITIONAL USES
§ 156.070 REVIEW AND GENERAL CRITERIA.
   (A)   Such uses are listed for each zone district in Appendix B of this
chapter.
   (B)   A request for approval of a conditional use to the Planning Commission
shall be accompanied by a statement demonstrating that the proposal will not
endanger the public health or safety at the selected location; will not
deteriorate the environment or create nuisance conditions, such as traffic
congestion or excessive noise, glare, smoke, dust or vibration; and that the
proposal meets all other requirements in the zoning district.
   (C)   The developer shall submit, in addition to the statement, a site plan
of his or her proposal showing existing and proposed buildings, with use of
each building noted, uses of all adjacent properties and of those directly
across an intervening street, points of access into the property, internal
drives and parking areas and topographical features, including proposed
grading, if any (with degree of slope shown).
   (D)   (1)   Review of plan. The Planning Commission shall review the plan at
its next regular meeting after submission and shall recommend to the Council
that the plan be approved as proposed, approved with specific conditions
attached or disapproved. The Planning Commission’s decision shall be made not
later than the second regular meeting after first reviewing the plan. The
Commission shall immediately send its recommendation to the Council. At its
first regular meeting after the plan is submitted, the Borough Council shall
schedule a public hearing on the proposal, properly noticed (see definition in
§
156.008 of this chapter). The Council shall hold the hearing and consider the
testimony received, as well as the recommendations of the Planning Commission,
before making a decision, which shall occur not later than the third regular
Council meeting after the submission was received.
      (2)   Result of decision. The Council may attach reasonable conditions
and safeguards, in addition to those contained in this subchapter, as it may
deem necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare. If granting
approval, the Council shall immediately authorize the Zoning Officer to issue a
zoning permit for the proposal. If the Council denies approval, it shall inform
the developer of the specific reasons for the denial. Failure of the developer
to accept conditions attached to approval shall constitute disapproval. Any
conditions attached to approval shall be noted on the zoning permit.
   (E)   The following are general guidelines to be considered in evaluating a
conditional use:
      (1)   Building setback from property lines. Buildings shall be set back
at least the same minimum distances as apply to permitted uses in the zone
district;
      (2)   Property access. Entrances should be located as remote as possible
from street intersections and to give motorists the greatest view of
conflicting traffic;
      (3)   Off-street parking. Shall be provided as required by §
156.055 of this chapter;
      (4)   Signs. Shall meet the regulations of §
156.056 of this chapter;
      (5)   Site development. Shall meet the regulations of §
156.057 of this chapter;
      (6)   Lighting of property. Should be the least needed to provide
illumination and directed away from adjacent streets or housing;
      (7)   Landscaping. Areas not paved or occupied by buildings should be
planted and maintained;
      (8)   Permanent buildings. Businesses shall be operated from a permanent
building on the property; and
      (9)   Hours of operation. The Council may control hours of operation if
late night activity might cause hardship to nearby residents.
(Prior Code, § 27-601) (Ord. 196, passed 4-14-1986; Ord. 206B, passed 8-13-
1990)
§ 156.071 CONDITIONAL RESIDENTIAL USES.
   (A)   Attached single-family dwellings (townhouses) (R-1 and R-2).
      (1)   Not more than eight dwellings shall be in an attached group, each
not less than 500 square feet on the ground floor level. No individual
townhouse lot shall be less than 3,000 square feet in area.
      (2)   When dwellings are located side-by-side, the distance between
centerlines of party walls shall be not less than 18 feet and the average of
all such distances in one group shall be not less than 20 feet. The minimum lot
size to receive a townhouse group shall be not less than 20,000 square feet.
      (3)   Off-street parking may be pull-in spaces off a rear or side alley,
but such parking shall be on the same property as the dwelling and shall be
paved.
      (4)   Each dwelling shall have front and back entrances at grade, or two
entrances as remote as possible from one another.
   (B)   Garden apartment buildings (R-1 and R-2).
      (1)   Apartments shall be sized and equipped as required by §
156.054(B) of this chapter, except there shall be at least 3,000 square feet of
lot area per apartment, and the minimum lot size to receive an apartment
building shall be not less than 20,000 square feet.
      (2)   Apartment buildings shall be separated as required by §
156.054(D) of this chapter.
      (3)   Off-street parking may be pull-in spaces off a rear or side alley,
provided such spaces are paved and on the same property as the apartment
building or on a second property in the same ownership as the apartment
building and not more than 200 feet distant from an entrance to the building.
   (C)   Nursing, convalescent or retirement homes (R-1, R-2 and R-3).
      (1)   Construction of a new building or renovation of an existing
building shall have been approved by the State Departments of Labor and
Industry and of Health prior to the issuance of a building permit.
      (2)   The number of retirement apartments or nursing or convalescent beds
shall be not more than the property area in square feet divided by 1,500, if in
the R-1 District, or by 1,000, if in the R-2 District.
      (3)   (a)   A NURSING HOME shall be one in which permanent skilled care
of bed-ridden patients is provided.
         (b)   A CONVALESCENT HOME implies temporary long term skilled care for
those recovering from serious illness before returning home.
         (c)   A RETIREMENT HOME provides permanent residence for elderly
persons requiring minimum care, but may include communal dining.
         (d)   APARTMENTS FOR THE ELDERLY shall be for not more than two
individuals, at least one of which shall be 62 years old or older.
   (D)   Boarding or lodging homes (R-1, R-2 and R-3).
      (1)   A single-family detached dwelling may be owned by or rented to not
more than five boarders or lodgers who are not all related by blood, marriage
or adoption, or any combination totaling five, provided one off-street parking
space is available on the lot for each boarder or lodger.
      (2)   The family residing in a single-family or two-family dwelling may
rent a room or rooms in the dwelling to not more than two boarders or lodgers
as an accessory use not requiring conditional use approval.
   (E)   Mobile home parks (R-2).
      (1)   Any mobile home park developed or expanded after the adoption of
this chapter shall have been approved by the Commonwealth Department of
Environmental Resources and by the County Planning Commission prior to the
lease of any lease lots in the park.
      (2)   No part of a mobile home shall be less than 25 feet from a park
property line or public street right-of-way line.
      (3)   Each mobile home lease lot shall contain at least 4,000 square feet
of area and have a width of at least 40 feet along a line not more than 15 feet
back from the abutting park street.
      (4)   No two mobile homes shall be closer to one another than 25 feet,
except that two adjacent homes not parallel to each other may be no closer
together than 20 feet provided the average separation is at least 25 feet.
      (5)   Except for laundry facilities, a building for park maintenance
equipment, a recreation area for park residents and/or the residence of the
owner or operator of the park, there shall be no other uses within a mobile
home park.
      (6)   Mobile homes may be placed on a mesh reinforced concrete pad at
least four inches thick prepared with all utility connections prior to the
arrival of the mobile home at the park, or mobile homes may be placed on at
least two masonry piers (or a peripheral masonry foundation) extended to at
least three feet below grade, such support structure to be completed not later
than 30 days after arrival of the mobile home at the park.
      (7)   The area between the bottom of the mobile home walls and the ground
below shall be ventilated but completely enclosed by a masonry, metal or vinyl
skirting.
      (8)   Mobile homes shall be securely held to their foundations or pads by
built-in or exterior over-the-top tie-downs at each corner and at least one
intermediate point on each side.
      (9)   No mobile home shall be occupied until the Sewage Enforcement
Officer verifies that it has been connected to public sewer and water lines.
      (10)   It shall be unlawful for a mobile home to be removed from the
borough until all taxes owed the borough, school district and county have been
paid in full, as verified by the tax collector.
      (11)   Except where the regulations of this chapter establish a specific
standard, the regulations of the County Mobile Home Park Subdivision
Regulations shall apply.
      (12)   Any mobile home brought into a mobile home park on or after the
effective date of this chapter shall comply with the National Manufactured
Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, 42 U.S.C. §§ 5401 et
seq., as amended.
(Prior Code, § 27-602) (Ord. 196, passed 4-14-1986) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.072 BUSINESS USES IN RESIDENTIAL OR CONSERVATION DISTRICTS.
   (A)   Commercial nurseries or greenhouses (CON, R-1 and R-2).
      (1)   Retail sales on the premises shall only be of crops grown there and
may be from a temporary or permanent sales building.
      (2)   In addition to buildings to house the business, the property may
also include the single-family detached dwelling of the owner or operator.
      (3)   Any materials used in the business that are odiferous shall be
stored in a closed container or closed building prior to application on the
crop fields.
      (4)   No burning of residue plant materials shall occur on the premises.
   (B)   Veterinary clinics or commercial kennels (CON).
      (1)   Any overnight holding of animals shall be in pens inside an
enclosed building.
      (2)   No animal remains shall be disposed of on the premises.
      (3)   No part of any kennel building or holding area or a clinic building
shall be closer than 100 feet from the nearest lot line.
      (4)   The residence of the owner or operator may also occupy the
property, but no other residential uses.
   (C)   Home occupations (CON, R-1 and R-2).
      (1)   It may occur in a single-family detached dwelling but not in
accessory buildings.
      (2)   It shall be operated by the residents of the dwelling and employ no
outside help.
      (3)   No exterior changes shall be made to the dwelling to accommodate
the home occupation.
      (4)   Retail sales shall be no more than an incidental part of the
occupation.
      (5)   Personal services shall be provided only on an appointment basis.
      (6)   Items to be repaired shall be limited to those that can be carried
in by one person.
      (7)   If the dwelling is rented, the residents shall have written
permission from the owner before commencing the home occupation.
   (D)   Small business ventures (CON).
      (1)   Such a business may occupy an area outside the dwelling, including
an accessory building.
      (2)   The business shall be operated by the residents of the dwelling on
the same property and employ no outside help.
      (3)   If the premises are rented, the residents shall have written
permission from the owner before commencing the business.
      (4)   No part of the business shall occur within 100 feet of any property
in another ownership.
      (5)   No scrap metal or other residue from the business shall be stored
outside a building.
      (6)   Any outdoor areas used in the business, except off-street parking
for customers, shall be screened from view from adjacent dwellings by a hedge
or fence at least four feet in height or natural landscaping or change of
grade.
      (7)   Before acting on a small business venture, the Council shall call
and hold a public hearing.
   (E)   Parking lots for permitted or conditional uses in an adjacent zone
district (R-1 and R-2).
      (1)   Such a lot shall be paved.
      (2)   Drainage from the lot shall be directed towards a storm sewer or to
the landscaped edges of the lot but shall not be permitted to flow on or over
any adjacent street or property.
      (3)   The edges of the lot shall be landscaped with a low evergreen hedge
maintained at a height of not more than four feet, or by a fence or wall of the
same height, wherever the lot abuts or is directly across the street from any
property occupied by dwellings of any type.
   (F)   Medical or dental clinics (R-3).
      (1)   The facility shall be for out-patient care and include no overnight
accommodations.
      (2)   The clinic shall be operated by licensed medical doctors, dentists
and/or chiropractors.
      (3)   There shall be no residential accommodations on the same property,
and laboratory work shall be only for patients of the clinic.
      (4)   The parking lot shall be developed in accordance with division (E)
above.
   (G)   Business or professional offices (R-3).
      (1)   The building shall be set back from property lines as required for
residential buildings.
      (2)   No parking area shall occur in the front yard of the property.
      (3)   The parking area shall be developed in accordance with division (E)
above.
   (H)   Funeral homes (R-3).
      (1)   The transfer of caskets to and from a hearse shall occur within an
enclosed garage.
      (2)   The building may also include the residence of the owner or
operator.
      (3)   The parking area shall be developed in accordance with division (E)
above.
   (I)   Commercial recreation establishments (R-3).
      (1)   All activity shall occur entirely within an enclosed building.
      (2)   The establishment shall not generate excessive noise or glare.
      (3)   Tables or electronic game machines used in the establishment shall
be separated by at least four feet on all sides, except one side may be against
a wall.
      (4)   There shall be a representative of the management on the premises
at all times the establishment is open responsible for customer behavior.
      (5)   The Council shall call and hold a public hearing before deciding on
any proposal for a commercial recreation establishment.
   (J)   Gasoline service stations (R-3).
      (1)   Pump islands shall not be closer than ten feet to any street right-
of-way. Overhanging canopies shall not extend into a right-of-way.
      (2)   All auto servicing, except normal activities at the pump island,
shall occur within an enclosed building. Services shall not include spray
painting, major engine overhaul, bodywork or tire recapping.
      (3)   Waste greases and oils and discarded car parts and tires shall be
stored within the station building for disposal off the property.
      (4)   Wherever the station property abuts a lot in residential use along
a side or rear line, there shall be provided an evergreen hedge, maintained at
a height of not less than four feet, or an opaque fence of the same height, on
the common property line.
      (5)   No derelict or wrecked vehicles shall be kept on the premises at
any time.
   (K)   Restaurants or taverns (R-3).
      (1)   Any restaurant shall provide sit-down tables in an enclosed
building for customers.
      (2)   If food is provided from a window directly to customers in cars,
room shall be provided on the lot so that at least three cars can wait in line
in advance of the pickup window.
      (3)   If food is available for takeout, there shall be litter baskets
available in the parking areas and the premises shall be cleaned up daily.
      (4)   The parking area shall be developed in accordance with division (E)
above.
   (L)   Motels (R-3).
      (1)   Units shall be for transient guests only; no guests shall remain
for more than 14 days.
      (2)   Except for a restaurant and paved parking area to serve the guests
and the apartment of the owner or operator, the property shall contain no other
uses.
   (M)   Neighborhood retail businesses (R-3).
      (1)   Any neighborhood business type that may be proposed and is not
listed in §
156.039(C)(11) of this chapter shall not be acted on by the Council until after
a public hearing has been held on the matter.
      (2)   The dwelling of the owner or operator, or apartments in accordance
with §
156.054(B) of this chapter, may occupy the same building.
      (3)   The parking area shall be developed in accordance with division (E)
above.
(Prior Code, § 27-603) (Ord. 196, passed 4-14-1986) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.073 OTHER CONDITIONAL USES.
   (A)   Recreation areas (CON).
      (1)   Earth and vegetation disturbance shall be kept to an absolute
minimum.
      (2)   Structures shall be only the minimum to serve the proposed
development. Several small buildings will be preferred to one large one.
   (B)   Cemeteries (CON).
      (1)   Grave sites shall be set back from street and property lines not
less than for a dwelling.
      (2)   No crematorium shall be permitted.
      (3)   Earth and vegetation disturbance shall be kept to a minimum
consistent with the use.
   (C)   Places of worship (R-1, R-2 and R-3).
      (1)   It shall not be located with its only access on a dead-end street.
      (2)   The facility may include the residence of the minister or priest
but no other residential accommodations.
      (3)   Part or all of the parking requirements may be met in a parking lot
shared with a commercial use whose hours do not conflict with normal times of
church attendance. If a separate lot for the church is provided, it shall be
developed in accordance with §
156.072(E) of this chapter.
   (D)   Nonprofit community clubs (R-1, R-2 and R-3).
      (1)   The club shall be affiliated with a state or national organization.
      (2)   The dwelling of the owner, operator or caretaker shall be the only
residence on the premises.
      (3)   The club shall be open only to members and their guests.
   (E)   Day care centers (R-1, R-2 and R-3).
      (1)   Such a facility may be in a church building or in a single-family
detached dwelling.
      (2)   If the facility is in a dwelling, it shall be operated by the
family residing there and shall accommodate not more than six preschool age
children or dependent adults.
      (3)   There shall be no overnight housing.
      (4)   The operation shall be approved by the State Department of Welfare
and the County Department of Health.
(Prior Code, § 27-604) (Ord. 196, passed 4-14-1986) Penalty, see §
156.999
NONCONFORMING USES, STRUCTURES AND LOTS
§ 156.085 APPLICABILITY.
   This subchapter shall apply to all nonconforming uses, structures and lots
as defined by this subchapter. Nothing contained herein shall require any
change in the overall layout, plans, construction, size or designated use of
any development, building, structure or part thereof for which official
approval and required permits have been granted prior to the effective date of
this subchapter or any amendment thereto.
(Ord. 2020-02, passed 3-9-2020)
§ 156.086 NONCONFORMING USES.
   These regulations shall apply to any use of a structure or lot in any zoning
district which is a nonconforming use as defined by this chapter. Whenever the
boundaries of a zoning district shall be changed so as to transfer an area from
one zoning district to another of a different classification, these regulations
shall also apply to any uses which thereby becoming nonconforming.
   (A)   Continuation. Where, at the effective date of adoption or amendment of
this subchapter, a lawful use of a lot or structure exists that is made no
longer permissible under the terms of this chapter as enacted or amended, such
use may be sold or otherwise transferred to other owners and may be continued
as long as the use conforms to all other applicable regulations of the borough,
county, commonwealth and federal government and the provisions of this
subchapter governing nonconforming uses, structures and lots.
   (B)   Enlargement or expansion.
      (1)   No nonconforming use of a lot or structure shall be enlarged or
increased or extended to occupy a greater area than was occupied at the
effective date of adoption of this subchapter unless the Zoning Hearing Board,
after public hearing, shall interpret that the enlargement or extension is
necessary by the natural expansion and growth of trade of the nonconforming
use. Any such enlargement or expansion shall conform to the area, height and
yard requirements of the zoning district in which it is located unless a
variance is granted.
      (2)   No nonconforming use shall be moved, in whole or in part, to any
other portion of the lot occupied by such use at the effective date of adoption
or amendment of this subchapter.
      (3)   Any nonconforming use may be extended throughout any part of a
structure which was designed for such use at the time the use became
nonconforming; however, a nonconforming use shall not be extended to occupy any
structure, except on a lot or portion of a lot at the time the use became
nonconforming.
   (C)   Change of use. A nonconforming use shall not be changed unless to a
conforming use, except as permitted by the Zoning Hearing Board in accordance
with the following.
      (1)   The new use will more closely correspond to the uses permitted in
the district.
      (2)   The changed use will be in keeping with the character of the
neighborhood in which it is located.
   (D)   Abandonment. When a nonconforming use of a structure and/or lot is
discontinued or abandoned for 12 consecutive months or for 18 months during any
three-year period, the structure and/or lot shall not thereafter be used except
in conformance with the regulations of the zoning district in which it is
located.
   (E)   Damage or destruction. In the event that damage or destruction of a
structure in which a nonconforming use is conducted involves 75% or less of the
total floor area of the structure, repairs or reconstruction may be undertaken,
provided that such restoration is started within 12 months of the date of
destruction. In the event that a structure in which a nonconforming use is
conducted is damaged or destroyed by fire or other means to an extent of more
than 75% of its total floor area, the structure shall be reconstructed only to
house a conforming use.
(Ord. 2020-02, passed 3-9-2020) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.087 NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES.
   These regulations shall apply to all nonconforming structures, as defined by
this chapter, in all zoning districts.
   (A)   Continuation. Where, at the effective date of adoption or amendment of
this subchapter, a lawful structure exists that is made no longer permissible
by the terms of this chapter as enacted and amended, such structure may be sold
or otherwise transferred to other owners and may continue to exist as long as
the structure conforms to all other applicable regulations of the borough,
county, commonwealth and federal government and the provisions of this
subchapter governing nonconforming uses, structures and lots.
   (B)   Structural alteration.
      (1)   Structures may be enlarged or structurally altered as long as the
following criteria are met.
         (a)   The expansion of the structure, as measured in square feet,
cannot increase the size of the original structure by more than 25%.
         (b)   The expansion cannot increase the already existing nonconformity
or create any other zoning problem.
      (2)   If the above-listed criteria cannot be met, an application may be
filed with the Zoning Hearing Board, which, after a public hearing, may
determine undue hardship and may authorize a reasonable modification of such
structure.
   (C)   Damage or destruction. Any nonconforming structure which has been
partially or completely damaged or destroyed by fire or other means may be
rebuilt or repaired on its existing foundation even though such foundation may
violate the setback requirements for the zoning district in which the structure
is located, provided that the repair or reconstruction and reoccupancy of the
structure occurs within 18 months of the date that the original structure was
damaged or destroyed.
   (D)   Moving. Should such structure be moved for any reason for any distance
whatsoever, it shall thereafter conform to the requirements of the zoning
district in which it is located.
   (E)   Signs. Nonconforming signs may be repaired or reconstructed, provided
that no structural alterations are made which increase the gross surface area
of the sign; however, nonconforming signs which are damaged or destroyed to an
extent of more than 50% of their replacement cost at the time of destruction
shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of this
chapter. Nonconforming signs may not be enlarged, added to or replaced by
another nonconforming sign, use or structure, except that the interchange of
poster panels shall be permitted.
   (F)   Repair or maintenance. Nothing in this subchapter shall be deemed to
prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of any structure or
part thereof declared to be unsafe by any official charged with protecting the
safety of the public.
(Ord. 2020-02, passed 3-9-2020) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.088 NONCONFORMING LOTS.
   (A)   Any lot of record existing at the effective date of this subchapter
and held in separate ownership different from the ownership of adjoining lots
may be used for the erection of a structure conforming to the use regulations
of the zoning district in which it is located without a lot area or lot width
variance even though its lot area and width are less than the minimum required
by this chapter; however, such lot must comply with the front, rear and side
yards and the height and lot coverage standards of the zoning district wherein
it is located.
   (B)   Where structures exist on adjacent nonconforming lots of record which
have front yards less than the minimum depth required, the minimum front yard
for an adjacent undeveloped nonconforming front yards on the immediately
adjacent developed nonconforming lots on either side of the undeveloped lot;
provided, however, that in no instance shall the front yard be less than 25
feet from the right-of-way of any public street.
   (C)   Any lot of record located in a residential subdivision containing five
or more lots and recorded prior to the effective date of adoption or amendment
of this subchapter shall comply with the minimum lot size requirement in effect
and applicable to the zoning district in which the lot is located at the time
said subdivision was recorded, provided that greater than 50% of the lots
located in the recorded subdivision presently contain a single-family dwelling.
(Ord. 2020-02, passed 3-9-2020) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.089 REGISTRATION OF NONCONFORMITY.
   The owner of a nonconforming use shall make an application for registration
of the nonconforming use and, upon presentation of documentation acceptable to
the Zoning Officer that the use was lawfully in existence prior to the
effective date of this subchapter, or any amendment which created
nonconformity, the Zoning Officer shall register the same on a map, and by
County Tax Mapping Department map and tract number, as a legal nonconforming
structure and nonconforming lot as they become known through the application
process.
(Ord. 2020-02, passed 3-9-2020)
ZONING HEARING BOARD
§ 156.100 OPERATION OF THE BOARD.
   (A)   The members of the Zoning Hearing Board in office at the time of the
adoption of this chapter shall continue until the expiration of their terms.
Thereafter, all reappointments by Borough Council shall be for three years. If
a vacancy occurs on the Board, the Council may fill it only for the unexpired
portion. All appointments shall be residents of the borough, and none shall
hold any other public office in the borough, except that one may be a member of
the Planning Commission.
   (B)   A Board member may be removed from office by majority vote of the
Council for malfeasance, misfeasance or nonfeasance in office, or other just
cause, after a majority vote. The accused member shall be given 15 days’ notice
before the vote and may request a public hearing in writing if he or she wishes
to contest the proposed action.
   (C)   The Board shall annually elect from its members a chairperson, vice-
chairperson and secretary, all of whom may succeed themselves. The Board shall
reorganize at its first meeting each year.
   (D)   The Chairperson shall call and conduct hearings. The Vice-Chairperson
shall act in the Chairperson’s absence. The Secretary shall keep minutes of
meetings, transcribe proceedings, distribute copies of testimony as needed and
place hearing advertisements. Transcription and distribution of testimony may
be assigned to others not members of the Board.
   (E)   The Board may appoint a hearing officer from its membership to conduct
a hearing on its behalf if a quorum cannot be obtained. Members who have a
conflict of interest with a case to be heard may excuse themselves from the
hearing.
   (F)   The Board shall keep full public records of its business and shall
submit an annual report of its activities to the Council not later than the
first of March each year.
   (G)   The Board may contract for legal, stenographic or consulting services
upon the approval of the Council. The law firm retained by the Board shall not
be the same one serving the Council.
   (H)   The Council may appoint by resolution one but not more than three
residents of the borough to serve as alternate members of the Board for three-
year terms. None shall hold any other public office in the borough. Alternate
members shall be selected in rotation by the Board Chairperson to serve in the
place of a regular member who is unable to sit on a particular case. The
alternate shall have the full power and duties of the replaced regular member
during the case and may participate in any other proceeding or discussion of
the Board, but without the right to vote.
(Prior Code, § 27-801) (Ord. 196, passed 4-14-1986; Ord. 206B, passed 8-13-
1990)
§ 156.101 FUNCTIONS OF THE BOARD.
   (A)   Appeals from decisions of the Zoning Officer. The Board shall hear and
decide appeals where it is alleged by the appellant that the Zoning Officer has
failed to follow prescribed procedures or has misrepresented or misapplied any
provision of this chapter.
   (B)   Challenges to the validity of the chapter or map. The Board shall hear
such challenges on substantive questions, take evidence and make a written
record. At the conclusion of the hearing, the Board shall decide all contested
questions and shall make findings on all relevant issues of fact, which shall
become part of the record on appeal to the courts.
   (C)   Variances. The Board shall hear requests for variances where it is
alleged that the provisions of this chapter inflict unnecessary hardship upon
the applicant.
      (1)   The written application for a variance submitted to the Board
Secretary in advance of the hearing shall demonstrate, where relevant:
         (a)   That the property to be developed is of a peculiar shape or size
and/or contains unusual topographic or other conditions creating a hardship;
         (b)   That because of these circumstances and not the regulations of
this chapter, there is no possibility the property can be developed in strict
accordance with the regulations;
         (c)   That such hardship has not been created by the appellant; and
         (d)   That the requested variance, if granted, will not downgrade the
character of the neighborhood, nor impair the future development of adjacent
properties in conformance with this chapter, nor undermine the public welfare.
      (2)   If authorized, the variance shall represent the least deviation
from the regulations that will afford relief.
      (3)   In granting a variance, the Board may attach appropriate conditions
necessary to protect the intent of this chapter and the public health and
safety.
      (4)   Under no circumstances shall the Board grant a variance to allow a
use not permitted under the terms of this chapter in the zoning district
containing the property for which the variance is sought, or any use expressly
or by implication prohibited by the terms of this chapter in the zoning
district.
   (D)   Appeals for approval of uses not listed in any zone district. The
Board shall hear appeals for the right to develop uses not specifically listed
as permitted by right or conditionally in any zone district.
      (1)   A developer proposing such a use shall first apply for a zoning
permit, and if denied, may appeal to the Board.
      (2)   The Board shall hear the appeal and shall determine in which zone
district the proposed use would be most appropriate, based on the permitted and
conditional uses listed for each zone classification. The Board may also find
that the proposed use is inappropriate in all zone districts of the borough.
      (3)   If the Board selects a zone classification, it need not necessarily
be the one governing the appellant’s property. The proposed use shall become a
conditional use in the zone classification selected, and the Board shall attach
appropriate guidelines for consideration of the conditional use.
      (4)   The appellant may then, provided he or she has property in the
selected zone classification, apply for conditional use approval as provided in
§§
156.035 to
156.039 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 27-802) (Ord. 196, passed 4-14-1986)
§ 156.102 PARTIES APPELLANT BEFORE THE BOARD.
   An appeal, challenge or request for a variance may be filed in writing with
the Secretary of the Board by, or on behalf of, any owner of land in the
borough, by any tenant wishing a variance, with the permission of his or her
landowner, or by any officer or agency of the borough, or by any aggrieved
person.
(Prior Code, § 27-803) (Ord. 196, passed 4-14-1986)
§ 156.103 HEARINGS, PRELIMINARY ACTIVITIES.
   (A)   When a request for a hearing is received by the Board Secretary, the
Board shall schedule and hold the hearing within 60 days.
   (B)   Hearings shall be conducted by the Board or by a hearing officer
member, whose decision or findings, where no decision is required, may be
considered final if acceptable to all parties.
   (C)   The parties to a hearing shall be the borough, the appellant and
anyone affected by the application, and/or any civic or community organization
who or which requests in writing the opportunity to appear prior to the
hearing.
   (D)   Notice of a hearing shall be mailed at least 15 days before the
hearing to all parties, and in addition, to the Zoning Officer and to owners of
properties adjacent to or directly across a street from the boundary of the
property or properties affected by the hearing, as well as to others who have
filed a timely request to receive notice.
   (E)   Public notice shall be placed twice in a newspaper of general local
circulation once in each of two consecutive weeks, the first not more than 30
days before the hearing and the second notice not less than seven days before
the hearing. In addition, if a variance is sought or an appeal requested,
notice shall be placed conspicuously on the affected property at least seven
days before the hearing.
   (F)   Notices shall indicate the date, time and place of the hearing and the
specific nature of the matter to be heard.
(Prior Code, § 27-804) (Ord. 196, passed 4-14-1986; Ord. 206B, passed 8-13-
1990)
§ 156.104 HEARINGS, CONDUCT.
   (A)   The Chairperson or Hearing Officer shall have the power to administer
oaths and issue subpoenas to compel the attendance of witnesses and the
production of relevant documents, including those requested by the parties.
   (B)   The parties shall have the right to be represented by counsel and
shall be afforded the opportunity to respond and present evidence and
arguments, and to cross-examine adverse witnesses on all relevant issues.
Formal rules of evidence shall not apply, but irrelevant, immaterial or unduly
repetitious evidence may be excluded.
   (C)   The Board or the Hearing Officer shall cause to have kept a
stenographic record of the proceedings. The appearance fee for a stenographer
shall be shared equally by the applicant and the Board. The cost of the
original transcript shall be paid for by the Board if the Board or Hearing
Officer orders it, or by a person appealing the Board’s decision if an appeal
is made. Additional copies of the transcript shall be paid for by the parties
requesting them.
   (D)   The Board, or the Hearing Officer, shall not communicate, directly or
indirectly, with any party and/or representatives of any party in connection
with any issue relevant to the hearing, except upon notice and opportunity for
all parties to participate; shall not take legal notice of any communications,
reports or other materials unless all parties are afforded an opportunity to
contest the material so noticed; and shall not inspect any site or its
surroundings with any party and/or representative of any party after the start
of the hearing unless all parties are given an opportunity to be present.
   (E)   The Board or Hearing Officer shall render a written decision, or when
no decision is required, written findings on the application, within 45 days
after the conclusion of the hearing before the Board or Hearing Officer.
Decisions shall be accompanied by findings of fact and conclusions based on
them together with the reasons therefor. Conclusions based on any provisions of
this chapter or any other ordinance or regulation of the borough or the State
Planning Code shall contain a reference to the provision relied on and the
reasons why a conclusion is deemed appropriate in light of the facts.
   (F)   If the hearing is conducted by the Hearing Officer and there is no
stipulation that his or her decision or findings are final, the Board shall
make his or her report and recommendations available to the parties, who may
submit representations to the Board. The Board shall convene, weigh the Hearing
Officer’s report and representations by the parties and make a final decision
or entry of findings not later than 30 days after the date of the Hearing
Officer’s report.
   (G)   When the Board or Hearing Officer fails to render a decision where it,
he or she has the power to do so within 45 days after hearing the application,
or fails to hold the public hearing within 60 days of receiving the request for
one, the decision shall be deemed to have been rendered in favor of the
applicant unless he or she has agreed in writing to a specific time extension.
   (H)   When the decision favors the applicant as a result of the Board’s
failure to render a decision or schedule a hearing, the Board shall give public
notice of the decision within ten days in a newspaper of general local
circulation.
   (I)   A copy of the final decision, or the findings if no decision is
required, shall be mailed to the applicant not later than the day after the
date of the decision. All others requesting notice of the decision not later
than the last day of the hearing shall receive by mail a summary of the
findings or decision and a statement of the place at which the full decision or
findings may be examined.
(Prior Code, § 27-805) (Ord. 196, passed 4-14-1986; Ord. 206B, passed 8-13-
1990)
§ 156.105 ZONING APPEALS.
   (A)   Once the Zoning Officer has acted on a development proposal pursuant
to the regulations of this chapter, any party may appeal the decision to the
Board not later than 30 days after the Zoning Officer’s action unless the party
can prove he or she had no knowledge of the decision within the 30-day period.
A second party succeeding in interest shall be bound by the first party’s
knowledge.
   (B)   While an appeal is pending before the Board, any development affected
by the appeal shall be halted unless the Zoning Officer certifies to the Board
that suspension would cause imminent peril to life and property. In this case,
suspension will occur only by a restraining order granted by the Board or
County Court. The party forced to stop shall have the right to petition the
Court to require the appealing party to post a bond as a condition of
continuing the appeal, the amount to be determined by the Court. The Court
shall hear the petition, determine whether the appeal is frivolous and, if so,
may require the posting of the bond.
   (C)   Appeals from decisions of the Board, or upon reports of the Board in
proceedings to challenge the validity of this chapter, shall be filed within 30
days of the decision or completion of the report with the Clerk of the County
Court of Common Pleas.
(Prior Code, § 27-806) (Ord. 196, passed 4-14-1986)
ADMINISTRATION
§ 156.120 DUTIES OF ZONING OFFICER.
   (A)   A Zoning Officer shall administer and enforce this chapter in
accordance with its literal terms. He or she shall be appointed by and be
responsible to the Council and shall hold no elective office in the borough.
   (B)   The Zoning Officer shall receive and process applications for zoning
permits and permissions to occupy in accordance with this chapter, and shall
not permit any construction or any use or change of use which does not conform
to this chapter.
   (C)   The Zoning Officer shall investigate alleged violations and take
action in accordance with §§
156.123 and
156.999 of this chapter. He or she shall also testify before the Zoning Hearing
Board on contested decisions he or she has made or when otherwise called to
testify. He or she shall not be denied access to any property in the course of
administering and enforcing this chapter.
   (D)   All questions of interpretation of this chapter shall be first
presented to the Zoning Officer, who shall make a decision thereon. Such
questions shall be considered by the Zoning Hearing Board only on appeal from
the Zoning Officer’s decision.
   (E)   In addition, the Zoning Officer shall represent the borough at
hearings before the magisterial district judge (see §
156.123 of this chapter), shall maintain public files of all permits issued and
applications processed, shall attend meetings of the Council to provide a
monthly report of his or her activities (see §
156.121(I) of this chapter), shall examine permitted work in progress (see §
156.121(E) of this chapter) and shall prepare and maintain a record of
nonconforming uses (see §
156.089 of this chapter).
(Prior Code, § 27-901) (Ord. 196, passed 4-14-1986; Ord. 2015-04, passed 12-14-
2015)
§ 156.121 ZONING PERMITS.
   (A)   No building or structure, including a mobile home, shall be erected,
moved or enlarged unless a zoning permit for such action has been issued by the
Zoning Officer. Permits shall not be required for the repaving of existing
residential driveways, for painting, for repointing masonry or for altering
interior partitions or doorways when no structural changes are needed. Once a
permit has been issued by the Zoning Officer, anyone aggrieved by that action
may, within 30 days thereafter, appeal the action to the Zoning Hearing Board.
   (B)   An application for a zoning permit shall include the following in
duplicate on forms provided by the Zoning Officer. A site plan may be waived by
the Zoning Officer if the application includes no construction outside the
existing buildings on the lot:
      (1)   A site plan drawn to scale showing the location of the proposed new
construction on the property relative to property boundaries and abutting
streets, with distances indicated, the location of driveway entrances, signs
and off-street parking areas, noting the arrangement of spaces, and any grading
contemplated;
      (2)   A statement describing the proposed use of the new construction and
the length, width and height of its components;
      (3)   Approval from the State Department of Labor and Industry if an
enclosed structure other than a one-family detached or two-family dwelling is
proposed; and
      (4)   Affidavit of the applicant that all information provided is true
and correct to the best of his or her knowledge.
   (C)   If the application is satisfactory, the Zoning Officer shall inspect
the premises where the construction is proposed to occur. If new construction
is proposed, the Zoning Officer shall verify on the site the location of the
construction relative to adjacent property lines and may order the owner to
have stakes positioned by a registered surveyor to indicate the property line
and outline of the new construction. Upon completing his or her inspection and
finding the application and premises compatible, the Zoning Officer shall
collect the appropriate zoning permit fee (see §
156.125 of this chapter), approve the application and return one copy, together
with a signed zoning permit, authorizing the applicant to proceed. The
applicant shall post the permit prominently on the building site during
construction.
   (D)   If the application is not satisfactory, the Zoning Officer shall
return one copy of the application, together with a letter indicating the
specific reasons why the application cannot be approved and the changes needed
to make it acceptable.
   (E)   The Zoning Officer shall from time to time visit the property whereon
the approved construction is taking place in order to assure himself or herself
that the work is proceeding in accordance with the zoning permit. The Zoning
Officer shall not be denied access to the property during working hours in
order to inspect the construction in progress, and he or she may order the work
corrected to conform to the permit or halted pending appeal to the Zoning
Hearing Board.
   (F)   If an applicant wishes to amend the use, arrangement or construction
of his or her building from that shown on the permit after the permit is
approved, he or she shall file with the Zoning Officer an application for an
amended zoning permit.
   (G)   (1)   A zoning permit shall become void if, after six months from the
date of issue, construction has not commenced and been vigorously pursued. The
life of a zoning permit shall be one year from the date of issue. Permits may
be extended for not more than one additional year on large projects, or where
the applicant can prove to the Zoning Officer a hardship exists making it
impossible to complete the project in one year.
      (2)   Once a permit has become void, a replacement permit may be obtained
in the same manner as for the original permit.
   (H)   A permit shall be required for the removal of any building or part of
any building. The applicant shall be responsible for backfilling any excavation
created by the razing and for the removal of all debris on the lot within 60
days after the issuance of the permit.
   (I)   The Zoning Officer shall keep records of all applications either
approved or disapproved, including one copy of each permit issued, shall
maintain a journal of his or her activities and shall submit a monthly report
and an annual summation report to the Borough Council detailing building
activity in the borough during the preceding year.
(Prior Code, § 27-902) (Ord. 196, passed 4-14-1986)
§ 156.122 PERMISSION TO OCCUPY.
   (A)   Before the use of a property or structure can be changed, or a
property occupied without the need of a zoning permit, the owner shall secure
the approval of the Zoning Officer in writing. Such approval shall be required
also whenever a greater number of dwelling units are being installed in a
structure, a home occupation is introduced or changed or commercial premises
are converted to a second commercial use.
   (B)   The owner shall be responsible for the use of his or her property,
even though he or she leases it to others, and for securing the necessary
occupancy permission, if needed.
(Prior Code, § 27-903) (Ord. 196, passed 4-14-1986)
§ 156.123 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Enforcement notice. The enforcement notice shall contain the following
information:
      (1)   The name of the owner of record and any other person against whom
the municipality intends to take action;
      (2)   The location of the property in violation;
      (3)   The specific violation with a description of the requirements which
have not been met, citing, in each instance, the applicable provisions of this
chapter;
      (4)   The date before which the steps for compliance must be commenced
and the date before which the steps must be completed;
      (5)   That the recipient of the notice has the right to appeal to the
Zoning Hearing Board within a prescribed period of time in accordance with the
procedures set forth in this chapter. If the recipient of the notice of
violation appeals and sends notice to the Borough Zoning Hearing Board, he or
she shall be required to pay an appeal fee, the amount of which will be set by
a resolution of the Borough Council; and
      (6)   That failure to comply with the notice within the time specified,
unless extended by appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board, constitutes a violation,
with possible sanctions clearly described.
   (B)   Other remedies. In case any building, structure, landscaping or land
is, or is proposed to be, erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered,
converted, maintained or used in violation of this chapter, the Borough Council
or, with the approval of the Borough Council, an officer of the borough, in
addition to other remedies, may institute any appropriate action or proceeding
to prevent, restrain, correct or abate such building, structure, landscaping or
land to prevent, in or about such premises, any act, conduct, business or use
constituting a violation.
(Ord. 2020-01, passed 3-9-2020) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.124 AMENDMENT OF CHAPTER.
   (A)   An amendment of this chapter may be initiated by the Planning
Commission, by the Borough Council or by petition presented to the Planning
Commission by a property owner or owners, or by a person or corporation who or
which has an option to purchase a property in the borough. The proposed
amendment or petition shall be written as proposed to be adopted. Revisions to
the zoning map shall be specified in writing, citing particular boundaries.
   (B)   The Planning Commission shall review an amendment petition or a
proposal by the Council and prepare recommendations to the Council not later
than the Commission’s second regular meeting after receiving the proposal. The
Commission may recommend approval of the proposal as presented, approval with
specific changes or rejection. If the proposal is made by the Council, the
Council shall allow the Commission at least 30 days to review and comment on
the proposal before taking action.
   (C)   The Council shall call and hold a public hearing after reviewing the
Commission’s recommendations, or at least 30 days after submitting a proposal
to the Commission for review. In addition, the Council shall send the proposal
to the County Planning Commission for review and comment at least 30 days
before the hearing.
   (D)   The Council shall advertise for its hearing twice in a newspaper of
general local circulation, once in each of two consecutive weeks, the first
notice not more than 30 days before and the second not less than seven days
before the hearing. The notice shall contain the full text of the amendment or
a summary, reference to a place and times where and when the amendment may be
examined before the hearing, and the date, time, place and purpose of the
hearing. If the full text is not carried in the notice, the newspaper
publishing the notice shall be provided a copy of the full text, and an
attested copy shall be filed in the County Law Library.
   (E)   In addition, where a change of zoning district boundary is sought, the
property or group of properties affected shall be posted in at least one
conspicuous location not less than seven days before the hearing with the same
information as in the hearing advertisement.
   (F)   The Council shall hold the hearing, keeping a written or sound record
of the testimony, and shall make a decision by majority vote to adopt or reject
the amendment within 90 days after the hearing. Within 30 days after enactment,
a copy of the adopted amendment shall be forwarded to the County Planning
Commission.
   (G)   If an amendment is substantially revised after the hearing, or zoning
district boundaries are further altered, the Council shall hold another hearing
on the revisions before taking action.
   (H)   If a landowner submits a curative amendment under the provisions of
the Municipalities Planning Code, §§ 101 et seq., of the Act of July 31, 1968,
P.L. 805, No. 247, art. I, as amended by the Act of Dec. 21, 1988 P.L. 1329,
No. 170, 53 P.S. §§ 10101 et seq., as amended, the Council shall call and hold
a public hearing within 60 days of receiving the petition and shall proceed as
for any other amendment petition. If the Council declares all or part of this
chapter invalid, it shall not be required to receive a curative amendment
during the period of the chapter review but shall, within 30 days of its
declaration, make a statement of the specific deficiencies it proposes to
correct, and shall, within 180 days thereafter, either adopt its curative
amendment after public hearing or reaffirm the validity of the chapter as it
was prior to the declaration. Such action by the Council may not again be taken
for at least three years after deciding on a previous municipal curative
amendment.
   (I)   Appeal from a decision of the Council on an amendment proposal shall
be to the County Courts.
(Prior Code, § 27-905) (Ord. 196, passed 4-14-1986; Ord. 206B, passed 8-13-
1990)
§ 156.125 SCHEDULE OF FEES.
   (A)   The Council shall establish by resolution a schedule of fees to cover
the cost of permits, conditional use approvals, petitions to amend the
ordinance or any action brought before the Zoning Hearing Board.
   (B)   The current fee schedule shall be available at the office of the
Borough Secretary and may be amended only by official resolution of the
Council.
   (C)   No permit shall be issued nor any action taken on proceedings before
the Council or the Zoning Hearing Board until the appropriate fees have been
paid in full.
(Prior Code, § 27-906) (Ord. 196, passed 4-14-1986)
§ 156.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated or
permitted the violation of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon being
found liable therefore in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced by the
borough, pay a judgment of not more than $500 (subject to change via
resolution) plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney fees incurred
by the borough as a result thereof. No judgment shall commence or be imposed,
levied or payable until the date of the determination of a violation by the
magisterial district justice. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals
the judgment, the borough may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable
Rules of Civil Procedure. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute
a separate violation unless the magisterial district judge, determining that
there has been a violation, further determines that there was a good-faith
basis for the person, partnership or corporation violating this chapter to have
believed that there was no such violation, in which event, there shall be
deemed to have been only one such violation until the fifth day following the
date of the determination of a violation by the magisterial district judge, and
thereafter, each day reasonable attorney fees collected for the violation of
this chapter shall be paid over to the borough.
   (B)   The Court of Common Pleas, upon petition, may grant an order of stay,
upon cause shown, tolling the per diem fine pending a final adjudication of the
violation and judgment.
   (C)   Nothing contained in this section shall be construed or interpreted to
grant to any person or entity other than the borough the right to commence any
action for enforcement pursuant to §
156.123 of this chapter or this section.
(Ord. 2020-01, passed 3-9-2020)
APPENDIX A: PERMITTED USES—ZONES IN WHICH PERMITTED
PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES Zone District
                         CON R-1 R-2 R-3
PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES                                        Zone District
                                                                CON R-1 R-2 R-3
Attached single-family dwellings (townhouses)                               X
Boarding or lodging homes                                                   X
Conversions of single-family dwellings                              X   X   X
Garden apartment buildings                                                  X
Growing of orchard, nursery or vegetable crops                      X   X
Growing of orchard, nursery, vegetable or field crops and       X
grazing of cattle
Home occupations                                                            X
Mobile homes                                                            X
Municipal facilities and services                               X   X   X   X
Parking lots                                                                X
Places of worship                                                           X
Public utility structures, rights-of-way and facilities                     X
Public utility structures, rights-of-way and facilities but not X   X   X
offices, garages or stockpiles
Single-family detached dwellings, not including mobile homes    X   X   X   X
Two-family dwellings                                                X   X   X
 
(Prior Code, Table 27-4-1)
APPENDIX B: CONDITIONAL USES—SECTION REFERENCE AND
ZONES WHERE THEY MAY BE PROPOSED
Conditional Use Reference Zone District
                          CON R-1 R-2 R-3
Conditional Use                               Reference  Zone District
                                                         CON R-1 R-2 R-3
Attached single-family dwellings (townhouses) §             X   X
                                              156.071(A)
Boarding or lodging homes                     §             X   X   X
                                              156.071(D)
Business or professional offices              §                     X
                                              156.072(G)
Cemeteries                                    §         X
                                              156.073(B)
Commercial nurseries, greenhouses or orchards §         X   X   X
                                              156.072(A)
Commercial recreation establishments          §                     X
                                              156.072(I)
Day care centers                              §             X   X   X
                                              156.073(E)
Funeral homes                                 §                     X
                                              156.072(H)
Garden apartments                             §             X   X
                                              156.071(B)
Gasoline service stations                     §                     X
                                              156.072(J)
Home occupations                              §         X   X   X
                                              156.072(C)
Medical or dental clinics                     §                     X
                                              156.072(F)
Mobile home parks                             §                 X
                                              156.071(E)
Motels                                        §                     X
                                              156.072(L)
Neighborhood retail businesses                §                     X
                                              156.072(M)
Nonprofit community clubs                     §             X   X   X
                                              156.073(D)
Nursing, convalescent or retirement homes     §             X   X   X
                                              156.071(C)
Parking lots for use in adjacent districts    §             X   X
                                              156.072(E)
Places of worship                             §             X   X   X
                                              156.073(C)
Recreation areas                              §         X
                                              156.073(A)
Restaurants or taverns                        §                     X
                                              156.072(K)
Small business ventures                       §         X
                                              156.072(D)
Veterinarian clinics or commercial kennels    §         X
                                              156.072(B)
 
(Prior Code, Table 27-4-2)
APPENDIX C: MINIMUM DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS
 Zone District
 CON R-1 R-2 R-3
                                                  Zone District
                                                  CON    R-1    R-2    R-3
Front yard depth (feet)                           25     25     25     25
Lot area per attached dwelling or apartment unit         3,000  3,000  2,000
(square feet)
Lot area (square feet)
   Attached dwellings (townhouses)                    20,000 20,000 10,000
   Garden apartments                                  20,000 20,000 10,000
   Mobile home parks                                         85,000
   Single-family dwellings                     40,000 7,500  7,500  4,000
   Two-family dwellings                               10,000 10,000 6,000
Lot frontage (feet)                               50     50     50     40
Lot width (feet)
   Neither side abuts street                   120    60     60     40
   One side abuts street                       120    75     75     50
Rear yard depth (feet)
   Accessory buildings                         15     8      8      8
   Principal buildings                         30     25     25     20
Side yard depth (feet)
   Abuts a street                              25     25     25     15
   Abuts another lot                           15     8      8      5
NOTES TO TABLE:
Minimum lot areas for uses other than those listed above may differ from
those shown; check text for specific minimum lot areas for each permitted and
conditional use.
 
(Prior Code, Table 27-4-3)
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
   Table
      
I.   BONDS AND LOANS
      
II.   FRANCHISES AND SERVICES
      
III.   GOVERNMENTAL AND INTERGOVERNMENTAL AFFAIRS
      
IV.   SEWERS
      
V.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
      
VI.   ZONING
      
VII.   PROPERTY
TABLE I: BONDS AND LOANS
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
Ord./ Date
Res.  Passed Description
No.
      9-12-  Signifies and expresses the desire of the borough to increase the
26    1940   indebtedness of the borough for the purpose of constructing a
             sanitary sewer system.
           (Prior Code, Appendix B)
132   6-7-   Increases the indebtedness of the borough for the grading and paving
      1971   of Vista Drive and installing a storm sewer on said drive.
           (Prior Code, Appendix B)
      2-19-  Authorizes the increase of indebtedness of the borough by issuing
156   1979   from time to time a series of general obligation bond anticipation
             notes in order to finance the borough’s sewer construction project.
           (Prior Code, Appendix B)
R.    3-9-   Increases the nonelectoral indebtedness of the borough by the
2004- 2004   issuance of a general obligation note in the amount of $40,000,
2            fixing the form number, date, interest and maturity thereof.
           (Prior Code, Appendix B)
R.    3-13-
2006- 2006   Secures flood insurance under the National Flood Insurance Program.
1
           (Prior Code, Appendix B)
R.    2-8-
2010- 2010   Enters into a loan agreement with Pennsylvania Infrastructure Bank.
1
           (Prior Code, Appendix B)
            
 
TABLE II: FRANCHISES AND SERVICES
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
                          Authorizes and directs the borough to enter into and
6             11-16-1931  execute an agreement with the West Penn Power Company
                          for lighting the streets, alleys, highways and public
                          places of the borough with electric light.
                        (Prior Code, Appendix C)
                          Authorizes and grants West Penn Power Company to
                          construct, operate and maintain poles, wires,
7             11-20-1931  transformers and any and all other apparatus and
                          materials necessary for the purpose of supplying
                          light, heat and power within the borough.
                        (Prior Code, Appendix C)
                          Authorizes and directs the borough to enter into and
21            11-16-1936  execute an agreement with the West Penn Power Company
                          for lighting the streets, alleys, highways and public
                          places of the borough with electric light.
                        (Prior Code, Appendix C)
                          Authorizes and directs the borough to enter into and
                          execute an agreement with the West Penn Power Company
30            11-12-1941  for lighting the streets, alleys, highways and public
                          places of the borough with electric light and for
                          other types of electric light and power services.
                        (Prior Code, Appendix C)
                          Establishes and authorizes Vandergift Telephone
62            12-9-1955   Company to construct, operate and maintain poles,
                          cables, wires and all other necessary to operate
                          within the borough.
                        (Prior Code, Appendix C)
                          Authorizes and grants T. W. Phillips Gas and Oil
55            4-9-1956    Company to construct and maintain gas line on
                          Sheridan Road.
                        (Prior Code, Appendix C)
                          Authorizes and directs the borough to enter into and
                          execute an agreement with the West Penn Power Company
56            8-16-1956   for lighting the streets, alleys, highways and public
                          places of the borough with electric light and for
                          other types of electric light and power services.
                        (Prior Code, Appendix C)
                          Authorizes and directs the borough to enter into and
                          execute an agreement with the West Penn Power Company
77            9-7-1961    for lighting the streets, alleys, highways, and
                          public places of the borough with electric light and
                          for other types of electric light and power services.
                        (Prior Code, Appendix C)
                          Authorizes and directs the borough to enter into and
                          execute an agreement with the West Penn Power Company
117A          10-4-1966   for lighting the streets, alleys, highways and public
                          places of the borough with electric light and for
                          other types of electric light and power services.
                        (Prior Code, Appendix C)
                          Establishes, authorizes and grants Kiski Valley Water
138           7-13-1973   Pollution Control Authority to operate within the
                          borough.
                        (Prior Code, Appendix C)
                          Authorizes and directs the borough to enter into and
                          execute an agreement with the West Penn Power Company
141A          3-11-1974   for lighting the streets, alleys, highways and public
                          places of the borough with electric light and for
                          other types of electric light and power services.
                        (Prior Code, Appendix C)
199           10-31-1986  Authorizes CATV franchise with Liberty TV Cable, Inc.
                        (Prior Code, Appendix C)
                          Extends the term of the Cable System Franchise
R. -/-/1997A  - -1997     Agreement between the borough and TCI of
                          Pennsylvania.
                        (Prior Code, Appendix C)
                          Establishes the garbage and rubbish collection/
-/-/1998      - -1998     disposal franchise by the Council regularly enacted
                          for the borough.
                        (Prior Code, Appendix C)
                         
 
TABLE III: GOVERNMENTAL AND INTERGOVERNMENTAL AFFAIRS
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
Ord./ Date
Res.  Passed Description
No.
12    12-11- Establishes the salary of the Mayor.
      1933
           (Prior Code, Appendix D)
R. 8/ 8-18-  Designates the Oklahoma Firemen’s Relief Association as the proper association
18/   1966   to receive funds from the state tax on premiums from foreign fire insurance
1966         companies.
           (Prior Code, Appendix D)
127   12-4-  Establishes the compensation of Council members.
      1969
           (Prior Code, Appendix D)
128   1-5-   Fixes the salary of the Mayor.
      1970
           (Prior Code, Appendix D)
129   3-2-   Establishes and authorizes the organization of a joint municipal authority, to
      1970   be known as Kiski Valley Water Pollution Control Authority.
           (Prior Code, Appendix D)
      1-25-  Authorizes the execution and delivery of a purchase agreement between Kiski
131   1971   Valley Water Pollution Control Authority and joining municipalities, including
             the borough.
           (Prior Code, Appendix D)
R. 2/ 2-22-  Designates the National Bank of the Commonwealth, Kiski Valley Office, as the
22/   1978   depository for the funds of the borough and is authorized to accept for deposit
1978         in an account to be known as the “Oklahoma Sanitary Sewer Fund.”
           (Prior Code, Appendix D)
R.    5-8-   Guarantees the borough will supply the local share funds (total project costs
1978- 1978   less grants received) required to construct a sanitary sewer collection system.
100
           (Prior Code, Appendix D)
R.    5-8-   Authorizes a certain borough officer to sign applications for grants with the
1978- 1978   Commonwealth Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Assistance.
101
           (Prior Code, Appendix D)
R.    11-13- Amends Act 170 to exclude borough officials and enacts a separate Code of
1978- 1978   Ethics eliminating the requirements for annual filing of financial statements
102          by borough officials.
           (Prior Code, Appendix D)
R. 9/ 9-24-  Authorizes the tri-party agreement between the borough, the Travelers Indemnity
24/   1979   Company and H. J. Schneider Construction.
1979
           (Prior Code, Appendix D)
R. 9/ 9-22-  Authorizes execution of grant application for the purpose of obtaining funds
22/   1980   for the development of borough park.
1980
           (Prior Code, Appendix D)
R. 1/ 1-12-
12/   1981   Approves the restructuring of Rainbow Control (Emergency Control System).
1981
           (Prior Code, Appendix D)
      5-9-   Agreement for participation in an emergency management system with Rainbow
178   1983   Emergency Management System, Inc. Appoints Council member to the Board of
             Directors of Rainbow Emergency Management Systems.
           (Prior Code, Appendix D)
193   12-5-  Fixes salary of the Mayor.
      1985
           (Prior Code, Appendix D)
194   12-9-  Fixes compensation of Council members.
      1985
           (Prior Code, Appendix D)
R.    4-11-  Urges the Kiski Valley municipalities to start construction of the “missing
1988- 1988   link” between PA Route 56 between Allegheny Township and the Lobaugh Bridge as
2            soon as possible.
           (Prior Code, Appendix D)
R.
10/   10-25- Appoints Mayor to complete the term of deceased official.
25/   1988
1988
           (Prior Code, Appendix D)
R.    2-21-  Requests the County Board of Elections to place a referendum on the primary
1989- 1989   ballot to consider the issuance of licenses to conduct small games of chance
2            within the borough.
           (Prior Code, Appendix D)
R.    4-10-  Council endorses the Eligibility Application for Public Purposes of the
1989- 1989   Oklahoma Fire Department No. 1.
3
           (Prior Code, Appendix D)
R.    5-8-
1989- 1989   Appoints an elected Council member to fill a vacancy.
4
           (Prior Code, Appendix D)
R.    12-22-
1989- 1989   Establishes independent auditor and salary.
5
           (Prior Code, Appendix D)
R.    3-12-
1990- 1990   Declaration of vacant Council position.
1
           (Prior Code, Appendix D)
208   12-10- Fixes compensation of Council members.
      1990
           (Prior Code, Appendix D)
209   12-10- Fixes salary of the Mayor.
      1990
           (Prior Code, Appendix D)
R.    12-10-
1990- 1990   Establishes independent auditor and salary.
2
           (Prior Code, Appendix D)
R.    5-13-  Approves and ratifies the 1990 Municipal Waste Management Plan for the county
1991- 1991   pursuant to the requirements of § 503 of the Pennsylvania Municipal Waste
1            Planning, Recycling and Waste Reduction Act of 1988.
           (Prior Code, Appendix D)
R.    12-9-
1991- 1991   Establishes independent auditor and salary.
2
           (Prior Code, Appendix D)
R.    2-10-
1992- 1992   Appoints a Council member to fill vacated position.
1
           (Prior Code, Appendix D)
R.    4-13-  Establishes the name change of a Council member to be appointed to fill a
1992- 1992   vacated position.
2
           (Prior Code, Appendix D)
R.    8-10-
1992- 1992   Appoints alternate members of the Zoning Hearing Board for three-year terms.
3
           (Prior Code, Appendix D)
R.    9-14-  Establishes facilities that will be utilized for the long-term disposal of the
1992- 1992   municipal waste generated within the borough in accordance with the
4            requirements of the approved county plan.
           (Prior Code, Appendix D)
R. -/ - -    General outline for disasters occurring within the borough, known as the
-/    1993   Emergency Disaster Plan.
1993
           (Prior Code, Appendix D)
R.    2-15-  Adopts the disaster emergency management plan in accordance with § 7503(1) of
1993- 1993   the Emergency Management Services Code.
1
           (Prior Code, Appendix D)
R.    12- -
12/-/ 1995   Reenacts the Wage Tax in accordance with Ord. 262.
1995A
           (Prior Code, Appendix D)
R.    12- -
12/-/ 1995   Reenacts the Realty Transfer Tax.
1995B
           (Prior Code, Appendix D)
R.    12- -
12/-/ 1995   Reenacts amusement licenses.
1995C
           (Prior Code, Appendix D)
R. -/ - -
-/    1997   Adopts the Local Tax Enabling Act.
1997B
           (Prior Code, Appendix D)
R.    - -    Authorizes cooperation with other municipalities in the negotiation of a cable
1997- 1997   communication franchise renewal agreement.
1
           (Prior Code, Appendix D)
R.    4-12-  Request to participate in the Commonwealth Department of General Services,
1999- 1999   Cooperative Purchasing Program.
1
           (Prior Code, Appendix D)
R. 5/ 5- -   Establishes the organizational and general operational concepts and procedures
-/    2002   to be implemented as the Borough Emergency Management Plan.
2002
           (Prior Code, Appendix D)
R.    1-5-   Request to participate in the Commonwealth Department of General Services,
2004- 2004   Cooperative Purchasing Program.
1
           (Prior Code, Appendix D)
2005- 11-14- Fixes salary of the Mayor.
3     2005
           (Prior Code, Appendix D)
2005- 11-14- Fixes compensation of Council members.
4     2005
           (Prior Code, Appendix D)
R.    4-21-
2008- 2008   Appoints Council member to fill vacancy.
1
           (Prior Code, Appendix D)
R.    4-13-  Adopts Robert’s Rules of Order for all borough organizations’ parliamentary
2009- 2009   authority.
2
           (Prior Code, Appendix D)
R.    9-14-
2009- 2009   Appoints Council member to fill vacancy.
3
           (Prior Code, Appendix D)
R.           Authorizes, empowers and directs the proper officers of the governing board to
10/   10-13- appoint a liaison between it and Berkheimer, the duly appointed collector of
13/   2009   delinquent earned income taxes for the district, for the express purpose of
2009         sharing confidential tax information with the district for official purposes.
           (Prior Code, Appendix D)
             Authorizes, empowers and directs the proper officers of the governing board to
             execute an agreement with Berkheimer whereunder Berkheimer is retained as the
R.    10-13- exclusive tax collector for the collection of delinquent earned income taxes
2009- 2009   for the term December 1, 2009, and ending December 31, 2011, together with such
10           extensions as may be agreed upon, said tax enactment having been adopted under
             and pursuant to the authority of the Local Tax Enabling Act (Act 511, P.L.
             1257).
           (Prior Code, Appendix D)
R.    10-13- Authorizes and empowers Local Tax Collector to impose and retain costs of
2009- 2009   collections on delinquent taxes.
11
           (Prior Code, Appendix D)
R.           Authorizes, empowers and directs the proper officers of the governing board to
2012- 7-9-   appoint a liason between it and Berkheimer, the duly appointed collector of
2     2012   earned income tax for the district, for the express purpose of sharing
             confidential tax information with the district for official purposes.
           (Prior Code, Appendix D)
-     6-10-  Fixes compensation of Council members.
      2019
            
Res.  5-22-  Requesting a grant from the Greenways, Trails, and Recreation Program to be
4 of  2025   used for the Oklahoma Borough Revitalization Project.
2025
Res.  7-14-  Requesting a Multimodal Transportation Fund grant from the Commonwealth
5 of  2025   Financing Authority to be used for the Middle Street Roadway and Pedestrian
2025         Improvements.
             Authorizes, empowers and directs the proper officers of the governing board to
Res.         execute an agreement with Berkheimer whereunder Berkheimer is retained as the
7 of  11-10- exclusive tax collector for the collection of delinquent per capita taxes for
2025  2025   the term defined herein, together with such extensions as may be agreed upon,
             said tax enactment having been adopted under and pursuant to the authority of
             the Local Tax Enabling Act (Act 511, P.L. 1257).
Res.         Authorizes, empowers and directs the proper officers of the governing board to
8 of  11-10- appoint Berkheimer as its tax hearing officer under and pursuant to the Local
2025  2025   Taxpayers Bill of Rights for the express purpose of adjudicating appeals
             thereunder.
Res.  11-10- Authorizes and empowers Local Tax Collector, Berkheimer, to impose and retain
9 of  2025   costs of collections on delinquent taxes.
2025
Res          Authorizes, empowers and directs the proper officers of the governing board to
10 of 11-10- appoint a liason between it and Berkheimer, the duly appointed delinquent tax
2025  2025   collector of per capita for the district, for the express purpose of sharing
             confidential tax information with the district for official purposes.
Res.  11-10- Requesting a Statewide Local Share Assessment grant from the Commonwealth
11 of 2025   Financing Authority to be used for the park improvement project.
2025
Res.  12-8-  Requesting a Statewide Local Share Assessment grant from the Commonwealth
13 of 2025   Financing Authority to be used for the walking path project.
2025
            
 
TABLE IV: SEWERS
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
Ord./ Date
Res.  Passed Description
No.
      5-9-   Authorizes and directs the borough to enter into and execute an agreement with
23    1940   the Pennsylvania Railroad Company for the construction of a sanitary sewer line
             on the company’s right-of-way within the borough.
           (Prior Code, Appendix G)
27    11-14- Approves and adopts a contract with the Works Progress Administration for the
      1940   construction of a comprehensive sanitary sewer system in the borough.
           (Prior Code, Appendix G)
             Approves the Engineer’s report with regard to the construction of a sewage
136   7-13-  disposal system by the Kiski Valley Water Pollution Control Authority and
      1973   authorizes the execution and filing of a self-liquidating debt exclusion
             certificate with regard to the same.
           (Prior Code, Appendix G)
             Authorizes the execution and delivery of a service agreement between Kiski
      7-13-  Valley Water Pollution Control Authority and the borough and others covering a
137   1973   sewage disposal system to serve certain areas of the borough and authorizes the
             execution and filing of an approval request and debt statement for said
             service.
           (Prior Code, Appendix G)
             Authorizes the execution and delivery of a joint memorandum of proceeding
148   3-4-   between Gilpin Township Sewage Authority, Township of Gilpin, Parks Township
      1977   Municipal Authority, Township of Parks, Borough of Oklahoma, Township of
             Washing and Kiski Valley Water Pollution Control Authority.
           (Prior Code, Appendix G)
             Authorizes the execution and delivery of an agreement of lease between Gilpin
150   3-4-   Township Sewage Authority, Township of Gilpin, Parks Township Municipal
      1977   Authority, Township of Parks, Borough of Oklahoma, Township of Washing and
             Kiski Valley Water Pollution Control Authority.
           (Prior Code, Appendix G)
153   1-15-  Accepts a petition entitled “Release and Dedication and Right-of-Way”
      1979   pertaining to a sanitary sewer in a plan of lots known as Colonial Acres.
           (Prior Code, Appendix G)
             Accepts a sanitary sewer. This sewer, not a part of the borough’s sewer plan,
             was located in the Colonial Acres plan of lots and extended as follows:
154   2-12-  beginning at a point on the south side of Orr Avenue at or near the west line
      1979   of Lot 28 in the Colonial Acres plan, thence along the west line of Lot 28 to a
             manhole; thence through Lots 28, 27, 26, 25, 24 and 23 near the dividing line
             of Lots 51 and 5; thence across Vista Drive through Lots 4, 3 and 52 to Lot 2.
           (Prior Code, Appendix G)
155   2-19-  Approves the Consulting Engineer’s report with regard to the borough’s 1979
      1979   sewer construction project.
           (Prior Code, Appendix G)
159   3-12-  Accepts and approves the construction contract for the construction of the
      1979   borough’s 1979 construction project.
           (Prior Code, Appendix G)
160   3-12-  Accepts a sanitary sewer.
      1979
           (Prior Code, Appendix G)
161   3-12-  Accepts a petition entitled “Release and Dedication and Right-of-Way”
      1979   pertaining to a sanitary sewer in a plan of lots known as Colonial Acres.
           (Prior Code, Appendix G)
162   3-12-  Accepts a release and dedication of a sanitary sewer.
      1979
           (Prior Code, Appendix G)
             Authorizes and directs the execution and delivery on behalf of the borough of a
             sewer service agreement with the Township of Allegheny and Municipal Authority
      4-22-  of Allegheny Township pertaining to the use of borough sewers for transporting
170   1980   sewage from the Hancock Avenue Extension Area in the Pollution Control
             Authority; authorizes and directs the necessary or convenient to fully and
             completely perform all and every act and thing necessary or convenient to do
             fully, and completed, perform the borough’s obligations under said agreement.
           (Prior Code, Appendix G)
             Authorizes the execution and delivery of an interjurisdictional pretreatment
188   10-8-  agreement between the Kiski Valley Water Pollution Control Authority and the
      1984   borough and other municipalities covering industrial waste discharges within
             the municipalities.
           (Prior Code, Appendix G)
R.    2-9-   Authorizes a semi-annual payment of the Borough Sewer Fund, on April 15 and
2009- 2009   October 15, for each payment in the amount of $45.
1
           (Prior Code, Appendix G)
            
 
TABLE V: STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
                          Vacates a portion of Old Township Road extending from
11            9-18-1933   Main Street to Pine Run. Purchases tracts of land to
                          widen, improve, straighten and extend Orr Avenue.
                        (Prior Code, Appendix H)
                          Approves and establishes lines, grades, drainage
                          structures and other structures appearing on the
13            2-26-1934   plans of the Department of Highways of the
                          commonwealth, shows proposed improvement on Chambers
                          Road, Orr Avenue and Apollo Road.
                        (Prior Code, Appendix H)
                          Approves and establishes lines, grades, drainage
                          structures and other structures appearing on the
25            6-17-1940   plans of the Department of Highways of the
                          commonwealth; adopts the said plan and approves and
                          opens as a public highway the relocation of State
                          Highway Route 69.
                        (Prior Code, Appendix H)
                          Amends Ord. 11 and Ord. 13 and vacates portions of
33            1-17-1944   Apollo Road and of Orr Avenue and described by the
                          Department of Highways of the commonwealth as Right-
                          of-Way 64012.
                        (Prior Code, Appendix H)
                          Opens and adopts as a public street in the borough
57            8-13-1956   Sheridan Road and State Highway Legislative Route
                          64248.
                        (Prior Code, Appendix H)
68            11-2-1959   The street commonly known and called Main Street be
                          changed to and known as Hancock Avenue.
                        (Prior Code, Appendix H)
R. 2002-2     1-7-2002    Authorizes lighting facility and lighting system
                          improvements on State Route 66 bridge.
                        (Prior Code, Appendix H)
                          All of Ash Street between Alternate Route 66 and
2011-01       9-12-2011   Middle Street and being located between Lot 47 and a
                          portion of Lot 45 in the Williams Chambers Plan and
                          Lot 49 in the Plan of the Village of Chambers Hill.
                        (Prior Code, Appendix H)
                         
 
TABLE VI: ZONING
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
142A     - -1975     Prior Zoning Ordinance.
                   (Prior Code, Appendix J)
                    
 
TABLE VII: PROPERTY
 
Res. No.      Date Passed Description
R. 11/10/1997 11-10-1997  Real estate at Thorn Street, Map No. 28-03-05-0-117,
                          sold.
                        (Prior Code, Appendix F)
                          Real estate at 1 Orr Avenue declared unsafe and a
R. 2019-0     8-5-2019    public health hazard; emergency declared to cause the
                          property to come into compliance.
                         
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Pennsylvania Statutes
References to Pennsylvania Code
References to Pennsylvania Consolidated Statutes
References to Pennsylvania Consolidated Statutes Annotated
References to Prior Code
References to Resolutions
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO PENNSYLVANIA STATUTES
P.S. Cite Code Section
P.S. Cite                     Code Section
3 P.S. §§ 459-101 et seq.   90.02
3 P.S. § 459-302             90.05
3 P.S. § 459-303(c)          90.06
3 P.S. § 851(c)              154.010
10 P.S. §§ 162.1 et seq.    110.03
                              153.001;
                              153.030;
32 P.S. §§ 679.101 et seq.  153.063;
                              153.080;
                              154.035
32 P.S. § 679.302            153.081
                              154.004;
32 P.S. §§ 680.1 et seq.    154.010;
                              154.032;
                              155.082
32 P.S. § 680.11             154.010
                              153.022;
32 P.S. §§ 693.1 et seq.    154.033;
                              154.125
35 P.S. §§ 691.1 et seq.    153.022
35 P.S. §§ 750.1 et seq.    153.022;
                              155.042
35 P.S. §§ 6018.101 et seq. 50.01
35 P.S. §§ 6022.101 et seq. 92.21
35 P.S. §§ 7210.101—7210.1150.01
53 P.S. §§ 4000.101 et seq. 50.01
53 P.S. §§ 6924.101 et seq. 32.002
53 P.S. § 6924.313           32.058
53 P.S. § 6924.502(C)        32.002
53 P.S. § 6924.502(c)(3)     32.002
                              111.10;
                              154.004;
                              154.010;
53 P.S. §§ 10101 et seq.    154.105;
                              154.123;
                              155.131;
                              156.008;
                              156.124
53 P.S. § 10201              31.01
53 P.S. §§ 10501 et seq.    155.004
                              154.100;
53 P.S. § 10509              154.101;
                              155.110
53 P.S. § 10510              155.110
53 P.S. § 10515.1            155.133
53 P.S. § 10515.3            155.133
53 P.S. §§ 10901 et seq.    156.008
                              32.016;
72 P.S. §§ 5511.1 et seq.   32.019;
                              32.020;
                              32.022
72 P.S. §§ 5860.101 et seq. 32.072
72 P.S. §§ 8101-C et seq.   32.035;
                              32.058
72 P.S. § 8101-D             32.999
72 P.S. § 8102-D             32.056;
                              32.057
75 P.S. §§ 7301 et seq.     72.999
77 P.S. §§ 1 through 2710   50.40
                              
 
REFERENCES TO PENNSYLVANIA CODE
Pa. Code Cite Code Section
Pa. Code Cite                  Code Section
25 Pa. Code Chapter 73         154.033
25 Pa. Code Chapter 92a        154.034
25 Pa. Code § 92a             154.010
25 Pa. Code Chapter 93         154.010;
                               154.032
25 Pa. Code Chapter 93.4a      154.003
25 Pa. Code Chapter 96         154.010
                               154.010;
25 Pa. Code Chapter 102        154.033;
                               154.125
25 Pa. Code § 102.4(b)        154.034
25 Pa. Code Chapter 105        154.010;
                               154.033
25 Pa. Code §§ 105.441—105.154.033
                               153.022;
34 Pa. Code                    153.023;
                               153.065;
                               153.096
34 Pa. Code Chapters 401—405 150.01;
                               153.065
                               
 
REFERENCES TO PENNSYLVANIA CONSOLIDATED STATUTES
Pa.C.S. Code Cite Code Section
Pa.C.S. Code Cite        Code Section
8 Pa.C.S. §§ 101 et seq10.02
                         32.016;
8 Pa.C.S. § 1086        32.019;
                         32.020;
                         32.022
8 Pa.C.S. § 1202        92.20
8 Pa.C.S. § 3301.5      10.01
8 Pa.C.S. §§ 3321—33210.99
13 Pa. C.S. § 7102      131.21
53 Pa.C.S. § 5601       51.080
                         
 
REFERENCES TO PENNSYLVANIA CONSOLIDATED STATUTES ANNOTATED
Pa.C.S.A. Cite Code Section
Pa.C.S.A. Cite               Code Section
2 Pa.C.S.A. §§ 101 et seq. 111.10
2 Pa.C.S.A. § 105           154.126
2 Pa.C.S.A. §§ 551—555   154.126
2 Pa.C.S.A. §§ 751 et seq. 154.126
18 Pa.C.S.A. § 4911         10.15
18 Pa.C.S.A. § 5503         130.01
Title 42 Pa.C.S.A.           154.126
42 Pa.C.S.A. § 933(a)(2)    111.10
53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5607         51.063
                             70.01;
                             72.090;
75 Pa.C.S.A. §§ 101 et seq.72.091;
                             72.097;
                             131.27
75 Pa.C.S.A. § 102          72.090;
                             131.21
75 Pa.C.S.A. § 3323(b)      Chapter 74, Schedule II;
                             Chapter 74, Schedule IV
75 Pa.C.S.A. § 3323(c)      71.10;
                             Chapter 74, Schedule II
75 Pa.C.S.A. § 3353(b)      131.21
75 Pa.C.S.A. § 3368         70.09
                             70.20;
75 Pa.C.S.A. § 4902(a)      70.21;
                             70.99
75 Pa.C.S.A. § 4902(b)      70.22;
                             70.99
75 Pa.C.S.A. § 4902(g)(1)   70.20;
                             70.99
75 Pa.C.S.A. § 4902(g)(2)   70.99
75 Pa.C.S.A. §§ 6101 et seq70.09
75 Pa.C.S.A. § 6109(a)(22)  72.090
75 Pa.C.S.A. §§ 7301 et seq72.098
75 Pa.C.S.A. § 7311         72.098
75 Pa.C.S.A. § 7721         71.15
75 Pa.C.S.A. § 7723         71.15
75 Pa.C.S.A. § 7752(a)      71.15
                             
 
 
REFERENCES TO PRIOR CODE
Prior Code Code Section
Prior Code   Code Section
1-201        30.01
1-202        30.02
1-211        30.15
2-101        90.01
2-102        90.02
2-103        90.03
2-104        90.04
2-105        90.05
2-107        90.99
5-101        150.15
5-102        150.16
5-201        150.30
5-202        150.31
5-203        150.32
5-204        150.33
5-205        150.34
5-206        150.35
5-207        150.36
5-208        150.37
5-209        150.38
5-210        150.99
6-101        130.01
6-102        130.99
6-201        130.02
6-202        130.02
6-203        130.02
6-204        130.99
6-301        130.03;
             130.99
6-401        131.01
6-402        131.02
6-403        131.03
6-404        131.04
6-405        131.05
6-406        131.99
6-501        131.20
6-502        131.21
6-503        131.22
6-504        131.23
6-505        131.24
6-506        131.25
6-507        131.99
6-508        131.26
6-509        131.27
6-510        131.28
6-511        131.29
6-512        131.30
6-601        130.15
6-602        130.16
6-603        130.17
6-604        130.18
6-605        130.19
6-606        130.99
6-607        130.20
7-101        92.01
7-102        92.02
7-103        92.03
7-104        92.04
7-105        92.05
7-106        92.06
7-202        92.20
7-203        92.21
7-204        92.22
7-205        92.23
7-301        92.35
7-302        92.36
7-303        92.37
7-304        92.38
7-305        92.39
7-306        92.40
7-307        92.41
7-308        92.42
7-309        92.43
7-310        92.44
7-311        92.45
7-312        92.46
7-313        92.47
7-314        92.99
8-101        153.001
8-201        153.002
8-202        153.003
8-203        153.004
8-204        153.005
8-301        153.020
8-302        153.021
8-303        153.022
8-304        153.023
8-305        153.024
8-306        153.025
8-307        153.026
8-308        153.027
8-309        153.028
8-310        153.029;
             153.999
8-311        153.030
8-401        153.045
8-402        153.046
8-403        153.047
8-404        153.048
8-501        153.060
8-502        153.061
8-503        153.062
8-504        153.063
8-505        153.064
8-506        153.065
8-507        153.066
8-601        153.080
8-602        153.081
8-603        153.082
8-604        153.083
8-701        153.095
8-702        153.096
8-801        153.110
8-802        153.111
8-901        153.006
8-902        153.006
8-1001       153.007
10-101       91.01
10-102       91.02
10-103       91.03
10-104       91.04
10-105       91.99
10-201       91.15
10-202       91.16
10-203       91.17
10-204       91.99
10-205       91.18
10-301       91.30
10-302       91.31
10-303       91.99
10-304       91.32
11-101       151.01
11-102       151.02
11-103       151.03
11-104       151.04
11-105       151.99
11-106       151.05
13-101       112.01
13-102       112.02
13-103       112.03
13-104       112.04
13-105       112.99
13-201       113.01
13-202       113.02
13-203       113.03
13-204       113.04
13-205       113.05
13-206       113.06
13-207       113.07
13-208       113.99
13-209       113.08
13-301       110.01
13-302       110.02
13-303       110.03
13-304       110.04
13-305       110.05
13-306       110.06
13-307       110.07
13-308       110.08
13-309       110.99
13-401       111.01
13-402       111.02
13-403       111.03
13-404       111.04
13-405       111.05
13-406       111.06
13-407       111.07
13-408       111.08
13-409       111.09
13-410       111.10
13-411       111.11
13-412       111.12
13-413       111.13
13-414       111.14
15-101       70.01
15-102       70.02
15-103       70.03
15-104       70.04;
             70.99
15-105       70.05;
             70.99
15-106       70.06;
             70.99
15-107       70.07;
             70.99
15-108       70.08
15-109       70.09
15-201       Chapter 74, Schedule I
15-202       71.01;
             71.99
15-203       71.02;
             71.99
15-204       71.03;
             71.99
15-205       71.04;
             71.99
15-206       71.05;
             71.99
15-207       71.12;
             71.99
15-208       71.06;
             71.99
15-209       71.07;
             71.99
15-210       71.08;
             71.99
15-211       71.09;
             71.99
15-212       Chapter 74, Schedule II
15-213       Chapter 74, Schedule IV
15-214       71.10;
             71.99
15-215       71.13;
             71.99
15-216       71.11;
             71.99
15-217       71.14;
             71.99
15-218       71.15
15-301       70.20;
             70.99
15-302       70.21;
             70.99
15-303       70.22;
             70.99
15-401       72.001
15-402       Chapter 75, Schedule I
15-403       72.002
15-404       72.003
15-405       72.004
15-406       72.005
15-407       72.006
15-408       72.007
15-409       72.008
15-411       72.999
15-501       72.020
15-502       72.021
15-503       72.022
15-504       72.023
15-505       72.024
15-506       72.025
15-507       72.026
15-508       72.027
15-509       72.028
15-511       72.999
15-512       72.029
15-601       72.045
15-602       72.046
15-603       72.047
15-604       72.048
15-605       72.049
15-606       72.050
15-607       72.051
15-608       72.052
15-609       72.053
15-610       72.054
15-612       72.999
15-701       72.070
15-702       72.071
15-703       72.072
15-704       72.073
15-705       72.074
15-706       72.075
15-707       72.999
15-801       72.090
15-802       72.091
15-803       72.092
15-804       72.093
15-805       72.094
15-806       72.095
15-807       72.096
15-808       72.097
15-809       72.999
15-810       72.098
15-901       70.35
15-902       70.36
15-903       70.37
15-904       70.99
15-1001      73.01;
             73.99
15-1002      73.02;
             73.99
15-1003      73.03;
             73.99
15-1101      70.50
15-1102      70.51
15-1103      70.52
15-1104      70.53
15-1105      70.99
Chapter 16   Chapter 93, Appendix A
16-101       93.01
16-102       93.99
16-201       93.02;
             93.99
18-101       51.001
18-102       51.002
18-103       51.003
18-104       51.004
18-105       51.999
18-201       51.015
18-202       51.016
18-203       51.017
18-204       51.018
18-205       51.019
18-206       51.020
18-207       51.021
18-208       51.022
18-209       51.023
18-210       51.999
18-211       51.035
18-212       51.036
18-213       51.037
18-214       51.038
18-215       51.039
18-216       51.040
18-221       51.055
18-222       51.056
18-223       51.057
18-224       51.058
18-225       51.059
18-226       51.060
18-227       51.061
18-228       51.062
18-229       51.063
18-230       51.064
18-231       51.065;
             51.999
18-301       51.080
18-302       51.081
18-303       51.082
18-304       51.999
18-305       51.999
             51.095;
18-402       51.096;
             51.999
18-501       51.110
18-502       51.111
18-503       51.112
18-504       51.113
18-505       51.114
18-506       51.115
18-507       51.999
18-508       51.116
20-101       50.01
20-102       50.02
20-103       50.03
20-104       50.15
20-105       50.16
20-107       50.18
20-108       50.19
20-109       50.04
20-110       50.20
20-111       50.43
20-112       50.45
20-113       50.46
20-114       50.47
20-115       50.35
20-116       50.40
20-117       50.38
20-118       50.39
20-119       50.37
20-120       50.41
20-121       50.44
20-122       50.42
20-123       50.36
20-124       50.99
21-201       152.25;
             152.99
21-221       152.26
21-222       152.99
21-301       152.40
21-302       152.41
21-303       152.42
21-304       152.43
21-305       152.44
21-306       152.45
21-307       152.46
21-308       152.47
21-309       152.48
21-310       152.49
21-311       152.50
21-312       152.99
22-101       155.003
22-102       155.004
22-103       155.005
22-104       155.002
22-105       155.001
22-201       155.020
22-202       155.021
22-203       155.022
22-204       155.023
22-205       155.024
22-301       155.035
22-302       155.036
22-303       155.037
22-304       155.038
22-305       155.039
22-306       155.040
22-307       155.041
22-308       155.042
22-309       155.043
22-310       155.044
22-311       155.045
22-312       155.046
22-313       155.047
22-314       155.048
22-315       155.049
22-316       155.050
22-401       155.065
22-402       155.066
22-501       155.080
22-502       155.081
22-503       155.082
22-601       155.095
22-602       155.096
22-603       155.097
22-701       155.110
22-702       155.111
22-703       155.112
22-704       155.113
22-705       155.114
22-706       155.115
22-801       155.006
22-802       155.006
22-901       155.130
22-902       155.131
22-903       155.133;
             155.999
22-904       155.132
24-101       32.001
24-103       32.003
24-201       32.015
24-202       32.016
24-203       32.017
24-204       32.018
24-205       32.019
24-206       32.020
24-207       32.021
24-208       32.022
24-301       32.035
24-302       32.036
24-303       32.037
24-304       32.038
24-305       32.039
24-306       32.040
24-307       32.999
24-308       32.041
24-309       32.042
24-310       32.043
24-311       32.044
24-321       32.055
24-322       32.056
24-323       32.057
24-324       32.058
24-401       32.070
24-402       32.071
27-101       156.001
27-102       156.002
27-103       156.003
27-104       156.004
27-105       156.005
27-106       156.006
27-107       156.007
27-201       156.008
27-202       156.008
27-301       156.020
27-302       156.021
27-303       156.022
27-401       156.035
27-402       156.036
27-403       156.037
27-404       156.038
27-405       156.039
Table 27-4-1 Chapter 156, Appendix A
Table 27-4-2 Chapter 156, Appendix B
Table 27-4-3 Chapter 156, Appendix C
27-501       156.050
27-502       156.051
27-503       156.052
27-504       156.053
27-505       156.054
27-506       156.055
27-507       156.056
27-508       156.057
27-509       156.058
27-510       156.059
27-601       156.070
27-602       156.071
27-603       156.072
27-604       156.073
27-801       156.100
27-802       156.101
27-803       156.102
27-804       156.103
27-805       156.104
27-806       156.105
27-901       156.120
27-902       156.121
27-903       156.122
27-905       156.124
27-906       156.125
Appendix B   TSO, Table I
Appendix C   TSO, Table II
Appendix D   TSO, Table III
Appendix F   TSO, Table VII
Appendix G   TSO, Table IV
Appendix H   TSO, Table V
Appendix J   TSO, Table VI
             
 
 
REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS
Res. No. Date Passed Code Section
Res. No.   Date Passed Code Section
8/18/1966  8-18-1966   TSO, Table III
2/22/1978  2-22-1978   TSO, Table III
1978-100   5-8-1978    TSO, Table III
1978-101   5-8-1978    TSO, Table III
1978-102   11-13-1978  TSO, Table III
9/24/1979  9-24-1979   TSO, Table III
9/22/1980  9-22-1980   TSO, Table III
1/12/1981  1-12-1981   TSO, Table III
1988-2     4-11-1988   TSO, Table III
10/25/1988 10-25-1988  TSO, Table III
1989-2     2-21-1989   TSO, Table III
1989-3     4-10-1989   TSO, Table III
1989-4     5-8-1989    TSO, Table III
1989-5     12-22-1989  TSO, Table III
1990-1     3-12-1990   TSO, Table III
1990-2     12-10-1990  TSO, Table III
1991-1     5-13-1991   TSO, Table III
1991-2     12-9-1991   TSO, Table III
1992-1     2-10-1992   TSO, Table III
1992-2     4-13-1992   TSO, Table III
1992-3     8-10-1992   TSO, Table III
1992-4     9-14-1992   TSO, Table III
-/-/1993   - -1993     TSO, Table III
1993-1     2-15-1993   TSO, Table III
12/-/1995A 12- -1995   TSO, Table III
12/-/1995B 12- -1995   TSO, Table III
12/-/1995C 12- -1995   TSO, Table III
-/-/1997A  - -1997     TSO, Table II
-/-/1997B  - -1997     TSO, Table III
1997-1     - -1997     TSO, Table III
11/10/1997 11-10-1997  TSO, Table VII
1999-1     4-12-1999   TSO, Table III
2002-1     1-7-2002    30.15
2002-2     1-7-2002    TSO, Table V
5/-/2002   5- -2002    TSO, Table III
2004-1     1-5-2004    TSO, Table III
2004-2     3-9-2004    TSO, Table I
2006-1     3-13-2006   TSO, Table I
2008-1     4-21-2008   TSO, Table III
2009-1     2-9-2009    TSO, Table IV
2009-2     4-13-2009   TSO, Table III
2009-3     9-14-2009   TSO, Table III
10/13/2009 10-13-2009  TSO, Table III
2009-10    10-13-2009  TSO, Table III
2009-11    10-13-2009  TSO, Table III
2010-1     2-8-2010    TSO, Table I
2012-2     7-9-2012    TSO, Table III
01-2017    12-11-2017  112.05
2019-0     8-5-2019    TSO, Table VII
2 of 2022  5-9-2022    51.130
5 of 2022  10-10-2022  32.072
4 of 2025  5-22-2025   TSO, Table III
5 of 2025  7-14-2025   TSO, Table III
7 of 2025  11-10-2025  TSO, Table III
8 of 2025  11-10-2025  TSO, Table III
9 of 2025  11-10-2025  TSO, Table III
10 of 2025 11-10-2025  TSO, Table III
11 of 2025 11-10-2025  TSO, Table III
13 of 2025 12-8-2025   TSO, Table III
                      
 
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No.  Date Passed Code Section
6         11-16-1931  TSO, Table II
7         11-20-1931  TSO, Table II
11        9-18-1933   TSO, Table V
12        12-11-1933  TSO, Table III
13        2-26-1934   TSO, Table V
21        11-16-1936  TSO, Table II
23        5-9-1940    TSO, Table IV
25        6-17-1940   TSO, Table V
26        9-12-1940   TSO, Table I
27        11-14-1940  TSO, Table IV
30        11-12-1941  TSO, Table II
33        1-17-1944   TSO, Table V
                      112.01—
41        2-10-1948   112.04;
                      112.99
                      113.01—
53        9-12-1955   113.08;
                      113.99
62        12-9-1955   TSO, Table II
55        4-9-1956    TSO, Table II
57        8-13-1956   TSO, Table V
56        8-16-1956   TSO, Table II
68        11-2-1959   TSO, Table V
77        9-7-1961    TSO, Table II
78        11-6-1961   92.01—
                      92.06
96        11-3-1965   32.001—
                      32.003
100       8-19-1966   112.99
106       8-19-1966   130.03;
                      130.99
                      91.01—
109       8-19-1966   91.04;
                      91.99
                      51.001—
112       8-19-1966   51.004;
                      51.999
113       8-19-1966   152.25;
                      152.99
116       8-19-1966   32.001—
                      32.003
117A      10-4-1966   TSO, Table II
118       11-7-1966   32.015—
                      32.022
121       12-12-1967  32.015
127       12-4-1969   TSO, Table III
128       1-5-1970    TSO, Table III
129       3-2-1970    TSO, Table III
131       1-25-1971   TSO, Table III
132       6-7-1971    TSO, Table I
136       7-13-1973   TSO, Table IV
137       7-13-1973   TSO, Table IV
138       7-13-1973   TSO, Table II
                      51.015—
139       7-13-1973   51.023;
                      51.999
141A      3-11-1974   TSO, Table II
142A      - -1975     TSO, Table VI
145       5-12-1976   51.020
148       3-4-1977    TSO, Table IV
150       3-4-1977    TSO, Table IV
                      32.035—
149       4-11-1977   32.044;
                      32.999
153       1-15-1979   TSO, Table IV
154       2-12-1979   TSO, Table IV
155       2-19-1979   TSO, Table IV
156       2-19-1979   TSO, Table I
157       3-12-1979   51.020
158       3-12-1979   51.035—
                      51.040
159       3-12-1979   TSO, Table IV
160       3-12-1979   TSO, Table IV
161       3-12-1979   TSO, Table IV
162       3-12-1979   TSO, Table IV
                      131.01—
163       9-10-1979   131.05;
                      131.99
164       9-10-1979   93.01;
                      93.99
                      91.30—
165       9-10-1979   91.32;
                      91.99
                      51.055—
169       3-10-1980   51.065;
                      51.999
170       4-22-1980   TSO, Table IV
172       1-4-1982    32.070;
                      32.071
                      151.01—
175       7-12-1982   151.05;
                      151.99
177       2-14-1983   112.02
178       5-9-1983    TSO, Table III
                      91.15—
182       9-12-1983   91.18;
                      91.99
184       9-12-1983   152.26;
                      152.99
                      150.30—
185       9-12-1983   150.38;
                      150.99
188       10-8-1984   TSO, Table IV
                      51.080—
189A      10-8-1984   51.082;
                      51.999
189B      11-12-1984  93.01
193       12-5-1985   TSO, Table III
                      130.15—
191       12-9-1985   130.20;
                      130.99
194       12-9-1985   TSO, Table III
                      156.001—
                      156.008;
                      156.020—
                      156.022;
                      156.035—
                      156.039;
                      156.050—
196       4-14-1986   156.059;
                      156.070—
                      156.073;
                      156.100—
                      156.105;
                      156.120—
                      156.122;
                      156.124;
                      156.125
197       6-9-1986    93.01;
                      93.99
199       10-31-1986  TSO, Table II
201       2-9-1987    32.055—
                      32.058
                      32.999;
                      51.065;
                      51.999;
                      91.99;
                      93.99;
                      112.99;
                      113.99;
                      130.03;
204A      2-13-1989   130.15—
                      130.17;
                      130.99;
                      131.01—
                      131.05;
                      131.99;
                      150.99;
                      151.99;
                      152.99
207A      2-13-1989   150.15;
                      150.16
204B      12-11-1989  30.01;
                      30.02
                      156.008;
                      156.070;
206B      8-13-1990   156.100;
                      156.103;
                      156.104;
                      156.124
208       12-10-1990  TSO, Table III
209       12-10-1990  TSO, Table III
-/-/1998  - -1998     TSO, Table II
2003-?    - -2003     156.051
                      51.110—
6/9/2003B 6-9-2003    51.116;
                      51.999
2003-02   6-9-2003    111.01—
                      111.14
2005-1    4-11-2005   156.037—
                      156.039
                      90.01—
2005-2    11-14-2005  90.05;
                      90.99
2005-3    11-14-2005  TSO, Table III
2005-4    11-14-2005  TSO, Table III
2006-1    1-3-2006    92.20—
                      92.23
                      51.095;
2010-12   9-13-2010   51.096;
                      51.999
                      153.001—
                      153.007;
                      153.020—
                      153.030;
                      153.045—
                      153.048;
                      153.060—
2010-10   12-14-2010  153.066;
                      153.080—
                      153.083;
                      153.095;
                      153.096;
                      153.110;
                      153.111;
                      153.999
2011-01   9-12-2011   TSO, Table V
                      131.20—
2012-01   3-12-2012   131.30;
                      131.99
                      50.01—
                      50.04;
                      50.15—
2012-03   7-9-2012    50.20;
                      50.35—
                      50.47;
                      50.99
                      155.001—
                      155.006;
                      155.020—
                      155.024;
                      155.035—
                      155.050;
                      155.065;
                      155.066;
12-8-2014 12-8-2014   155.080—
                      155.082;
                      155.095—
                      155.097;
                      155.110—
                      155.115;
                      155.130—
                      155.133;
                      155.999
                      152.40—
2014-04   12-8-2014   152.50;
                      152.99
2014-06   12-8-2014   93.02;
                      93.99
                      92.35—
2015-02   8-10-2015   92.47;
                      92.99
                      10.10;
                      10.15;
                      30.15;
                      50.99;
                      51.020;
                      51.035;
                      51.064;
                      51.096;
                      51.999;
                      70.01—
                      70.09;
                      70.20—
                      70.22;
                      70.35—
                      70.37;
                      70.50—
                      70.53;
                      70.99;
                      71.01—
                      71.15;
                      71.99;
                      72.001—
                      72.008;
                      72.020—
                      72.029;
                      72.045—
                      72.054;
                      72.070—
                      72.075;
                      72.090—
                      72.098;
                      72.999;
                      73.01—
                      73.03;
                      73.99;
2015-04   12-14-2015  Chapter 74, Schedule I;
                      Chapter 74, Schedule II;
                      Chapter 74, Schedule IV;
                      Chapter 75, Schedule I;
                      90.05;
                      91.32;
                      91.99;
                      92.99;
                      93.02;
                      93.99;
                      110.01—
                      110.08;
                      110.99;
                      111.06;
                      112.01—
                      112.04;
                      112.99;
                      113.01;
                      113.99;
                      130.01—
                      130.03;
                      130.99;
                      131.29;
                      131.30;
                      131.99;
                      150.16;
                      150.99;
                      151.99;
                      152.25;
                      152.99;
                      153.029;
                      153.999;
                      155.999;
                      156.008;
                      156.058;
                      156.059;
                      156.120
-         6-10-2019   TSO, Table III
2020-01   3-9-2020    156.123;
                      156.999
2020-02   3-9-2020    156.085—
                      156.089
                      154.001—
                      154.010;
                      154.025—
                      154.035;
                      154.050—
                      154.054;
                      154.065—
                      154.070;
                      154.085—
2020-04   1-11-2021   154.088;
                      154.100—
                      154.105;
                      154.120—
                      154.126;
                      154.999;
                      Chapter 154, Appendix A;
                      Chapter 154, Appendix B;
                      Chapter 154, Appendix C;
                      Chapter 154, Appendix D;
                      Chapter 154, Appendix E
                      154.001—
                      154.010;
                      154.025—
                      154.035;
                      154.050—
                      154.054;
                      154.065—
                      154.070;
                      154.085—
2021-01   8-9-2021    154.088;
                      154.100—
                      154.105;
                      154.120—
                      154.126;
                      154.999;
                      Chapter 154, Appendix A;
                      Chapter 154, Appendix B;
                      Chapter 154, Appendix C;
                      Chapter 154, Appendix D;
                      Chapter 154, Appendix E
                      50.02;
                      50.03;
                      50.15;
                      50.18—
                      50.20;
2022-1    6-13-2022   50.35;
                      50.36;
                      50.38—
                      50.41;
                      50.46;
                      50.47
1 of 2024 4-8-2024    150.01;
                      150.02
2 of 2024 11-11-2024  152.01—
                      152.08
1 of 2025 9-8-2025    51.063
2 of 2025 10-13-2025  Adopting Ordinance
4 of 2025 11-10-2025  32.016
5 of 2025 12-8-2025   70.20
                     
 
 
